CODE of JERSEY CITY, NEW JERSEY 
____________ 
A Codification of the General Ordinances of
Jersey City, New Jersey 
____________ 
Beginning with Supp. No. 16,
Supplemented by Municipal Code Corporation 
____________ 
 
PREFACE 
The City of Jersey City has, over the years, passed through a process of legislative change common to many American communities. While only a few simple laws were necessary at the time of the establishment of the city, subsequent growth of the community, together with the complexity of modern life, has created the need for new and more detailed legislation for the proper function and government of the city. The recording of local law is an aspect of municipal history, and as the community develops and changes, review and revision of old laws and consideration of new laws, in the light of current trends, must keep pace. The orderly collection of these records is an important step in this ever-continuing process. Legislation must be more than mere chronological enactments reposing in the pages of old records. It must be available and logically arranged for convenient use and must be kept up-to-date. It was with thoughts such as these in mind that the Council ordered the following codification of the city's legislation, to replace the 1971 Code of the City of Jersey City, adopted 5-4-1971, as readopted 9-19-1978 by Ord. No. S-128 and June 14, 1995 by Ord. No. 95-050. The following paragraphs will further explain the organization and contents of the Code of Jersey City. 
Contents of Code 
The various chapters of the Code contain all currently effective legislation of a general and permanent nature enacted by the Council of the City of Jersey City, including revisions or amendments to existing legislation deemed necessary by the Council in the course of the codification. 
Division of Code 
The Code is divided into parts. Part I, Administrative Legislation, contains all city legislation of an administrative nature, namely, that dealing with the administration of government, that establishing or regulating municipal departments and that affecting officers and employees of the municipal government and its departments. Part II, General Legislation, contains all other city legislation of a regulatory nature. Items of legislation in this part generally impose penalties for violation of their provisions, whereas those in Part I do not. 
Grouping of Legislation and Arrangement of Chapters 
The various items of legislation are organized into chapters, their order being an alphabetical progression from one subject to another. Wherever there are two or more items of legislation dealing with the same subject, they are combined into a single chapter. Thus, for example, all legislation pertaining to the regulation of streets and sidewalks may be found in Part II, in the chapter entitled ""Streets and Sidewalks." In such chapters, use of Article or Part designations has preserved the identity of the individual items of legislation. 
Table of Contents 
The Table of Contents details the alphabetical arrangement of material by chapter as a means of identifying specific areas of legislation. Wherever two or more items of legislation have been combined by the editor into a single chapter, titles of the several Articles or Parts are listed beneath the chapter title in order to facilitate location of the material. 
Reserved Chapters 
Space has been provided in the Code for the convenient insertion, alphabetically, of later enactments. In the Table of Contents such space appears as chapters entitled "(Reserved)." In the body of the Code, reserved space is provided by breaks in the page-numbering sequence between chapters. 
Pagination 
A unique page-numbering system has been used, in which each chapter forms an autonomous unit. One hundred pages have been allotted to each chapter, and the first page of each is the number of that chapter followed by the numerals "01." Thus, Chapter 6 begins on page 601, Chapter 53 on page 5301, etc. By use of this system, it is possible to add or to change pages in any chapter without affecting the sequence of subsequent pages in other chapters, and to insert new chapters without affecting the existing organization. 
Numbering of Sections 
A chapter-related section-numbering system is employed, in which each section of every item of legislation is assigned a number which indicates both the number of the chapter in which the legislation is located and the location of the section within that chapter. Thus, the first section of Chapter 6 is § 6-1, while the fourth section of Chapter 53 is § 53-4. New sections can then be added between existing sections using a decimal system. Thus, for example, if two sections were to be added between §§ 53-4 and 53-5, they would be numbered as §§ 53-4.1 and 53-4.2. 
Scheme 
The Scheme is the list of section titles which precedes the text of each chapter. These titles are carefully written so that, taken together, they may be considered as a summary of the content of the chapter. Taken separately, each describes the content of a particular section. For ease and precision of reference, the Scheme titles are repeated as section headings in the text. 
Histories 
At the end of the Scheme in each chapter is located the legislative history for that chapter. This History indicates the specific legislative source from which the chapter was derived, including the enactment number (e.g., ordinance number, local law number, bylaw number, resolution number, etc.), if pertinent, and the date of adoption. In the case of chapters containing Parts or Articles derived from more than one item of legislation, the source of each Part or Article is indicated in the History. Amendments to individual sections or subsections are indicated by histories where appropriate in the text. 
Electronic Submission. 
In the interests of accuracy and speed, we encourage you to submit your ordinances electronically if at all possible. We can accept most any file format, including Word, WordPerfect or text files. If you have a choice, we prefer Word, any version. You can send files to us as an e-mail attachment, by FTP, on a diskette or CD-ROM. Electronic files enable us not only to get you your code more quickly but also ensure that it is error-free. Our e-mail address is: ords@municode.com . 
For hard copy, send two copies of all ordinances passed to: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
P.O. Box 2235 
Tallahassee, FL 32316 
Customer Service. 
If you have any questions about this code or our services, please contact Municipal Code Corporation at 1-800-262-2633 or: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310 
CERTIFICATION 
CITY OF JERSEY CITY 
Office of the City Clerk 
I, Robert Byrne, City Clerk of the City of Jersey City, New Jersey, hereby certify that the chapters contained in this volume are based upon the original ordinances and resolutions of the City Council of the City of Jersey City, and that said ordinances and resolutions, as revised and codified, renumbered as to sections and rearranged into chapters, constitute the Code of the City of Jersey City, County of Hudson, State of New Jersey, as adopted by Ordinance 95-050 of the City Council on June 14, 1995. 
Given under my hand and the Seal of the City of Jersey City, County of Hudson, State of New Jersey, this _______ day of _______ 1995, at Jersey City, New Jersey. 
s/ Robert Byrne 
___________ 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
The Code of the City of Jersey City has been kept current by regular supplementation of LexisNexis Municipal Codes. 
Beginning with Supp. No. 16, 
Supplemented by Municipal Code Corporation 
In brackets at the beginning of each chapter or within some sections is a legislative history identifying the specific sources for the provisions of that chapter or section. This legislative history is complemented by an ordinance disposition table, following the text of the Code, listing by number all ordinances, their subjects, and where they appear in the codification. 
A subject-matter index, with complete cross-referencing, locates specific Code provisions by individual section numbers. 
This supplement brings the Code up to date through Ordinance No. 19-062 , passed June 12, 2019. 
OFFICIALS 
OF THE 
CITY OF JERSEY CITY 
City Hall 
280 Grove Street 
Jersey City, New Jersey 07302 
Telephone: (201)547-5000 
_____ 
2018 
_____ 
Steven M. Fulop 
Mayor 
Municipal Council 

Rolando R. Lavarro, Jr. 	At-Large 
Daniel Rivera 	At-Large 
Joyce E. Watterman 	At-Large 

Denise Ridley 	Ward A 
Mira Prinz-Arey 	Ward B 
Richard Boggiano 	Ward C 
Michael Yun 	Ward D 
James Solomon 	Ward E 
Jermaine D. Robinson 	Ward F 
 
Robert Byrne 
City Clerk  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City 6-14-1995 as Ord. No. 95-050. Amendments noted where applicable.] 
Be it ordained and enacted by the Council of the City of Jersey City, County of Hudson, State of New Jersey, as follows:  
ARTICLE I - Adoption of Code 
 
§ 1-1. - Adoption of 1995 Code. 
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the City of Jersey City of a general and permanent nature adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters and sections by General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of Chapters 1 through 346, together with an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as the "Code of the City of Jersey City," hereinafter known and referred to as the "Code."  
§ 1-2. - Territorial applicability. 
The Code shall refer only to the omission or commission of acts within the territorial limits of the city and to that territory outside the city over which the city has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or Charter provisions or any law.  
§ 1-3. - Code supersedes prior ordinances. 
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all general and permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code, except such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or continued in force.  
§ 1-4. - When effective. 
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication according to law.  
§ 1-5. - Copy of Code on file. 
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the City Clerk and shall remain there for use and examination by the public until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if this ordinance shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Clerk of the City of Jersey City by impressing thereon the Seal of the city, as provided by law, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Clerk of the city, to be made available to persons desiring to examine the same during all times while said Code is in effect.  
§ 1-6. - Amendments to Code. 
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the governing body to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into such Code so that reference to the "Code of the City of Jersey City" shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code, as amendments and supplements thereto.  
§ 1-7. - Publication; filing. 
The Clerk of the City of Jersey City, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published, in the manner required, a copy of this Adopting Ordinance in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. Sufficient copies of the Code shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk for inspection by the public at all times during regular office hours. The enactment and publication of this Adopting Ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.  
§ 1-8. - Code book to be kept up-to-date. 
It shall be the duty of the Clerk or someone authorized and directed by the Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the Code required to be filed in his or her office for the use of the public. All changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective date of this codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.  
§ 1-9. - Sale of Code book. 
Copies of the Code book containing the Code may be purchased from the Clerk upon the payment of a fee to be set by resolution of the Council, which may also arrange, by resolution, for procedures for the periodic supplementation thereof.  
§ 1-10. - Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation. 
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City of Jersey City to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section or any part of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to one (1) or more of the following: a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.), or imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days or a period of community service not exceeding ninety (90) days, in the discretion of the Judge imposing the same.  
§ 1-11. - Severability. 
A.  Severability of Code provisions. Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts thereof. 
B.  Severability of ordinance provisions. Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts thereof.  
§ 1-12. - Repeal of ordinances. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance and not contained in the Code are hereby repealed as of the effective date of this Adopting Ordinance, except as hereinafter saved from repeal.  
§ 1-13. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
A.  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinance in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
B.  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed.  
§ 1-14. - Effect on past acts and obligations. 
Neither the adoption of this Code or the repeal hereby of any ordinance of this city shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violation of ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date hereof, nor be construed as a waiver of any license or penalty at said effective date due and unpaid under such ordinance, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinance relating to the collection of any such license or penalty or the penal provisions applicable to the violation thereof, nor to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof, required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance, and all rights and obligations thereof appertaining shall continue in full force and effect.  
§ 1-15. - Ordinances saved from repeal. 
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in § 1-12 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal: 
A.  Any ordinance adopted subsequent to September 14, 1994. 
B.  Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or liability. 
C.  Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom. 
D.  Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance brought pursuant to any legislative provision. 
E.  Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted or conferred. 
F.  Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof. 
G.  Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of the city's indebtedness. 
H.  Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation. 
I.  The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges or the approval of the municipal budget. 
J.  The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final subdivision plats. 
K.  All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of payment of salaries and compensation of officers and employees. 
L.  Any ordinance adopting or amending the Zoning Map. 
M.  Any ordinance regulating vehicles and traffic. 
N.  An ordinance adopted 10-6-1931, regulating the use of streets and sidewalks on Pacific Avenue between Communipaw Avenue and Carbon Street. 
O.  An ordinance adopted 9-1-1959, regulating the use of Roosevelt Stadium recreation and parking area by operators of motor vehicles. 
P.  Ordinance No. C-404, adopted 3-26-1987, creating the Montgomery Industrial Center Special Improvement District and establishing a district management corporation to provide supplemental services to property within the district at the district member's sole expense.  
ARTICLE II - Definitions, Construction and Interpretation 
 
§ 1-16. - Definitions; rules of construction of Code. 
A.  In the course of this Code and of all ordinances, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Council or the context clearly requires otherwise: 
(1)  Word usage. 
(a)  The official time of the city shall be a.m. and p.m. 
(b)  Bond. When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing shall be sufficient. 
(c)  Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day. If the last day is a Sunday or a Saturday or a legal holiday, that day shall be excluded. 
(d)  Definitions. Unless expressly otherwise provided, definitions given within a chapter, Article or section apply only to words or phrases used in such chapter, Article or section. 
(e)  Gender. Words importing the masculine gender shall import the feminine and neuter. 
(f)  Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
(g)  Number. Words used in the singular include the plural and the plural includes the singular number. 
(h)  Or; and. "Or" may be read "and" and "and" may be read "or," if the sense so requires. 
(i)  Preceding; following. The words "preceding" and "following" shall mean next before and next after, respectively. 
(j)  Shall; must; may. The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory, and the word "may" is permissive. 
(k)  Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
(2)  Terms defined. As used in the Code, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
CHARTER - The Charter of the City of Jersey City. (See N.J.S.A. 40:69A-1 et seq.) 
CITY - The City of Jersey City, in the County of Hudson and State of New Jersey, except as otherwise provided. 
COUNCIL - The Municipal Council of the City of Jersey City. 
COUNTY - Hudson County, New Jersey. 
DIRECTOR - The chief executive officer of the office or department to which the particular division, bureau, board or agency or subordinate municipal administrative body has been assigned by the Municipal Council. 
KEEPER or PROPRIETOR - Persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and copartnerships, whether acting by themselves or a servant, agent or employee. 
LICENSE ISSUING AUTHORITY - The official or agency designated by the City Council to issue licenses under the provisions of this Code. Unless specifically provided otherwise in any chapter of this Code, "license issuing authority" shall be the Alcohol Beverage Control Board or its designee. 
OATH - Includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
OWNER - Applied to a building or land, means any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or part of such building or land. 
PERSON - Includes a corporation, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, organization and any other group of two (2) or more acting as a unit, as well as an individual. 
PERSONAL PROPERTY - Includes every species of property, except real property as herein defined. 
PROPERTY - Includes real and personal property. 
PUBLIC PLACE - Includes any park; stadium; athletic field; playground; street; bus, train or railroad depot, station or terminal; any lake or stream; any cemetery; schoolyard; avenue; plaza; square; open space adjacent thereto or any other public place. 
REAL PROPERTY - Includes land, together with all things attached to the land so as to become a part thereof. 
SIDEWALK - Any portion of the street between the curbline and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians. 
SIGNATURE; SUBSCRIPTION - Includes a mark when a person cannot write. 
STATE - The State of New Jersey. 
WRITING; WRITTEN - Includes printing and any other mode of representing words and letters. 
B.  The provisions of this Code and all ordinances and all proceedings under them are to be construed with a view to effect their purpose and intent and as shall be consistent with the rules of construction as established or may be established in law. 
C.  All words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. Nothing herein shall be construed to alter such rules of construction as established or may be established in law. 
D.  The rules of construction as set forth in this chapter shall not be applied to any section which shall contain any express provision excluding that construction or when the subject matter or context of that section shall be clearly repugnant to the rules of construction.  
§ 1-17. - References to chapters, Articles or sections; conflicting sections. 
In addition to the rules of construction specified in § 1-16 of this ordinance, the following rules shall be observed in the construction of this Code: 
A.  All references to chapters, Articles or section are to the chapters, Articles and sections of this Code, unless otherwise specified. 
B.  If the provisions of different chapters or Article of this Code conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions of such chapter or Article shall prevail as to all matters and questions growing out of subject matter of that chapter or Article. 
C.  If different sections of the same chapter are clearly in conflict, the provisions of the section which is last in numerical order shall prevail unless the construction is inconsistent with the meaning of that chapter.  
§ 1-18. - Interpretation of section numbers. 
In reading a section number from left to right, the digit or digits to the left of the dash refer to the chapter number of this Code. The digits to the right of the dash refer to the particular section within such chapter. Figures to the right of a decimal point shall indicate new sections inserted between existing sections. The decimal system shall be used in maintaining the numerical order of such sections.  
§ 1-19. - Headings and catchlines not to affect the meaning of any provision. 
All designations and headings of chapters or Articles and all catchlines of section or subsections are intended only for convenience in arrangement and as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of such chapters, Articles, sections or subsections. They shall not be deemed or taken to be any part of or any Title of such chapters, Articles, sections or subsections; nor shall they be construed to alter the otherwise intended meaning of any provision of this Code.  
§ 1-20. - Correction of erroneous section numbers in an ordinance. 
A.  The chapters, Articles, sections and subsections in an ordinance shall not be considered as part of the subject matter of the ordinance but merely for convenience of arrangement. 
B.  If a section number is erroneously used in an ordinance and there was no intention by the Council to repeal the subject matter in the same section number of the Code, then the City Clerk shall correct the section number of the ordinance so as not to cause an inadvertent repeal of the preexisting material contained in that section number of the Code.  
§ 1-21. - Reference includes amendments. 
Any reference in this Code to an ordinance or provision of this Code shall mean such ordinance or provision as now existing or hereafter amended.  
ARTICLE III - Enforcement; Penalties 
 
§ 1-22. - Acts by deputy. 
Whenever a power is granted to or a duty is imposed upon a public officer or employee, the power may be exercised or the duty may be performed by a deputy of such officer or employee or by a person duly authorized pursuant to law or ordinance, unless this Code expressly provides otherwise.  
§ 1-23. - Notices, reports, statements, applications and records to be written in English. 
All notices, reports, statements, applications and records required or authorized by this Code shall be made in writing in the English language, unless specifically provided otherwise.  
§ 1-24. - Service of notice; proof of service. 
A.  Unless otherwise specifically indicated, whenever a notice is required to be given pursuant to any section of this Code, that notice shall be given either by personal delivery to the person to be notified or by deposit in the United States Mail in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to the person to be notified at his last known residence or business address, or by any other method of proof approved by law. 
B.  Proof of giving notice shall be made either by affidavit of the person over eighteen (18) years of age who actually accomplished personal service or by a return receipt signed by the recipient notified by the United States mail or by any other method approved by law.  
§ 1-25. - General penalty. 
[Amended 3-27-2002 by Ord. No. 02-035; 10-23-2013 by Ord. No. 13-113 ; 1-25-2017 by Ord. No. 17-005 ] 
A.  Notwithstanding any other section of this Code or any other ordinance, the maximum penalty for violating any provision of this Code shall be, in the discretion of the Court, a fine of up to two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) and/or imprisonment for a period of up to ninety (90) days and/or a period of community service not exceeding ninety (90) days; provided, however, that for the violation of an ordinance pertaining to solid waste disposal the maximum penalty shall be ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), and the minimum penalty shall be two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00); provided further, however, that for violations of Chapter 287 by owners of multiple-family residential property, the minimum penalty shall be: 
1.  Two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for properties that are one (1) to four (4) units; and 
2.  Five hundred dollars ($500.00) for properties that are five (5) or more units. 
B.  Each day a violation of any provision of this Code or any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. This section shall not affect any mandatory minimum penalty established by any section of the Code or ordinance. 
C.  In addition to the penalties hereinabove provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code or any ordinance shall be deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by the city as provided by law, and each day that such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
D.  Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:69A-29, any person who is convicted of violating an ordinance within one (1) year of the date of a previous violation of the same ordinance and who was fined for the previous violation, shall be sentenced by a court to an additional fine as a repeat offender. The additional fine imposed by the court upon a person for a repeated offense shall not be less than the minimum or exceed the maximum fine fixed for a violation of the ordinance, but shall be calculated separately from the fine imposed for the violation of the ordinance.  
§ 1-26. - Prohibited acts; causing, aiding or concealing. 
Whenever in this Code any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering or concealing such act or omission.  
§ 1-27. - Same offense punishable by different sections of Code. 
In cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of this Code, the Corporation Counsel may elect under which to proceed, but not more than one (1) recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense.  
ARTICLE IV - Codification Revisions 
 
§ 1-28. - Nonsubstantive changes. 
In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as part of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, certain grammatical changes and other minor changes were made in one (1) or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the Council that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so changed had been previously formally amended to read as such.  
§ 1-29. - Changes in previously adopted ordinances.[1] 
The following changes, amendments or revisions to existing ordinances are made herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance. (Chapter and section number references are to the ordinances as they have been renumbered and appear in the Code.) 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— In accordance with § 1-29, the chapters, parts and sections which were added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. During routine supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments or additions will be replaced with the following wording: "Amended (added) 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050." A complete description of all changes is on file in the borough offices. 
 
Chapter 3 - ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT[1] 
_____
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
History— Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City September 8, 1981 as Arts. I through XV, Subarticle 1, of Ord. No. MC-14. Amendments noted where applicable. 
Cross reference— Board of Assessment Commissioners, Ch. 9; municipal authorities, Ch. 12; sale of City property, Ch. 17; claims, payment of, Ch. 19; contracts and investments, Ch. 21; Municipal Court, Ch. 23; ethics, Ch. 33; personnel, Ch. 53; public access to records, Ch. 62; construction codes, uniform, Ch. 131; Council rules of order, Ch. A350; executive orders, Ch. A351. 
 
ARTICLE I - Title; Definitions 
 
§ 3-1. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Administrative Code."  
§ 3-2. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
ADMINISTRATIVE UNIT — A department, division, bureau or agency of the city or any subdivision thereof. 
ADMINISTRATOR — The Business Administrator appointed pursuant to the Charter and this Administrative Code or any Deputy or Acting Administrator temporarily serving in place of the Business Administrator pursuant to the Charter or this Administrative Code. [2] 
DIRECTOR — The administrative head of a department. 
GOVERNING BODY — The Municipal Council as constituted under the Charter. 
MAJORITY — A majority of a quorum of the members of the Council present. 
ORDINANCE — An act of the Council, as defined in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et seq. 
PRESIDENT — The President of the Municipal Council. 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— References to the "Charter" mean N.J.S.A. 40:69A-1 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE II - Council 
 
§ 3-3. - Legislative power. 
The legislative power of the municipality shall be exercised by the Municipal Council, except as otherwise may be provided by general law.  
§ 3-4. - Organization; President; President Pro Tem. 
[Amended 2-11-1992 by Ord. No. McC-407; 4-27-1994 by Ord. No. 94-029; 7-29-2009 by Ord. No. 09-087; 8-22-2012 by Ord. No. 12-106 ] 
A.  The Council shall organize pursuant to law on July 1 at which time it shall elect a President from among its members for a term coextensive with the term of the Council. Effective July 1, 2013 and thereafter, the term of a President shall be two years. 
B.  The Council may also elect a Council President Pro Tem from among its members for a term coextensive with the term of the Council President.  
§ 3-5. - Reports; investigations; liaisons. 
[Amended 1-22-1992 by Ord. No. McC-408] 
The Council may require any municipal officer, in its discretion, to prepare and submit sworn statements regarding his or her official duties and the performance thereof and otherwise to investigate the conduct of any department, office or agency of the municipal government. The Council may appoint members of the Council or any Council aides to act as liaison between the Municipal Council and the several autonomous boards and agencies.  
§ 3-6. - Annual audit. 
The Council shall cause to be made an annual audit of the city's accounts and financial transactions as required by law. Such audit shall be made by a registered municipal accountant of New Jersey selected by the Council.  
§ 3-7. - City Clerk. 
The Council shall appoint a City Clerk for the term prescribed by law. Such Clerk shall keep the minutes and records of the proceedings of the Council and maintain and compile its ordinances and resolutions as required by the Charter and shall perform such other functions as may be required by law. Prior to this appointment, the Clerk shall have been qualified by training and experience to perform the duties of his or her office.  
§ 3-8. - Budget Committee. 
[Added 11-26-1986 by Ord. No. C-329] 
A.  Establishment of Budget Committee. There is hereby created a City Council Budget Committee to be composed of three members of the City Council appointed by the Council President. 
B.  Powers of the Committee. 
(1)  The City Council Budget Committee shall review each departmental budget. The Committee may name a citizens' budgetary advisory panel to assist the Committee in its review. 
(2)  After receiving the Mayor's budget, the Committee may request from each department information concerning projected expenditures and revenue needs for the coming budget year. The Committee may hold public hearings on budget priorities. 
(3)  The Chairman of each City Council departmental committee shall serve as an ex officio member of the Budget Committee at any hearing concerning a departmental budget. The Budget Committee shall, in cooperation with the Finance Committee, hold a detailed review of the annual municipal audit. 
C.  Duties. On or before February 1 or within such time as shall be extended by the Council, the Committee shall report in writing to the full City Council. The report shall include a listing of all the Committee's budget priorities, proposed expenditures, including one-time expenditures, and areas of increased expenditures, revenue projections and potential and proposed one-time revenues. Its report shall contain alternative approaches to budget decisions, with estimates of cost and estimates of income. The City Council Committee is not required to recommend one alternative over others. [3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Former Secs. 2-8 through 2-8.28, which contained the Council Rules and immediately followed this section, have been deleted 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050. Such rules are now contained in the Appendix to this Code. 
 
§ 3-9. - Amendment of Rules. 
[Added 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050] 
The Council Rules, as contained in the Appendix of this Code, may be amended from time to time by resolution of the City Council.  
§ 3-9.1. - Preamble. 
[Added 6-12-02 by Ord. No. 02-075] 
A.  The Council affirms that the preservation of responsible government requires that the fullest opportunity be afforded to the people of the City to petition their government for the redress of grievances and to express freely to the Council, the Mayor, and to other members of the Executive Branch, their opinions on legislation, various current issues, and on purchases, bids, and various contracts and agreements to be negotiated and entered into by the City. 
B.  The Council has determined, however, that the preservation and maintenance of the integrity of the legislative and contracting process, including public bidding, and the negotiation and entry into contracts, including but not limited to contracts for the performance of work, the delivery of goods, professional services agreements, extraordinary unspecifiable service contracts, grant agreements and financial agreements, requires the identification in certain instances of persons and groups who seek to influence the content, introduction, passage or defeat of legislation or the proposal, negotiation, amendment, approval or entry into contracts and agreements, and, where it is not otherwise apparent or readily ascertainable, the nature of the interest which those persons and groups seek to advance or protect through such activity. 
C.  It is the purpose of the Ordinance codified in this Section to require adequate disclosure in certain instances in order to make available to the Council, and to the public, information relative to the activities of persons who seek to influence the content, introduction, passage or defeat of ordinances or resolutions, or the proposal, negotiation, amendment, approval or entry into contracts, and where it is not otherwise apparent or readily ascertainable, the nature of the interest which those persons and groups seek to advance or protect through such activity.  
§ 3-9.2. - Requirement of written disclosure of lobbyist representative status. 
[Added 6-12-02 by Ord. No. 02-075] 
A.  Any person who, on or after the effective date of the Ordinance codified in this Section is employed, retained or engages himself as a lobbyist representative shall, prior to any communication with a Municipal Council member, the Mayor, the Mayor's or Council's staff, or an officer or staff member of the Executive Branch, and in any event within 30 days of the effective date of such employment, retainer or engagement, whichever occurs later, file a signed notice of lobbyist representative status with the City Clerk, identifying himself and persons by whom he is employed or retained, and the persons in whose interests he is working, and the general nature of his proposed services as a lobbyist representative for such persons, which notice shall contain the following information: 
(1)  His name, business address and regular occupation; 
(2)  The name, business address and occupation or principal business of the person from whom he receives compensation for acting as a lobbyist representative; 
(3)  The name, business address and occupation or principal business of any person in whose interest he acts as a lobbyist representative in consideration of the aforesaid compensation, if such person is other than the person from whom said compensation is received; 
(4)  Whether the person from whom he receives said compensation employs him solely as a lobbyist representative, or whether he is a regular employee performing services for his employer in some other capacity; 
(5)  The length of time for which he will be receiving compensation from the person aforesaid for acting as a lobbyist representative, if said length of time can be ascertained at the time of filing; and 
(6)  The specific legislation or contract or the type of legislation or type of contract, in relation to which he is to act or to promote or oppose as a lobbyist representative in consideration of the aforesaid compensation, and the nature of the interest which those persons and groups seek to advance or protect through such activity, to which he is to act as lobbyist representative in consideration of the aforesaid compensation. 
B.  A separate signed lobbyist representative form shall be filed with the City Clerk for each specific legislation or contract or for each type of legislation or type of contract over which the lobbyist representative intends to exert influence. 
C.  The City Clerk shall develop and promulgate a lobbyist representative filing form in accordance with the terms of this Chapter.  
§ 3-9.3. - As used in this Chapter: 
[Added 6-12-02 by Ord. No. 02-075] 
A.  The term "person" includes an individual, sole proprietorship, partnership, committee, association, corporation, and any other organization or group of persons or form of legal organization. 
B.  The term "lobbyist representative" means any person who receives or agrees to receive, directly or indirectly, compensation, in money or by anything of value, including reimbursement for expenses, to influence, by direct or indirect communication, any City ordinances or resolutions, or the proposal, negotiation, amendment, approval or entry into any City contracts or agreements. 
C.  The term "influence" means to make any attempt by communication, whether successful or not, to secure or prevent the initiation of any ordinance or resolution, or to secure or prevent the consideration, amendment, issuance, promulgation, adoption or rejection of any ordinance or resolution by a member of the Municipal Council, or the Mayor, and means any attempt by communication, whether successful or not, to effect the proposal, negotiation, amendment, approval or entry into any contract, whether required to be publicly bid or not, including but not limited to contracts for the performance of work, the delivery of goods and services, professional services agreements, extraordinary unspecifiable service contracts, grant agreements and financial agreements. 
D.  The term "communication" means any communication, oral or in writing or by any other medium, addressed, delivered, distributed or disseminated, respectively to a Municipal Council member, to the Mayor, the Mayor's or the Council's staff, or to an officer or member of the Executive Branch, as distinguished from communication to the general public.  
§ 3-9.4. - Violation. 
[Added 6-12-02 by Ord. No. 02-075] 
Any contract or agreement entered into by the City with any person in violation of the provisions of this Chapter shall be voidable by the City and the terms and specifications of all contracts and agreements entered into by the City shall provide notice of and shall require compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. Any person, as defined in this Chapter, whose lobbyist representatives fail to comply with the provisions of this Chapter, shall be disqualified, following notice and an opportunity to be heard before the City Clerk, from entering into contracts and agreements with the City of Jersey City for a period of two (2) years for each violation.  
§ 3-9.5. - This Chapter shall not apply to the following activities: 
[Added 6-12-02 by Ord. No. 02-705] 
A.  The publication or dissemination, in the ordinary course of business, of news items, advertising, editorials or other comments by a newspaper, book publisher, regularly published periodical, or radio or television station, including an owner, editor or employee thereof; 
B.  Acts of an officer or employee of the City of Jersey City or of its autonomous agencies or of the Government of this State or any of its political subdivisions, or of the Government of the United States or of any State or territory thereof or any of their political subdivisions, in carrying out the duties of their public office or employment; 
C.  Acts of bona fide religious groups acting solely for the purpose of protecting the public right to practice the doctrines of such religious groups; 
D.  Acts of a duly organized national, State or local committee of a political party; 
E.  Acts of a person in testifying before a City Municipal Council committee at a public hearing who receives no compensation therefor beyond the reimbursement of necessary and actual expenses, and who makes no other communication with a member of the Municipal Council, Council staff, the Mayor, the Mayor's staff, or another officer or staff member of the Executive Branch in connection with the subject of his testimony; and 
F.  Acts of a person in communicating to a member of the Municipal Council, Council staff, the Mayor, the Mayor's staff, or another officer or staff member of the Executive Branch, if such communication is undertaken by him as a personal expression and not incident to his employment, even if it is upon a matter relevant to the interests of a person by whom or which he is employed, and if he receives no additional compensation or reward, in money or otherwise, for or as a result of such communication or provision of benefits.  
ARTICLE III - Mayor 
 
§ 3-10. - Executive power. 
A.  The executive power of the municipality shall be exercised by the Mayor. 
B.  The Mayor may assign and reassign, transfer and retransfer, from time to time, either temporarily or permanently, any property or personnel from one function to another, or from one administrative unit to another as the efficient management of the city government may require, subject to the express requirements of the Charter, Title 11A, Civil Service, of the Revised Statutes, as amended, and other general laws. This section shall not, however, apply to the Council or the office of the City Clerk. 
C.  The Mayor shall have the power of appointment and removal of all officers or employees of the city, except as provided by Charter or general law. 
D.  The Mayor shall assign or approve the assignment of space in public buildings or other public places for the temporary or permanent use of any department, body, officer, agency or instrumentality and shall, through the Business Administrator, control the assignment, allocation and use of furniture, equipment or other public property in the city government. 
E.  The Mayor may establish specific nonsalaried boards or commissions or groups and appoint the members thereof who shall serve at his or her pleasure. [4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's Note: See Ch. 43, Mayor's Commission on Senior Affairs. 
 
§ 3-11. - Powers and duties. 
[Amended 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050] 
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:69A-40, the Mayor shall: 
A.  Enforce the Charter and ordinances of the city and all general laws applicable thereto. 
B.  Report annually to the Council and to the public on the state of the city and the work of the previous year. He or she shall also recommend to the Council whatever action or programs he or she deems necessary for the improvement of the city and the welfare of its residents. He or she may from time to time recommend any action or programs he or she deems necessary or desirable for the city to undertake. 
C.  Supervise, direct and control all departments of the municipal government and shall require each department to make an annual and such other reports on its work as he or she may deem desirable. 
D.  Require such reports and examine such accounts, records and operations of any board, commission or other agency of municipal government, as he or she deems necessary. 
E.  Prepare and submit to the Council for its consideration and adoption an annual operating budget and a capital budget, establish the schedules and procedures to be followed by all municipal departments, offices and agencies in connection therewith and supervise and administer all phases of the budgetary process. 
F.  Supervise the care and custody of all municipal property, institutions and agencies and make recommendations concerning the nature and location of municipal improvements and execute improvements determined by the Council. 
G.  Sign all contracts, bonds or other instruments requiring the consent of the city [5] 
H.  Review, analyze and forecast trends of municipal services and finances and programs of all boards, commissions, agencies and other municipal bodies, and report and recommend thereon to the Council. 
I.  Supervise the development, installation and maintenance of centralized budgeting, personnel and purchasing procedures as may be authorized by ordinance. [6] 
J.  Negotiate contracts for the city, subject to Council approval. 
K.  Assure that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the city or its inhabitants in any statute, franchise or other contract are faithfully kept and performed. 
L.  Serve as an ex officio, nonvoting member of all appointive bodies in municipal government of which he or she is not an official voting member. 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's Note: See also Ch. 21, Contracts and Investments. 

--- (6) --- 
Editor's Note: See Ch. 19, Claims, Payment of, and Ch. 53, Personnel. 
 
§ 3-12. - Approval or veto of ordinances. 
Ordinances adopted by the Council shall be submitted to the Mayor, and he or she shall, within 10 days after receiving any ordinance, either approve the ordinance by affixing his or her signature thereto or return it to the Council by delivering it to the City Clerk, together with a statement setting forth his or her objections thereto or to any item or part thereof. No ordinance or any item or part thereof shall take effect without the Mayor's approval, unless the Mayor fails to return an ordinance to the Council within 10 days after it has been presented to him or her or unless the Council, upon reconsideration thereof on or after the third day following its return by the Mayor, shall by a vote of 2/3 of the members resolve to override the Mayor's veto.  
§ 3-13. - Attendance at Council meetings; voting. 
The Mayor may attend meetings of the Council and may take part in discussions of the Council but shall have no vote, except in the case of a tie on the question of filing a vacancy in the Council, in which case he or she may cast the deciding vote.  
§ 3-14. - Appointment of department heads. 
A.  The Mayor shall appoint heads of each department established pursuant to this Code or pursuant to any other ordinance with the advice and consent of the Council. 
B.  Each department head shall serve during the term of office of the Mayor appointing him or her and until the qualification of his or her successor.  
§ 3-15. - Removal of department heads. 
The Mayor may, in his or her discretion, remove any department head after notice and an opportunity to be heard. Prior to removing the department head, the Mayor shall first file written notice of his or her intention with the Council, and such removal shall become effective on the 20th day after the filing of such notice, unless the Council shall prior thereto have adopted a resolution by a 2/3 vote of the whole number of the Council disapproving the removal.  
§ 3-16. - Acting Mayor in absence or disability of Mayor; vacancy in office. 
[Amended 4-22-1992 by Ord. No. 92-041] 
A.  The Mayor shall designate the Business Administrator, any other department head or the City Clerk to act as Mayor whenever the Mayor shall be prevented by absence from the city, by disability or other cause from attending to the duties of his or her office. During such time the person so designated by the Mayor shall possess all the rights, powers and duties of the Mayor. Whenever the Mayor shall have been unable to attend to the duties of his or her office for a period of 60 consecutive days for any of the above stated reasons, an Acting Mayor shall be appointed by the Council, who shall succeed to all the rights, powers and duties of the Mayor or the then Acting Mayor. 
B.  Any Council President who becomes the Acting Mayor by assuming the powers and duties of the Mayor pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-131, shall receive a total compensation equal to the salary fixed for the Mayor.  
§ 3-17. - Appointment of personal staff. 
[Amended 4-8-1992 by Ord. No. 92-032] 
Subject to available appropriations, the Mayor may appoint such personal staff as are authorized by N.J.S.A. 40:69A-60.1, and any amendments thereto. The personal staff of the Mayor shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor in the unclassified service of the civil service of the city.  
§ 3-18. - Organization of office. 
The office of the Mayor shall consist of the Mayor and his or her personal staff as authorized by Sec. 2-45 of the City Code. [7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Original Sec. 2-45, entitled "Office of the Mayor; personal staff," which immediately followed this section, was repealed 4-8-1992 by Ord. No. 92-032. For current provisions dealing with this topic, see § 3-17. Original Sec. 2-45.1, entitled "Office of the Mayor; Studio for the Arts; fees," which immediately followed original Sec. 2-45 and was added 6-23-1983 by Ord. No. MC-421 and amended 3-14-1990 by Ord. No. McC-108, was repealed 9-8-1993 by Ord. No. 93-097. Original Secs. 2-46 and 2-47, dealing with the Division of Public Information, added 11-27-1985 by Ord. No. C-48, were repealed 2-13-1986 by Ord. No. C-166. 
 
§ 3-19. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-138 , adopted October 28, 2015, amended the Code by repealing former § 3-19 in its entirety. Former § 3-19 pertained to the Office of Municipal Emergency Management, and carried no history note.  
§ 3-19.1. - Resident Response Center Created; Head. 
[Added 7-18-2012 by Ord. No. 12-089 ; amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ; 9-24-2015 by Ord. No. 15-126 ; 2-24-2016 by Ord. No. 16-026 ] 
Within the office of the Mayor there is hereby created a Resident Response Center, the head of which shall be the Director of the Resident Response Center, and the following additional offices, the heads of which shall be under the personal supervision of the Mayor or a Deputy Mayor as designated by the Mayor: 
A.  Emergency Management; 
B.  Resident Response Center; and 
C.  Cultural Affairs.  
§ 3-19.2. - Powers and Duties of the Resident Response Center. 
[Added 7-18-2012 by Ord. No. 12-089 ; amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ; 2-10-2015 by Ord. No. 15-005 ; 5-27-2015 by Ord. No. 15-062 ; 9-24-2015 by Ord. No. 15-126 ; 2-24-2016 by Ord. No. 16-026 ] 
The Resident Response Center shall supervise the central telephone switchboard operation and supervise the Bureaus created pursuant to Section 3-19.2.1 hereunder.  
§ 3-19.2.1. - Bureaus under the Office of Resident Response Center. 
[Added 2-24-2016 by Ord. No. 16-026 ; amended 4-11-2018 by Ord. No. 18-025 ] 
A.  Bureau of Constituent Services. There is hereby created within the Resident Response Center a Bureau of Constituent Services. The Bureau shall accept and respond to constituents' complaints and inquiries on all aspects of City services and operations to enhance constituent confidence in government by expediting the handling of citizens' complaints and inquiries in coordination with the various departments of City government and autonomous agencies.  
§§ 3-19.3, 3-19.4. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-141 , adopted October 25, 2017, amended the Code by repealing former 3-19.3 and 3-19.4. Former §§ 3-19.3 and 3-19.4 pertained to the Bureau of Innovation, and derived from Ord. No. 15-061 , adopted May 27, 2015.  
§ 3-19.5. - Office of Cultural Affairs Created; Head. 
[Added 9-24-2015 by Ord. No. 15-126 ] 
There is hereby created an Office of Cultural Affairs, the head of which shall be the director of the Office of Cultural Affairs. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-126 , adopted September 24, 2015, amended the Code by adding a new § 3-19-3. In order to prevent duplication of section numbers, the new section has been redesignated as § 3-19.5.  
§ 3-19.6. - Powers and Duties of the Office of Cultural Affairs. 
[Added 9-24-2015 by Ord. No. 15-126 ; 4-26-2017 by Ord. No. 17-044 ] 
The Office of Cultural Affairs which, notwithstanding any ordinance to the contrary, shall, including but not limited to, be responsible for: 
(1)  Serving as the primary point of intake for all applications for public assemblies as defined in Chapter 122, including but not limited to block parties, carnivals, circuses, festival/fairs, flea markets, and parades; and 
(2)  For organizing cultural events on behalf of the City, including but not limited to, cultural and heritage events, art shows, street fairs, outdoor concerts, holiday festivals and all other public programs. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-126 , adopted September 24, 2015, amended the Code by adding a new § 3-19.4. In order to prevent duplication of section numbers, the new section has been redesignated as § 3-19.6.  
ARTICLE IV - Administrative Units 
 
§ 3-20. - Offices and departments. 
The municipality shall have the following offices and departments: 
A.  Offices. 
(1)  Office of the City Clerk. 
(2)  Office of Assessments. 
[Added 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050] 
B.  Departments. 
[Amended 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050] 
(1)  Department of Administration. 
(2)  Department of Public Works. [8] 
(3)  Department of Housing, Economic Development and Commerce. 
[Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
(4)  Department of Public Safety. 
[Amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] 
(5)  Reserved. 
[Repealed 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] 
(6)  Department of Health and Human Services. 
(7)  Department of Law. [9] 
(8)  Department of Recreation. 
(9)  Reserved. 
[Added 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052; amended 11-07-01 by Ord. No. 01-121; 12-27-01 by Ord. No. 01-141; repealed 6-25-2008 by Ord. No. 08-092] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Former Subsection B(2), which listed the Department of Finance, was repealed 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052. This ordinance also renumbered former Subsection B(3) through (7) as B(2) through (6). 

--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Former Subsection B(8), which listed the Department of Water and immediately preceded this subsection, was repealed 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052. This ordinance also renumbered former Subsection B(9) and (10) as B(7) and (8). 
 
§ 3-21. - Subordinate administrative units. 
The several offices and departments shall consist of divisions, bureaus, boards and other subordinate units and shall be allocated and assigned as hereinafter provided.  
§ 3-22. - Allocation of administrative functions. 
[Amended 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050] 
All the administrative functions, powers and duties of the municipality, other than those vested in the offices of the Municipal Clerk and the Municipal Tax Assessor, shall be allocated and assigned among and within its departments, divisions, bureaus and offices.  
§ 3-23. - Powers and duties of Directors. 
A.  The respective Directors shall devote full-time, as and when required, for the proper and efficient discharge of the duties of their office. 
B.  The Directors shall, under the supervision of the Mayor: 
(1)  Prescribe the internal organization of their respective departments and the duties of subordinate officers and employees within their departments. 
(2)  Assign functions, powers and duties to subordinate officers and employees within their departments and modify such assignments as need appears. 
(3)  Supervise the work of their departments through the divisions established by this chapter and such other organizational units as they may find necessary or desirable, and supervise and direct the work of the employees of their respective departments. 
(4)  Delegate to division heads such of their respective powers as they may deem necessary for efficient administration. 
(5)  Report at least annually to the Mayor and Council, in such form as shall be approved by the Business Administrator, on the work of their respective departments during the preceding year.  
§ 3-24. - Appointment of subordinate officials and employees. 
The head of each such office and department shall appoint subordinate officers and employees within the respective offices or departments and may, in his or her discretion and with the approval of the Mayor, remove such subordinate officers and employees in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 11A:1-1 et seq., Civil Service, and any other law applicable thereto.  
§ 3-25. - Division heads and bureau heads. 
A Director may serve as a division head and a division head may serve as a bureau head without additional compensation.  
§ 3-26. - Vacancy in office of Director. 
Whenever a vacancy exists by resignation, removal or otherwise in the office of Director of any department, the Mayor may temporarily fill such vacancy in cases not specifically provided for in the Charter or Code by appointing an Acting Director, who shall perform all the duties and functions of such department head until the office shall be filled permanently. Any such appointment of an Acting Director shall terminate not later than 90 days after the date of the appointment, unless the Council shall, by resolution, authorize one or more extensions thereof.  
§ 3-27. - Vacancy in office of division head or bureau head. 
Whenever a vacancy exists in the office of head of any departmental division by resignation, removal, disability or otherwise, the Director of the department may fill such vacancy temporarily by appointing an acting head of such division, who shall have and perform all the functions, powers and duties of such division until the office shall be filled permanently.  
§ 3-28. - Preservation of civil service rights. 
If prior to the effective date of this Code, any officer or employee of the city has acquired permanent status within the meaning of Title 11A, Civil Service, and such officer or employee is transferred to an office or employment created pursuant to this Code substantially identical in functions, powers and duties of their office or employment under which he or she acquired such permanent status, such status shall be preserved.  
§ 3-29. - Departmental administrative regulations. 
No rule or regulation made by any department shall, except upon written approval of the Mayor, take effect until at least 10 days after it is filed with the City Clerk as required by the Charter. This limitation of time shall not apply, however, to any order, rule or regulation which relates solely to the organization or internal management of the city government or a part thereof. The City Clerk shall maintain a docket of all orders, rules and regulations filed in his or her office, which docket shall show the name of the issuing department, a brief description of the subject matter and the date of filing. At the close of each year, the Clerk shall, with the advice of the Corporation Counsel, compile, codify and bind all of the orders, rules and regulations which then remain in effect. The Clerk may arrange for the printing and sale of such compilation within the limits of available appropriation.  
ARTICLE V - Office of City Clerk[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's Note: For statutory provisions relating to the City Clerk, see N.J.S.A. 40:69A-38. 
 
§ 3-30. - Appointment of City Clerk. 
The Council shall appoint a City Clerk who shall, prior to his or her appointment, have been qualified by training or experience to perform the duties of the office.  
§ 3-31. - General functions of City Clerk. 
The City Clerk shall perform all of the functions required of Municipal Clerks by the general election law (Title 19 of the Revised Statutes) and any other state law or city ordinance and receive the fees prescribed therefor for the use of the city.  
§ 3-32. - City Clerk to be Clerk of Council; records. 
A.  The City Clerk shall serve as Clerk of the Council and shall keep the minutes and records of the proceedings of the Council and, upon request of its Chairman, of any Council Committee. 
B.  He or she shall preserve and compile all ordinances and resolutions. At the close of each year he or she shall, with the advice of the Corporation Counsel, bind, compile or codify all the ordinances and resolutions or true copies thereof of the city which then remain in force and effect. 
C.  He or she shall properly index the record books, compilation or codification of ordinances and resolutions. 
D.  The City Clerk shall obtain the minutes of all meetings of autonomous boards and agencies and of any nonprofit corporation established under authority of any resolution or ordinance of the Council and shall furnish those minutes to each member of the Council as they become available. 
[Added 1-22-1992 by Ord. No. McC-409]  
§ 3-33. - Custodian of City Seal and records. 
A.  The City Clerk shall have custody of the City Seal and shall keep all records, books and documents of the city, except such of them as are committed by charter or ordinance to another office. 
B.  He or she shall be the depository and custodian of all official surety bonds furnished by or on account of any city officer or employee, except his or her own bond. The latter shall be placed in the custody of the Business Administrator. 
[Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
C.  He or she shall be the depository and custodian of all insurance policies, deeds, leases and contract documents to which the city may be a party. He or she shall report to the Business Administrator at least annually the coverage, expiration date and premium of each surety bond and contract of insurance in his or her custody.  
§ 3-34. - Affixing City Seal. 
The Clerk shall cause the Corporate Seal of the city to be affixed to instruments and writings when authorized by an ordinance or resolution or when necessary to exemplify any document or record of his or her office or to certify any act or paper, which, from the records in his or her office, shall appear to have been a public act of the city or a public document. He or she shall charge and collect such fees for affixing the Seal as may be prescribed by ordinance.  
§ 3-35. - Disposition of Council actions. 
All matters acted upon by the Council at any duly called meeting, which, in its opinion, require such action, shall be officially communicated by the City Clerk to the office, employee, board, body, commission or other agency of the city for whatever action is to be taken by such officer, employee, board, body, commission or other agency. Whatever action is taken in accordance with the direction of the Council shall then be communicated to the City Clerk, unless otherwise directed, for presentation to and information of the Council. Such action shall become a part of the agenda for subsequent meetings or until removed from the agenda by the Council. [11] 
Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's Note: Original Sec. 2-38, entitled "Facilities and staff service," which immediately followed this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. 
 
§ 3-36. - Deputy City Clerk.[12] 
A.  Creation of Deputy City Clerk. There is hereby created within the office of the City Clerk the title and position of Deputy City Clerk. The City Clerk may appoint a maximum of two Deputy City Clerks. 
[Amended 7-18-01 by Ord. No. 01-092] 
B.  Selection of Deputy City Clerk by City Clerk. The City Clerk is authorized to select, from the employees of his or her office, such person or persons as he or she shall determine for the purpose, and to designate such person or persons as Deputy City Clerk or Clerks, for such period or periods of time as the City Clerk may determine to be necessary to the proper and efficient conduct of the affairs of his or her office. 
C.  Deputy City Clerk; powers and duties. The Deputy City Clerk shall, subject to the supervision and control of the City Clerk, be vested with and possess all of the rights and powers and be charged with all of the duties imposed by law, ordinance or otherwise upon the City Clerk. 
D.  Designation of Deputy City Clerk to be in writing; distribution of copies. Any such designation shall be in writing, signed by the City Clerk, and a copy shall be made of record in the office of the City Clerk and copies thereof shall be forwarded to the office of the Mayor, the office of the Business Administrator and to each of the offices of the respective Directors of the several departments of government in the city. 
E.  Deputy City Clerk to serve at pleasure of City Clerk. When so designated, any such designee or designees shall serve as such Deputy City Clerk at the pleasure of the City Clerk, and any such designation shall be and remain, at all times, revocable by the City Clerk. 
Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's Note: For statutory provisions relating to the Deputy City Clerk, see NJSA. 40A:9-135. 
 
§ 3-37. - Search of marriage license records; fee. 
[Added 11-10-1983 by Ord. No. MC-497; amended 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050] 
For any search of the files and records of marriages when the correct year only is supplied by the applicant, whether or not certification or a certified copy is made, the City Clerk shall be entitled to a minimum fee as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges, plus a fee as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges, for each additional year searched, said fee to be paid by the applicant, except as provided by N.J.S.A. 26:8-63 of the Revised Statutes.  
§ 3-38. - Petitions for franchise or street vacation ordinances; fee. 
[Added 1-23-1986 by Ord. No. C-145; amended 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050] 
Petitions for franchise ordinances and street vacation ordinances shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk. The petitioner shall file an original petition and ordinance and 20 clear copies each and shall remit to the City Clerk a nonrefundable fee in the amount as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges. Prior to approval of the ordinance, the petitioner shall reimburse the City Clerk for the cost of advertising the ordinance. The petitioner shall be responsible for filing all notices and documents required by federal, state or county agencies.  
§ 3-38.1. - Standards for naming streets and municipally-owned property. 
[Added 2-25-2015 by Ord. No. 15-012 ; amended 4-8-2015 by Ord. No. 15-046 ] 
A.  Definitions. 
"Designation" means providing an additional, commemorative name designation, subordinate to the original name designation, of a public thoroughfare over which the City has jurisdiction. 
"Municipal Council Street-Name Subcommittee" means the ad hoc subcommittee charged with reviewing applications for commemorative street names and identifying a list of pre-approved names for new streets to be constructed in Jersey City. 
"Municipally Owned Property" means: 
(a)  Buildings and structures, including overpasses, bridges and viaducts and any similar structure; 
(b)  Real property, including open spaces and parks; and 
(c)  Interior features of any municipally owned property. 
"Naming" means providing an original name designation to a public thoroughfare over which the City has jurisdiction. 
"Renaming" means changing an original name designation of a public thoroughfare over which the City has jurisdiction to a different name. 
"Streets" as referenced in this section shall mean any public or private thoroughfare that permits public access either for pedestrian travel, vehicular travel or both. 
B.  Procedure for commemorative designation of streets. 
1.  Any person or organization seeking a commemorative street name designation shall file a commemorative street designation request form with the City Clerk. The completed form shall include the requested name to be commemorated, the reason for the commemoration, the existing street number or name, the length of the requested commemorative designation, i.e. Montgomery Street from West Side Avenue to Bergen Avenue, and the exact number of commemorative street signs to be added. 
In the case of a commemorative street designation honoring an individual or an organization, all supporting documentation used to support an application to honor that individual or organization must be authenticated and must be attached to the application. 
In the case of a commemorative street designation honoring an individual, the applicant seeking the commemorative designation must conduct an independent background check on the individual, if possible, before submitting a request to dedicate the street. The cost of the background check must be borne by the applicant. 
2.  The commemorative street designation request form shall be accompanied by a petition signed by at least seventy-five percent (75%) of the recorded property owners on the street proposed for the commemorative designation, and should include written letters of support or recommendation from applicable community groups. If the applicant is looking to designate a corner of a street, then the application must be accompanied by a petition signed by all recorded property owners within a two hundred-foot radius of the corner proposed for the commemorative designation. Such a request should also include written letters of support or recommendation from applicable community groups. 
3.  The City Clerk shall refer the completed commemorative designation request form, with completed petitions and all additional supplemental materials to the Street-Name Subcommittee which will consist of three (3) Municipal Council representatives or their designees, one (1) of whom will be the ward Councilperson in whose ward the street to be designated is located, the Director of City Planning or his or her designee, the Director of Cultural Affairs or his or her designee, the Director of Public Safety or his or her designee, and the Mayor or his or her designee. The Subcommittee will meet as necessary to review commemorative street name applications. If the request is approved by the Subcommittee, the application will be brought before the Municipal Council for final approval. 
4.  If approved, signs identifying the commemorative name designation shall be placed underneath the primary street name sign. 
C.  Standards for commemorative designation. 
1.  The authority to designate any street or municipally owned property in Jersey City shall remain solely with the Municipal Council. 
2.  A proposed commemorative name shall meet all applicable standards and requirements established by Subsection C.2.b of this section, provided however, that if for any reason the requesting party cannot meet these standards, a letter requesting a waiver of these standards, showing a good cause justification therefore, shall be provided by the requestors. 
a.  A proposed commemorative street or municipally owned property designation shall: 
(1)  Honor a person, organization, corporation, foundation, or similar entity that has a made a significant contribution to the City of Jersey City; or 
(2)  Reflect the geographic location, community, and the unique characteristics of the area or neighborhood; or 
(3)  Recognize the historical significance of the area or neighborhood. 
b.  Requirements. The following standards shall apply to the review and approval of any proposed commemorative name: 
(1)  Prospective individual honorees should have a minimum of fifteen (15) years of community involvement and should have demonstrated an extraordinary and consistent commitment and dedication to Jersey City. Prospective organizational honorees must have a minimum of thirty (30) years of community involvement in Jersey City. 
(2)  Prospective organizational honorees must be not-for-profit organizations. 
(3)  If a proposed commemorative street designation will recognize a prospective individual honoree, with rare exception, the individual must have been deceased for at least three (3) years. 
(4)  The Subcommittee will not consider an application to designate a street for an individual or organization already honored in a similar fashion, i.e. a person or organization having a park, monument or public building already named after him or her in Jersey City. 
(5)  A person, organization, foundation, or similar entity that has made significant contributions to the State of New Jersey or to the United States may be considered, but there should be, if possible, some relevant connection to Jersey City. 
(6)  The Subcommittee may deny approval of an application at its sole discretion. If an application is denied by the Subcommittee, the original applicant may not reapply on behalf of the prospective honoree for five (5) years from the date of the denial. 
(7)  Commemorative names should be unique, and unlikely to cause confusion or misunderstanding due to duplication of, or similarity with, an existing name, location, or other street name within Jersey City. Near duplications in spelling or street names that are phonetically similar to existing street names shall not be approved. 
(8)  Street names shall not contain more than three (3) words or exceed seventeen (17) characters in length, including spaces between words and excluding the street type, i.e. "avenue" or "street." 
(9)  No street can have more than two (2) commemorative street designations. 
(10)   If a portion of a street is proposed to be commemoratively designated, the designated portion shall begin and end at the intersections of major cross streets. 
(11)   The cost of producing and installing appropriate signs designating the commemorative name shall be paid by the original requestors. 
D.  Standards for re-naming existing streets and municipally owned property. The re-naming of streets and municipally owned property is discouraged and will only be allowed in exceptional circumstances such as the City Council finding it necessary for the protection of public health and safety. The new name shall be considered within the context of the historical and or community significance of the existing name. New street names shall follow the requirements and protocol contained in Subsection E, Procedure for naming new streets, and Subsection F, Standards for naming new streets. 
E.  Procedure for naming new streets. 
1.  The owner of record, after receipt of site plan or subdivision approval for the streets creation, shall file a street naming request form with the city clerk. The completed form shall include the requested name and documentation supporting the request. 
2.  The City Clerk shall refer the completed street dedication request form, and all additional supplemental materials to the Street-Name Subcommittee, which will consist of three (3) Municipal Council representatives or their designees, one (1) of whom will be the ward Councilperson in whose ward the street to be designated is located, the Director of City Planning or his or her designee, the Director of Cultural Affairs or his or her designee, the Director of Public Safety or his or her designee and the Mayor or his or her designee. The Subcommittee will meet as necessary to review street name applications, then make a recommendation on the application before the Municipal Council who shall accept, reject or amend making the final naming choice. 
3.  If approved, signs identifying the name designation shall be placed on the street by the owner. 
4.  The street signs and their installation shall be consistent with the City's State approved standards. 
F.  Standards for naming new streets. 
1.  The authority for the naming new streets or municipally owned buildings or structures constructed in Jersey City shall remain solely with the Municipal Council. 
2.  The Street-Name Subcommittee will identify fifty (50) potential names for the pre-approved street names list. A list of suitable names will be presented to the Departments of Planning and Public Safety for review within 120 days of the adoption of Ordinance 15-046 . 
3.  A final list of pre-approved street names will be presented to the Municipal Council within thirty (30) days of being reviewed by the Departments of Planning and Public Safety. 
4.  The pre-approved list of suitable street names will be available in the Division of City Planning. The pre-approved list will contain names that honor people who have made significant contributions to the City of Jersey City, or names which reflect the history, geographic location or unique characteristics of Jersey City. Developers building new streets are to pick from the names on this pre-approved list. 
5.  Individuals seeking to designate a street may, at their discretion, ask instead that the Subcommittee add the commemorative name to the list of pre-approved street names. 
6.  If a developer constructing a new street does not wish to pick from the list of pre-approved street names, the developer may ask the Subcommittee for a waiver to submit his or her own suggested street name(s), but the authority to name City streets shall remain with the Municipal Council and the developer's suggested name(s) must conform with the requirements of Subsection C of this section. The Subcommittee and the Municipal Council reserve the right to reject any proposed new street name. 
7.  Each new street must be named by separate ordinance and as each name is chosen from the list of pre-approved street names, that name shall be removed from the list by the City Clerk. Once a name is chosen from the pre-approved street name list, that name shall not be reused for any other street 
8.  In the event that the City vacates a street and the vacated street is intended to remain, either in whole or in part, as a vehicular thoroughfare, it shall be a condition of approval that the street name be selected from the pre-approved street name list. 
9.  Any new street, either public or private, created as part of a site plan or subdivision shall be submitted by the project applicant to the Municipal Council for street naming. The authority for naming all streets, both public and private, shall remain solely with the Municipal Council. 
10.  In the case of a private street, the owner of record shall file a naming request with the Street Name Subcommittee. 
11.  All efforts should be made to complete this process before a street is opened for public access and mail begins to be delivered. 
12.  If the owner does not submit a request before the street is opened for public access, the Street Name Subcommittee shall submit one to the City Council for consideration, 
G.  Standards for naming new municipally owned property. 
1.  The authority for the naming new municipally owned property constructed in Jersey City shall remain solely with the Municipal Council. 
2.  The City Council may choose to make its selection after receiving a written recommendation from any one of the city's advisory boards, including the Street-Name Subcommittee, or such other advisory board established for such purpose. 
3.  Such recommendation for naming a municipally owned property shall state how the proposed name(s) meet(s) with the criteria set forth in Subsection C of this section. 
4.  Each new municipally owned property must be named by separate ordinance. 
5.  Upon approval of a name for a new municipally owned property, a copy of the ordinance shall be forwarded to the Division of City Planning and Architecture for design of the appropriate signage and placement thereof. 
H.  Standards for commemorative street signs. To avoid confusion, the color scheme for commemorative street name signage shall be the inverse color scheme of the current street signs. 
1.  Standard street signage shall be green with white lettering and commemorative street signs shall be white with green lettering. 
2.  Street signs within historic districts shall be brown with white lettering and denote the name of the historic district in which the street runs through along the top edge. Commemorative street signs within a historic district shall be the inverse color scheme of the current street signs within the historic district and shall be white with brown lettering. 
3.  Commemorative street signs shall be six (6) inches lower than the actual street signs. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-012 , adopted February 25, 2015, amended the Code by adding new provisions to be designated as § 3-39. In order to prevent duplication of section numbers, the provisions have been included as § 3-38.1 at the discretion of the editor.  
ARTICLE VI - Department of Administration 
[Amended 11-27-1985 by Ord. No. C-48] 
 
§ 3-39. - Creation of Department; Director. 
[Amended 6-25-2008 by Ord. No. 08-092] 
There is hereby established the Department of Administration, the Director of which shall be the Business Administrator. The appointed City Chief Financial Officer shall be a part of the Department of Administration and report to the Business Administrator.  
§ 3-40. - Selection of Business Administrator. 
[Amended 6-25-2008 by Ord. No. 08-092] 
The Business Administrator shall be chosen solely on the basis of his or her executive and administrative qualifications with special reference to his or her actual experience in, or knowledge of, accepted practices in respect to the duties of his or her office as hereinafter set forth. At the time of his or her appointment, he or she shall be a resident of Jersey City, and during his or her tenure of office he or she shall remain a resident of Jersey City, unless otherwise approved by resolution of the Municipal Council in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:69A-44.  
§ 3-41. - Powers and duties of Business Administrator. 
[Amended 11-7-01 by Ord. No. 01-121] 
A.  The Business Administrator shall be the chief administrative officer of the city and shall exercise the powers and duties of the Department of Administration. 
B.  The Business Administrator shall under the direction and supervision of the Mayor: 
(1)  Assist in the preparation of the budget. 
(2)  Administer a purchasing and general service system. 
(3)  Supervise the activities of those divisions and offices within the Department of Administration. 
(4)  Perform such other duties as the Mayor may prescribe. 
C.  The Business Administrator shall also, subject to the direction of the Mayor, supervise the administration of each of the departments established by this Administrative Code. For this purpose, he or she shall have the power to investigate the organization and operation of all departments, to prescribe standards and rules of administrative practice and procedure and to consult with the heads of the departments under his or her jurisdiction, provided that, with respect to the Department of Law and the Division of Accounts and Control, the authority of the Business Administrator shall extend only to matters of budgeting, personnel and purchasing. [13] 
D.  Certification. Each year the Mayor or Business Administrator shall certify to the Municipal Council and the Tax Assessor that each financial agreement with each urban renewal entity has been entered into and is in effect pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 
[Added 4-24-02 by Ord. No. 02-049] 
E.  Consistent with N.J.S.A. 40A:11-14, the Business Administrator is empowered to execute license agreements with all private property owners willing to permit the Fire Division of the Public Safety Department exclusive use of their buildings for fire training purposes. The Business Administrator shall execute the form agreement on file in the office of the City Clerk. 
[Added 5-9-2018 by Ord. No. 18-034 ] 
Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's Note: See Ch. 19, Claims, Payment of, and Ch. 53, Personnel. 
 
§ 3-42. - Organization of Department. 
[Amended 2-13-1986 by Ord. No. C-166; 4-14-1988 by Ord. No. C-665; 9-13-1989 by Ord. No. McC-18; 8-19-1992 by Ord. No. 92-109; 10-27-1993 by Ord. No. 93-120; 9-28-1994 by Ord. No. 94-88; 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050; 11-7-01 by Ord. No. 01-121; 12-27-01 by Ord. No. 01-141; 9-22-2004 by Ord. No. 04-107; 6-9-2010 by Ord. No. 10-072; 6-25-2008 by Ord. No. 08-092; 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ; 1-29-2014 by Ord. No. 14-008 ; 1-13-2016 by Ord. No. 15-185 ; 4-13-2016 by Ord. No. 16-059 ; 10-11-17 by Ord. No. 17-137 ; 10-25-17 by Ord. No. 17-141 ] 
The Department of Administration shall consist of the following divisions and offices: 
A.  Division of Management and Budget. 
B.  Division of Real Estate. 
C.  Division of Architecture. 
D.  Division of Engineering, Traffic and Transportation. 
E.  Office of Municipal Public Defender. 
F.  Division of Communications. 
G.  Reserved. 
H.  Reserved. 
I.  Division of Purchasing and Central Services. 
J.  Office of Sustainability. 
K.  Division of Information Technology. 
L.  Office of Diversity and Inclusion; Heads. 
M.  Office of Utility Management. 
N.  Bureau of Innovation. 
O.  Reserved. 
P.  Reserved. 
Q.  Reserved. 
R.  Division of Economic Opportunity. 
S.  Office of Risk Management. 
T.  Division of Collections. 
U.  Division of Treasury and Debt Management. 
W.  Division of Accounts and Control. 
X.  Division of Internal Audit. 
Y.  Office of Tax Abatement.  
§ 3-43. - Division of Management and Budget. 
A.  Creation of the Division of Management and Budget; Budget Officer in charge; qualifications. Within the Department of Administration there shall be a Division of Management and Budget, the head of which shall be the Budget Officer. The Budget Officer shall, prior to his or her appointment, be qualified by training or experience in the administration of governmental or large corporate budgets, in management policies, in the analysis of budgetary costs, and in the administration and enforcement of grants. 
[Amended 6-25-2008 by Ord. No. 08-092] 
B.  Division of Management and Budget; functions. 
[Amended 6-25-2008 by Ord. No. 08-092] 
(1)  Prepare and prescribe uniform forms and procedures for budget preparation for all departments and other spending agencies. 
(2)  Assist the Business Administrator in the review and analysis of budget requests. 
(3)  Develop and install records and procedures to enable each department to evaluate work load and performance reports. 
(4)  Assist in the preparation of the budget document and related appropriation statements. 
(5)  Evaluate from a budgetary viewpoint various municipal programs and administer budgetary considerations as to all grants received by the city. 
(6)  Supervise management services, studies and programs. 
(7)  Conduct continuing studies for determining quality of work and devising improvements in efficiency and economy. 
(8)  Preparation of recommended budget. 
(i)  The city budget shall be prepared by the Mayor with the assistance of the Business Administrator and the Budget Officer. During the month of November, the Mayor shall require all Department Directors to submit requests for appropriations for the ensuing budget year and to appear before the Mayor or the Business Administrator at public hearings, which shall be held during that month, on the various requests. On or before January 15, the Mayor shall submit to the Council his or her recommended budget, together with such explanatory comment or statement as he or she may deem desirable. 
(ii)  The budget document shall be prepared in such form as is required by law for municipal budgets. There shall be appended to the budget a detailed analysis of all items of expenditure and revenue as far as practicable. Such analysis shall include a comparison of the total number of positions of each class and grade to be authorized by the budget with the actual number thereof employed at the beginning of the preceding budget period. So far as practicable, such analysis shall include appropriate statements of the cost of performance of functional programs and activities stated in terms of quantitative, countable units of work for operating and capital expenditures. The Business Administrator, with the assistance of the Budget Officer, shall prepare an estimate of non-property-tax revenues anticipated for the support of each annual budget. 
(9)  Supervision of administration of the budget by Business Administrator. 
(i)  The Business Administrator shall supervise the administration of each annual budget. In consultation with Department Directors, he or she shall establish quarterly or such other periodic allotments or appropriations as he or she may deem necessary. Each department shall plan and administer its expenditure program within the limits of such allotments. 
(ii)  If at any time during the budget year the Business Administrator shall ascertain that the city government is faced with the probability of incurring a cash deficit for the current year, he or she shall reconsider the work programs and allotments of the several departments. Upon such reconsideration and with the approval of the Mayor, he or she may revise budget allotments so as to forestall, as far as possible, the making of commitments and expenditures in excess of the revenues to be realized during the fiscal year. 
C.  Grants; functions. 
[Added 6-25-2008 by Ord. No. 08-092] 
(1)  Identify potential new grant sources for municipal projects, programs and departments; 
(2)  Manage and assist the preparation of all City grant applications to the federal and state government; 
(3)  Manage, coordinate and monitor all states of the City grant process, including the proper execution and implementation of all grant agreements and contracts and programs once grants are awarded; and 
(4)  Implement appropriate audit and other controls on all City grant programs to maintain compliance with grant terms and conditions and maintain comprehensive records on all grant programs.  
§ 3-44. - Division of Real Estate. 
[Amended 6-8-1989 by Ord. No. C-963; 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
Under the Department of Administration there shall be a Division of Real Estate, the head of which shall be the Director of Real Estate. Under the direction of the Department of Administration, the Division of Real Estate shall perform the following functions: 
A.  Direct the inspection of city-owned and tax title line properties in coordination with other city departments and agencies in accordance with applicable state and city statutes, codes and ordinances. 
B.  Supervise the activities of all agents appointed for the collection of rents and profits and for the management of properties acquired by the city and which are not within the jurisdiction of the Tax Collector. 
C.  Supervise the activities of all agents appointed by the Tax Collector or otherwise for the collection of rents and profits on properties coming within the jurisdiction of the Tax Collector for nonpayment of taxes and also supervise the activities of all agents appointed by the Tax Collector for the management of properties coming within the jurisdiction of the Tax Collector under N.J.S.A. 54:5-53.1. 
D.  Conduct, participate in and coordinate with other city departments and agents hearings, conferences and actions necessary for the maintenance and rehabilitation of city-owned, tax title lien and related properties. 
E.  Promote and supervise sales and leases of land owned by the city and not needed for public use. 
F.  Develop programs, seek funding from the state or federal government or private sources and promote projects through public and private sponsors for the development and rehabilitation of properties. This function shall be coordinated with the programs and plans of the Urban Research and Design Division. 
G.  Assist the Tax Collector with all necessary foreclosure actions, proceedings for the enforcement of liens and proceedings for the collection of delinquent taxes pursuant to law. 
H.  Coordinate policies with appropriate city officials, government bodies and other persons as to land use and disposition. 
I.  Promulgate and administer, in coordination with other city departments and agencies, rules and guidelines for the maintenance and rehabilitation of properties.  
§ 3-45. - Division of Architecture. 
[Added 7-17-2014 by Ord. No. 14-081 ; 1-13-2016 by Ord. No. 15-185 ] 
A.  Creation of the Division of Architecture; Director of Architecture in charge. There is hereby created within the Department of Administration a Division of Architecture, the head of which shall be the Director of Architecture, which shall: 
(1)  Provide architectural services for the construction, reconstruction, maintenance, rehabilitation and demolition of public buildings, parks and related facilities. Produce plans and specifications under signature and seal of a licensed architect; 
(2)  Provide for the structural maintenance, repair and alteration of all public buildings and parks owned or operated by the City; 
(3)  Establish standards and procedures for the control, use and care of all City-owned equipment, materials and supplies in the custody of the Office; 
(4)  Supervise the performance of all contracts for public works-related capital improvement projects and certify the amounts due and payable thereunder; 
(5)  Provide for the preparation of plans and specifications for the construction, repair, alteration and demolition of all City buildings and structures; 
(6)  Set standards for the construction, reconstruction and maintenance of all facilities in and/or on public lands; 
(7)  Be responsible for grant coordination and control and preparation of all plans and specifications for public works and capital improvements; 
(8)  Enforce the following section of the City Code and issue summonses for violation of this section: 
(a)  Chapter 134, Contractors.  
§ 3-46. - Division of Engineering, Traffic and Transportation. 
[Added 7-17-2014 by Ord. No. 14-081 ; amended 11-12-2014 by Ord. No. 14-017 ; 1-13-2016 by Ord. No. 15-185 ; 4-13-2016 by Ord. No. 16-059 ] 
A.  Within the Department of Administration, there shall be a Division of Engineering, Traffic and Transportation, the head of which shall be the Municipal Engineer. The Division of Engineering, Traffic and Transportation shall comply with N.J.S.A. 45:8-27 et seq., governing the licensing and practice of professional engineers and all other applicable laws. The Municipal Engineer shall perform or oversee the performance of the following: 
(1)  Grant coordination and control and preparation of all plans and specifications for public works and capital improvements, including those funded under NJDOT administered grants (undertaken by the City); 
(2)  The performance of all contracts for public works and transportation-related capital improvement projects and certify the amounts due and payable thereunder; 
(3)  Provide and maintain surveys, maps, specifications and operating records with respect to all property, works and facilities under the jurisdiction of the Division; 
(4)  Establish standards and procedures for the control, use and care of all City-owned equipment, materials and supplies in the custody of the Division; 
(5)  Provide, supervise and coordinate engineering and technical activities and services of all departments; 
(6)  Perform or supervise land surveys of public land and rights-of-way and maintain the official tax assessment maps for the City; 
(7)  Enforce the following sections of the City Code and issue summonses for violation of these sections: 
(a)  Article I of Chapter 287, Solid Waste; 
(b)  Chapter 340, Waterfront; 
(8)  The Director shall designate an inspector(s) who shall have the authority and duties as provided by the Jersey City Municipal Code but shall report to the Division Director; 
(9)  The Municipal Engineer shall have plenary authority and control over transportation-related capital improvement projects and the coordination and control over NJDOT-administered grants and aid for capital construction. 
(10)   Inspect backfilling operations of street openings permitted in accordance with Sections 296-20 through 296-51. 
B.  Traffic and Transportation Functions. 
(1)  Administer and enforce Chapter 332, Vehicles and Traffic, and such other provisions of the Jersey City Code relating to traffic, transportation and traffic engineering, except as otherwise provided by federal, state, county or local laws; 
(2)  Assure that all signs conform to federal, state, county and local laws, rules and regulations governing traffic signs, marking or pavements and related markings for such purposes. All traffic control devices shall conform, insofar as practicable, with the standards set forth in the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways, United States Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration; 
(3)  Designate the location and design of highway lighting devices, poles and fixtures and the type and intensity of illumination for streets and ways; 
(4)  Collect and compile traffic data and prepare engineering studies and surveys in regard to vehicular and pedestrian traffic; 
(5)  Establish parking meter zones and determine the design, type, size, location and use of parking meters; 
(6)  Make and promulgate regulations designating curb loading zones, taxi stands and bus stops pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-197(3)b; 
(7)  Conduct studies of the causes of accidents and determine remedial measures to prevent their future occurrence; 
(8)  Maintain a suitable system of filing traffic accident reports and prepare an annual traffic report, which report shall contain the following information: the number of traffic accidents; number of persons killed; number of persons injured; and other similar pertinent traffic accident data; 
(9)  Plan the operation and movement of traffic on the streets and highways of the City; 
(10)   Establish rates and regulations governing the use of public highways by vehicles and pedestrians within the limits established by state law and Chapter 332, Vehicles and Traffic, of the Jersey City Code, including, but not to the exclusion of other regulatory powers conferred, the installation of traffic control devices, designations of through streets and stop streets, of curb parking zones and the manner of their use, including areas for the installation of parking meters, designation of public carrier stands and areas for the installation of parking meters, designation of public carrier stands and stops, curb loading zones, crosswalks, safety zones and streets at which drivers shall not make right or left turns, speed of vehicles and time of loading and unloading; 
(11)   Review all requests for street openings and public utility work plans which in any way would affect traffic within the City, issue street opening permits to municipal and utility excavators, establish rules and regulations governing construction and maintenance work zones on public rights-of-way and assure that such zones conform to established standards for the protection of traffic and pedestrians and review and approve all curb cuts on the municipal right-of-way; 
(12)   Cooperate with other City officials in the development of ways to improve traffic conditions; 
(13)   Carry out additional duties imposed by this Code; 
(14)   Provide by regulation for the closing of any street or portion thereof to motor vehicle traffic on any ways whenever such closing is necessary for the preservation of the public safety, health and welfare; said regulations shall be promulgated in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:67-16.7 and 40:67-16.9; 
(15)   Install and maintain traffic signals and other traffic control devices. 
(16)   The Division of Engineering, Traffic and Transportation shall, concurrently with the Division of Police and the Division of Parking Enforcement within the Department of Public Safety, enforce all laws and regulations regulating the parking of vehicles: 
(a)  In on-street and off-street parking metered areas in the City; 
(b)  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the curb; 
(c)  Within ten (10) feet of a fire hydrant; 
(d)  Within no stopping and no standing zones where signs indicate the existence for such zones; 
(e)  In a bus stop or in a taxi stand zone where signs indicate the existence of such zones; 
(f)  On a roadway within twelve (12) inches of the curb; 
(g)  In an off-street parking area operated by the City. 
(17)   Drawings for construction of proposed traffic facilities to be submitted to the Municipal Engineer. All design drawings prepared by other agencies, departments or divisions for the construction of proposed highways, bridges, parking terminals and other traffic handling facilities shall be submitted to the Municipal Engineer for a review and recommendation, but nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the City Council from acting on such matter without such review or recommendation.  
§ 3-47. - Office of Municipal Public Defender. 
A.  Creation. There is established within the Department of Administration the Office of Municipal Public Defender, the head of which shall be the Chief Public Defender. The Chief Public Defender shall administer the Municipal Public Defender Program and directly supervise the professional, clerical and investigative staff assigned to the program. The Business Administrator's authority over this office shall extend only to matters of budgeting, personnel and purchasing. 
B.  Functions. 
(1)  Municipal Public Defenders shall perform the following functions: 
(a)  Render legal advice, counseling and representation to all eligible defendants in the Jersey City Municipal Court; in addition, Municipal Public Defenders shall represent eligible defendants charged with nonindictable offenses involving gambling in both the Superior Court of Hudson County and the Municipal Court of Jersey City. [14] 
(b)  Appeal any conviction or sentence where an appeal is warranted in the opinion of the Municipal Public Defender. 
(c)  Represent all city employees (with the exception of full-time police officers) charged with work-connected, nonindictable offenses. 
(2)  Neither the Municipal Public Defenders nor their staff shall be obligated to offer any legal advice or representation to any person for any matter other than those specified in Subsection B(1). 
(3)  The Chief Municipal Public Defender and Municipal Public Defenders shall be permitted to maintain a private law practice, provided that their assignments as Municipal Public Defenders shall be given priority over their private practice at all times without exception, so that there shall be no conflict with their obligations as Municipal Public Defenders. [15] 
C.  Application fees for representation by Public Defender. A person applying for representation by a Municipal Public Defender or court-approved counsel shall pay an application fee set forth in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges. Funds collected pursuant this subsection shall be deposited in a dedicated fund administered by the Chief Financial Officer. Such funds shall be used exclusively to meet the costs incurred in providing the services of a Municipal Public Defender, including, when required, expert and lay investigation and testimony. 
[Added 11-23-1999 by Ord. No. 99-143] 
Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Editor's note— See Ch. 23, Court, Municipal. 

--- (15) --- 
Editor's note— Original Secs. 2-69 through 2-72.2, which created the Division of Engineering, which immediately followed this section, were repealed 9-14-1994 by Ord. No. 94-87. Original Sec. 2-70.1, entitled "Establishing photocopying fees and fees for documents on file," as added 1-8-1987 by Ord. No. C-356, which immediately followed this section, was deleted 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050. For provisions relating to fees, see Ch. 160, Fees and Charges. Original Secs. 2-72.3 through 2-72.5, as added 9-13-1989 by Ord. No. McC-9, which created the Bureau of Traffic Engineering, were repealed 8-19-1992 by Ord. No. 92-109. 
 
§ 3-48. - Division of Communications created; head. 
[Added 4-14-1988 by Ord. No. C-665; amended 8-14-1986 by Ord. No. C-190; 9-24-1987 by Ord. No. C-543; 1-14-1988 by Ord. No. C-643; 10-13-1988 by Ord. No. C-829; 10-14-1992 by Ord. No. 92-142; 10-27-1993 by Ord. No. 93-120; 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] [16] 
There is hereby created a Division of Communications, the head of which shall be the Director of the Division of Communications. 
Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
Editor's note— Original Secs. 2-77.1 and 2-77.2, which created the Division of Public Information and Citizen Services, as added 2-13-1986 by Ord. No. C-166, which preceded this section, were repealed 9-27-1989 by Ord. No. McC-44. Original Sec. 2-77.12, which created the Office of Risk Management, added 9-13-1989 by Ord. No. McC-18, which also preceded this section, was repealed 9-28-1994 by Ord. No. 94-88. 
 
§ 3-49. - Powers and duties of Division of Communications. 
[Amended 10-25-1989 by Ord. No. McC-54; 11-23-1993 by Ord. No. 93-137; 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052; 4-13-2016 by Ord. No. 16-059 ] 
The Division of Communications shall: 
A.  In coordination with the various departments of city government, develop and implement communications, public information and educational programs to enhance the knowledge of city residents concerning the availability of and access to city services. 
B.  Coordinate the interrelationship between and dissemination of public information to the public and all aspects of the media, including print media, radio, television and video. 
C.  Participate in and coordinate the development of local origination programming and other aspects of the interrelationship between the cable television franchisee and the city's public access and city access cable television channels.  
§ 3-50. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-089, § B, adopted July 18, 2012 , amended the Code by repealing former § 3-50, which pertained to the creation of the Mayor's Action Bureau, and derived from Ord. No. C-442, adopted March 26, 1987; Ord. No. C-637, adopted December 10, 1987; Ord. No. McC-9, adopted September 13, 1989; Ord. No. McC-18, adopted September 13, 1989; Ord. No. 95-050, adopted June 14, 1995; Ord. No. 97-052, adopted August 13, 1997; Ord. No. 01-121, adopted November 7, 2001.  
§ 3-50.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-089, § B, adopted July 18, 2012 , amended the Code by repealing former § 3-50.1, which pertained to the powers and duties of the Mayor's Action Bureau, and derived from Ord. No. 97-052, adopted August 13, 1997; and Ord. No. 01-121, adopted November 7, 2001.  
§ 3-51. - Purchasing; Division of Purchasing and Central Services. 
[Amended 12-11-1986 by Ord. No. C-347; 10-27-1988 by Ord. No. C-840; 5-27-1992 by Ord. No. 92-052; 12-9-1992 by Ord. No. 92-179; 1-13-1993 by Ord. No. 92-193; 6-12-1996 by Ord. No. 96-063; 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052; 1-28-2009 by Ord. No. 09-003; 1-28-2009 by Ord. No. 09-004] 
There is hereby created a Division of Purchasing and Central Services, the head of which shall be the Business Administrator, or, if qualified, his designee. The head of the Division of Purchasing and Central Services shall be a Registered Public Purchasing Specialist (RPPS) and shall have a minimum of four years' experience in commercial or governmental purchasing. 
[Added 6-25-2008 by Ord. No. 08-092] 
A.  Purchase controls, orders and requisitions. 
(1)  All purchases made and contracts awarded for any supplies, materials, equipment or services shall be pursuant to a written requisition from the Director of the department, office or agency whose appropriation will be charged. No purchase shall be made nor obligation incurred unless the Chief Financial Officer certifies that a sufficient unencumbered balance of appropriation is available to pay therefor. 
(2)  The Director of the department, office or agency making a request for the purchase of one or more motor vehicles shall submit a copy of the request to the City Council Finance Committee. Such request shall include a statement of the reasons for the request and shall identify the vehicles to be replaced, if any. 
B.  Conformance with statutes required; procedures. 
(1)  All purchases made and contracts awarded by the Purchasing Agent shall conform with the requirements of the Local Public Contracts Law of the State of New Jersey, and all specification shall be drafted in a manner to encourage free, open and competitive bidding. In addition to the requirements of the Local Public Contracts Law, [17] the Purchasing Agent shall comply with the following procedures: 
(a)  The Purchasing Agent shall prepare or cause to prepared, under his or her supervision and approval, specifications for the items or services to be purchased. 
(b)  Prior to and no later than the insertion of the advertisement in the newspapers for solicitation of bids, the Purchasing Agent shall contact as many appropriate vendors which may be interested in and which supply said items or services as he or she can determine and submit to them the specifications for said items or services and request that they submit sealed bids to him or her at the date, time and place set forth in said advertisement. A description of the items or services to be advertised and the vendors contacted shall be filed with the Clerk of the Council and with the Director of Minority and Women Business Enterprise Development Program prior to advertisement. The list shall indicate which of the vendors contacted qualify as minority or women business enterprises. 
(c)  The Purchasing Agent shall receive the sealed bids from the vendors at the date, time and place as set forth in said advertisement. 
(d)  The Purchasing Agent shall open the sealed bids and determine the lowest responsible bidder. He or she shall then submit the same to the Council by way of resolution at the next special or regular meeting of the Council pursuant to law. 
(2)  The Purchasing Agent shall attach to said resolution a fact sheet which will contain the following information: 
(a)  The names and addresses and the amounts of the bids of other vendors who had submitted bids. 
(b)  The names and addresses of all vendors who were contracted by the Purchasing Agent who were requested by him or her to submit bids. 
(c)  Whether or not said vendors have submitted bids. 
(d)  The names and addresses of the vendors who have received or picked up the proposals. 
(e)  If any of the above vendors did not submit bids, the Purchasing Agent, after receiving the sealed bids at the time and place for said reception, shall contact said vendors who did not submit bids, either orally or in writing, and attempt to determine why such vendors did not or would not submit bids. 
(3)  In addition to the above information placed on the fact sheet attached to the resolution, the Purchasing Agent shall set thereon any irregularities that may be found in the bid documents of the lowest bidder, no matter how slight or minor said irregularities may be, for consideration by the Council. 
(4)  Whenever practicable, materials and contractual services shall be procured under the New Jersey Division of Purchases and Property, under the state contract procedure. 
C.  Public bidding procedures. 
[Amended 1-14-1998 by Ord. No. 97-096] 
(1)  The Purchasing Agent is authorized to advertise for and receive bids in connection with all purchases, contracts or agreements in accordance with the provisions of the Local Public Contracts Law. The governing body, however, shall be the contracting agent and shall award such contracts and purchases as may be recommended by the Purchasing Agent. 
(2)  The Purchasing Agent shall determine the method of presenting bids, except that such method shall be confined to either personal presentation at bid opening or by registered mail. In either case, the method shall be stated in the public advertisement, and if registered mail, proper safeguards shall be provided to ensure the security of bids. Bids received after the time stated in the advertisement shall be considered as nonresponsive and shall be returned unopened to the sender. 
(3)  Following review and evaluation of bids, the Purchasing Agent shall recommend the lowest responsible bidder to the governing body, which shall award the contract or take such other action as it deems proper. The Purchasing Agent may, however, reject all bids and readvertise if he or she deems it to be in the best interest of the city. 
(4)  A low bidder whose bid is rejected by the Purchasing Agent may appeal, in writing, to the Business Administrator within 10 days of the mailing date of the Purchasing Agent's decision. A copy of the appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk. Upon appeal, the Business Administrator shall schedule a hearing of the appeal within 10 days following receipt of the appeal. At the appeal hearing the appellant or his or her legal counsel may present evidence in his or her behalf. The hearing shall be held in accordance with reasonable rules of due process. The appointed hearing officer shall file his or her decision and a statement of reasons for his or her decision with the City Clerk within 10 business days following the hearing. 
D.  Emergency contracts; procedure. The City of Jersey City shall follow the procedure set forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:11-6. 
[Amended 10-14-2016 by Ord. No. 15-104 ; 11-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-172 ] 
E.  Awarding of contracts for professional and extraordinary unspecifiable services. 
(1)  Subject to Subsection E(2), before submitting any proposed contract for professional or extraordinary unspecifiable services to the Council for approval, a Department Director shall solicit quotations, whenever practicable, for any contract of $7,500 or more. If a Department Director recommends that the contract be awarded on the basis of other than the lowest quotation received or considers it impracticable to solicit quotations, he or she shall file a statement of explanation of the reason or reasons why competitive quotations are considered impracticable. 
(2)  There shall be exempted from the procedures established under Subsection E(1) any contract submitted by the Corporation Counsel for the appointment of special counsel to represent any officers or employees of the city in any legal proceeding or to represent the Jersey City Medical Center or its agents, servants and employees. 
F.  Division of Purchasing and Central Services; Purchasing Agent in charge; qualifications; functions. 
[Amended 4-13-2016 by Ord. No. 16-059 ] 
(1)  The head of the Division of Purchasing and Central Services shall be the Purchasing Agent. Prior to appointment, the Purchasing Agent shall have four years' experience in commercial or governmental purchasing. 
(2)  Under the direction of the Business Administrator, the Purchasing Agent shall: 
(a)  Administer the execution and performance of all contracts awarded by the Municipal Council. 
(b)  Purchase, store and distribute all supplies, materials and equipment and contract for all services required by any department; except that the Department of Public Works shall administer contracts for public works or improvements. 
(c)  Establish and enforce specifications for service, supplies, materials and equipment. 
(d)  Inspect or supervise the inspection of all deliveries of supplies, materials and equipment and the rendition of contractual services and determine their quality, quantity and conformance with specifications. 
(e)  Have charge of any central storerooms and warehouses that may be established. 
(f)  Transfer to or between departments, offices and agencies and from or to central stores such supplies, materials and equipment as need appears and arrange for the sale of surplus or obsolete items. 
(g)  With the approval of the Council, transfer obsolete or unneeded equipment and supplies to any autonomous board, commission or agency created by the City of Jersey City. 
(h)  Supervise and administer all joint purchasing agreements between the city and other governmental agencies. 
(i)  Supervise the sale of surplus equipment and materials. 
(j)  Within 12 months subsequent to the effective date of this subsection, the Purchasing Agent of the City of Jersey City must conduct a review of existing product and service specifications to determine whether existing specifications either require or exclude the use of recycled products, reusable products or products designed to be recycled, for use by all departments, agencies, offices, boards and commissions. 
(k)  Within the same twelve-month period, all city departments and agencies must recommend changes to the Purchasing Agent to ensure that performance standards for particular products can be met and that specifications are not overly stringent and to recommend changes to ensure that specifications will incorporate a requirement for the use of recycled materials, reusable products and products designed to be recycled to the maximum extent practicable, subject to an alternative showing that either the performance of the product will be jeopardized or that the product will negatively impact health, safety or operational efficiency. 
(l)  Outside contractors bidding to provide products or services to the city, including printing service, must demonstrate that they will comply with the specifications described in Subsection F(2)(j). 
(m)  City staff will work to encourage the copier industry to develop copiers that will accept recycled paper. In addition, recycled paper shall be purchased and used in all copy machines that will accept it. 
(n)  The Purchasing Agent shall purchase only new copiers which are capable of utilizing recycled paper. 
(o)  When recycled products are used, reasonable efforts shall be undertaken to label the products to indicate that they contain recycled materials. City departments and agencies shall use for their masthead stationery and envelopes recycled paper that includes postconsumer recycled content and may indicate on the paper that they contain recycled material. Other recycled products used by the city may also indicate that they contain recycled material. 
(p)  Contracts shall be awarded for recycled products, reusable products offered as alternative to disposable products and products designed to be recycled where they are offered as alternatives to nonrecyclable products. The contract award shall be based on the lowest responsible bid or price quoted by the supplier or suppliers offering recycled products. 
(q)  The city will cooperate to the greatest extent feasible with neighboring city and county governments in an effort to develop a comprehensive, consistent and effective procurement effort intended to stimulate the market for recycled products, reusable products and products designed to be recycled. 
(r)  All related city departments and agencies shall work cooperatively to further the purposes of this chapter. The city's economic development process shall incorporate the goal of stimulating the market for recycled material. 
(s)  The Purchasing Agent shall annually specify in an annual report, to be filed with the City Clerk, the quantity of RCRA Guideline products with recycled content in terms of their weight and percentage of acquisition in comparison to products without recycled content. 
(t)  This section establishes a recycled product procurement policy required pursuant to federal law (42 U.S.C. § 6962 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act). 
(3)  Green Product Procurement Policy. Under the direction of the Business Administrator, the Purchasing Agent shall purchase green products pursuant to the following policy [Added 1-28-2009 by Ord. No. 09-003] : 
(a)  Purpose. This subsection shall be known as the "Green Products Procurement Policy." Its purpose is to promote the purchase of products which minimize damage to human health and the City's natural environment, to reduce carbon emissions in the City and to stimulate the market for recycled, reused, and biodegradable products. 
(b)  Definitions. For the purposes of subsection F(3) the following definitions apply: 
"Biodegradable" means the ability of a substance, material, or product ingredient to readily decompose by the action of microbes. 
"Cleaning Product" means a dishwashing detergent or compound, household cleaner, commercial cleaner, industrial cleaner, metal cleaner; degreasing compound or other substance used or intended to be used for cleaning purposes. 
"Conventional products" are hereby defined as those products which the Purchasing Agent has evaluated for their effects on human health and the environment and has determined inappropriate for classification as green products, or those products that the Purchasing Agent has not yet so evaluated. 
"Electronic device" means: 
[1]  any cathode ray tube, any product containing a cathode ray tube, any liquid crystal display (LCD), plasma screen or other flat panel television or computer monitor or similar video display product, any battery containing lead, cadmium, lithium or silver, any computer central processing unit that contains one (1) or more circuit boards and includes any desktop computer or any laptop computer or computer peripherals including but not limited to, any keyboard, mouse and other pointing device, printer, scanner, facsimile machine and card reader, and any copier, but not including any automobile, or large piece of commercial or industrial equipment containing a cathode ray tube, a cathode ray tube product, a flat panel display or similar video display device that is contained within, and not separate from, the larger piece of equipment, or any device used by emergency response personnel; or 
[2]  any other device powered by electricity designated by the Purchasing Agent. 
"ENERGY STAR™ Products" are hereby defined as those products which meet the energy efficiency standards set forth by the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the U.S. Department of Energy for compliance with its ENERGY STAR® program. 
"ENERGY STAR™ Electronic Device" is hereby defined as any ENERGY STAR™ product that meets the definition of an electronic device. 
"Excessive costs" are hereby defined as costs of purchasing green products where either the immediate cost of purchasing the green product exceeds by seventy-five percent (75%) the immediate cost of the comparable conventional product in the current fiscal year, or where the average yearly cost of the green product exceeds by seventy-five percent (75%) the average yearly cost of comparable conventional product when amortized over the entire lifetime of both products. When evaluating the costs of green products and comparable conventional products, the Purchasing Agent shall compare total costs of each including, but not limited to: the costs of maintenance, insurance, disposal, replacement, safety and health, training, material management and potential liability costs. 
"Green products" are hereby defined as those products which the Purchasing Agent has determined would have a lesser or reduced negative effect on human health and the environment when compared with comparable conventional products and services, where such comparison includes consideration of all phases of the product's life cycle, including raw materials acquisition, production, manufacturing, packaging, transportation, distribution, operation, maintenance, and disposal, including potential for reuse or ability to be recycled. 
"Green purchasing" is hereby defined as the practice of purchasing green products. 
"Green Seal" is the non-profit organization, located at 1001 Connecticut Avenue, NW, Suite 827, Washington, DC 20036-5525 which evaluates and certifies products based on each product's environmental impact throughout its life cycle. 
"Green Seal™ Certified Products" are those products which green seal has evaluated and tested for environmental impact and has awarded the Green Seal™ certification, and which maintain such standards so as to allow such certification. 
"Pre-consumer waste material" means materials or by-products generated after manufacturing of a product is completed, but before the product reaches the end-use consumer. Pre-consumer waste material does not include home scrap, which is those scrap metals or by-products generated by a company that can be used by the generating company or parent company. 
"Post-consumer waste material" means only those materials generated by a consumer which have served their intended end use and which have been separated or diverted from solid waste. Wastes generated during production or an end product are excluded. All materials collected from residential sources in a municipal recycling program may be considered post-consumer. 
"Recycled content" means the total amount of pre-consumer waste material and post-consumer recovered material introduced as a feed stock in a material production process, usually expressed as a percentage. 
"Recyclable product" means a product which, after its intended end use, twenty-five percent (25%) of the product has been diverted from the solid waste stream for use as a raw material in the manufacture of another consumer or procurable product. For the purposes of this definition, burning or composting of products may not be considered diversion. 
"Recycled material" means material and byproducts that have been recovered or diverted from solid waste and that can be utilized in place of raw or virgin material in manufacturing a product. It is derived from post- consumer recycled material, manufacturing waste, industrial scrap, agricultural waste, and other waste material, but does not include material or byproducts generated from, and commonly reused within, an original manufacturing process. 
"Toxic or hazardous substance" means any substance that, because of its quantity or concentration, or physical or chemical characteristics, poses a significant present or potential harm to human health and safety or the environment if released into the workplace or environment." 
"Purchasing Agent" is hereby defined as the Purchasing Agent for the City of Jersey City or his or her designees. 
(c)  Mandatory product evaluation. The Purchasing Agent shall, in consultation with the City department(s) ordering or leasing the product(s), evaluate all products in the categories listed in subsections (l)—(n) below for their environmental impact. The Purchasing Agent shall then classify as green products those products which, considering the totality of their life cycle, have a reduced effect on human health and the environment, when compared with comparable products that serve a similar function. 
(d)  Permitted Product Evaluation. The Purchasing Agent may, in consultation with the City department(s) ordering or leasing the product(s), evaluate for environmental impact such other products as he or she deems appropriate and may classify as green products those products which, considering the totality of their life cycle, have a reduced effect on human health and the environment when compared with comparable products that serve a similar function. 
(e)  Guidance for Green Product Classification. The Purchasing Agent, when evaluating and classifying products as "green products," shall consult: 
[1]  the Comprehensive Procurement Guideline for Products Containing Recovered Materials, as set forth in part 247 of Title 40 of the United States Code of Federal Regulations; 
[2]  the EPA's Affirmative Procurement Plan entitled "EPA's Final Guidance on Environmentally Preferable Purchasing;" and 
[3]  the U.S. Department of Health and Human Service's booklet entitled "Purchasing Green products and Services at the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services" issued by the office of the Assistant Secretary for Administration and Management, Office of Acquisition Management and Policy in July, 2006 (and as amended and supplemented). 
[4]  Any similar instructional materials recently or later made available by the EPA, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, or the N.J. Department of Environmental Protection which may be reasonably instructive in determining whether a product should qualify as a green product. 
(f)  Classification of third-party certified, recycled, and biodegradable products. When determining whether to classify a product as a green product, the Purchasing Agent shall give substantial consideration to whether products which have achieved GreenSeal™ certification or equivalent third-party certification, whether products are Biodegradable, whether products are recyclable products and whether products are composed of ten percent (10%) or greater Recycled Content. GreenSeal™ Certified Products and products which have achieved equivalent third-party certification shall be classified as green products unless they contain dangerous levels of toxic or hazardous substances, as defined in section (i), or unless there is a compelling reason not to so classify them. Compelling reasons against classification of such products as green products may include, but are not limited to: 
[1]  excessive distance a product must be shipped throughout its life-cycle 
[2]  environmentally harmful packaging 
[3]  product's lack of fuel efficiency or energy efficiency 
[4]  product's emission of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs); and 
[5]  product's significant lack of durability. 
(g)  Requirement for purchasing green products. Subject to paragraph (h) below, the Purchasing Agent shall purchase green products over comparable conventional products whenever the cost of the green product does not exceed by twenty-five percent (75%) the cost of comparable conventional product, and may purchase green products over comparable conventional products when the cost of green product does not exceed by seventy-five percent (75%) the cost of the comparable conventional product. When evaluating the cost of a green product and a comparable product, the Purchasing Agent shall compare total costs over the life of the item, including, but not limited to: the costs of maintenance, insurance, disposal, replacement, safety and health, training, material management and potential liability costs. 
(h)  Waiver of green product preference. Wherever there exists one (1) or more significant concerns regarding the purchase or lease of a green product, including excessive costs, health, safety, performance, compatibility, lack of availability within a reasonable period of time, or statutory prohibitions the Purchasing Agent may waive the preference for purchasing a green product and may purchase, lease, or allow the purchase or lease of comparable conventional products to the extent such concerns require, subject to section (i)[3]. Reasons for such a waiver shall be detailed in writing by the Purchasing Agent and maintained in the Office of the Purchasing Agent. 
(i)  Toxic or hazardous substances. The presence of toxic or hazardous substances is to be considered in product classification and purchasing as follows: 
[1]  The Purchasing Agent shall not classify as green products any products which he or she determines contain dangerous levels of toxic or hazardous substances including, but not limited to lead, mercury, cadmium, hexavalent chromium, polybrominated biphenyls or polybrominated dephenyl ethers. 
[2]  The Purchasing Agent shall consider a product's achievement of Green Seal Certification or equivalent third-party certification as compelling evidence that the level of toxic or hazardous substances in the product is not dangerous. 
[3]  The Purchasing Agent shall not select products with dangerous levels of toxic or hazardous substances for purchase or lease except where: 
[a]  Purchasing Agent has waived the green product requirement pursuant to material concerns specified in subsection (h) above; and 
[b]  There is no comparable conventional product available that addresses the material concerns necessitating the waiver but does not contain dangerous levels of toxic or hazardous substances. 
(j)  Maintenance of information about green products. The Purchasing Agent shall develop and maintain lists, descriptions and other relevant documentary information about green products and recycled products and make such information available to all City departments whenever possible. 
(k)  Purchasing or lease contract specifications. The Purchasing Agent shall review and modify current and future procurement requirements so that contract specifications, clauses and solicitation language address the standards of subsection F(3). 
(l)  Electronic devices. In accordance with subsections [1]—[5] below, the Purchasing Agent shall evaluate all electronic devices purchased or leased by the City for environmental impact, and determine whether all such electronic devices shall be to classified as green products. 
[1]  Except as indicated in paragraph (i) above, electronic devices issued the ENERGY STAR™ title shall be considered green products for the purposes of this ordinance. 
[2]  The Purchasing Agent may also classify electronic devices which are not ENERGY STAR™ products as green products. In determining such classification, the Purchasing Agent shall consult those guidelines and standards issued, or to be issued, by the New Jersey State agency which is, or will be, charged with establishing energy-efficient guidelines, in addition to the guidelines denoted in paragraph (e) and (f) above. 
[3]  Subject to sections [4] and [5] below, when purchasing or leasing new electronic devices or replacing existing electronic devices the City shall select those which are both ENERGY STAR™ products and green products, where available, over those which are green products but not ENERGY STAR™ Products. 
[4]  In accordance with section (i) above, wherever an ENERGY STAR™ electronic device contains dangerous levels of toxic or hazardous substances, it shall not be considered a green product and shall not be selected over other electronic devices which are green products. 
[5]  Whenever valid concerns regarding the purchase or lease of a ENERGY STAR™ Electronic Device exist, including health, safety, performance, availability, statutory prohibitions and/or excessive costs, the Purchasing Agent may waive the requirement for purchasing the ENERGY STAR™ electronic device, and may purchase, lease, or allow the purchase or lease of comparable non-ENERGY STAR™ products to the extent such concerns require. Reasons for such a waiver shall be detailed in writing by the Purchasing Agent and maintained in the contract file. 
(m)  Carpets. In accordance with [1] and [2] below, the Purchasing Agent or his or her designee shall evaluate all carpets, carpet cushions, and carpet adhesives purchased or leased by the City for environmental impact, and determine whether all such products shall be classified as green products: 
[1]  The Purchasing Agent may consider any widely accepted industry recommendations for reduced volatile organic compounds when classifying carpeting products in addition to the guidelines denoted in paragraphs (e) and (f) above. 
[2]  No carpet, carpet cushion, or carpet adhesive purchased by any City department shall contain the following volatile organic compounds in any significant concentration: 
[a]  for carpet 4-phenylcyclohexene, formaldehyde or styrene; 
[b]  for carpet cushions, butylated hydroxytoluene, formaldehyde or 4 phenylcyclohexen e; and 
[c]  for carpet adhesives, folmaldehyde or 2-ethyl-hex anol. 
(n)  Miscellaneous products. The following are hereby designated for green product evaluation. The Purchasing Agent, in consultation with the City department ordering the product, shall evaluate all products within each category as to each product's environmental impact to determine if each product shall be classified as a green product: 
[1]  Cleaning products 
[2]  antifreeze 
[3]  insulation products 
[4]  recycled plastic products 
[5]  re-manufactured laser printer toner cartridges 
[6]  paint 
[7]  re-manufactured tires and products made from recycled tire rubber, including rubber mats and play field surfaces 
[8]  lights and light bulbs. 
(o)  Reclassification. The Purchasing Agent shall have the authority to change classification status of any product by either adding or removing such product from the list of green products provided he or she has good cause to reclassify and does so according to the principles set forth in subsections (e), (f) and (i). Good cause to reclassify shall include but not be limited to: 
[1]  Changes in the physical makeup or manufacture of the product or packaging which result in a material change in the product's net impact on human health, safety, or the environment. 
[2]  Changes in the distribution or transportation of the product which result in a material change in the product's net impact on human health, safety, or the environment. 
[3]  Purchasing Agent's discovery of information previously unknown to him or her regarding the presence or absence of dangerous levels of toxic or hazardous substances in the product, the threat any such substances impose, or newly discovered hazards of substances previously not considered hazardous. 
[4]  Purchasing Agent's discovery of information previously unknown to him or her regarding product's net impact on human health, safety, or the environment. 
[5]  Changes in the product's status as a Green SealTM product, an ENERGY STARTM product or other comparable changes in third-party certification status. 
(p)  The City of Jersey City will not purchase products containing in whole or in part wood from tropical forests or temperate rainforests excepting those woods which are proven to have been harvested in an environmentally sound manner in accordance with the guidelines set forth in Appendix A. [Added 3-22-2006 by Ord. No. 06-035] 
The city will not allow the use or purchase of products containing in whole or in part wood from tropical forests or temperate rainforests by any entity either using monies provided by the City of Jersey City for fulfillment of contracts or purchasing agreements, or on leased properties belonging to the City. 
APPENDIX A 
Terms of this resolution will be met if it can be proven through an independent certification program approved by the Forest Stewardship Council that the tropical forest or temperate rainforest wood product has come from a forest operation that meets the following conditions*: 
Local Involvement 
Local communities are involved in all stages of planning and management of a diverse array of forest products for sustainable yields, including non-timber forest products. 
Land Rights 
Projects must not interfere with aboriginal or traditional land rights of indigenous peoples, or other current land tenants. 
Ecology 
Timber harvesting cannot adversely affect beneficial physical processes such as climatic regulations, the surface or ground water quality or the overall watershed function. 
Timber harvesting must maintain soil productivity and not increase erosion rates. 
Timber harvesting must not use synthetic or other harmful pesticides or herbicides. 
Timber harvesting must not diminish biological diversity of flora and fauna including tree species.† 
The potential for continuous harvest of all timber and non-timber forest products must be maintained. 
* At this time there are certain independent programs that certify timber production in the tropics and in temperate regions as meeting these and other conditions. These include but are not limited to the Smart Wood™ Program of the Rainforest Alliance, and Scientific Certification Systems. Wood products labeled as Smart Wood™ or SCS Certified would meet the above conditions and would be considered acceptable as meeting the conditions of this ordinance. 
† Forest Stewardship Council (FSC)-accredited certifications in old growth tropical rainforests are not currently meeting this criterion and are therefore excluded from this exemption. 
The Forest Stewardship Council is an international body accepted as an overseer of independent certifiers. The Forest Stewardship Council guidelines have met with approval by organizations around the world. 
(4)  Green Vehicle Procurement Policy. Under the direction of the Business Administrator, the Purchasing Agent in consultation with the Department of Public Works shall purchase green vehicles pursuant to the following policy [Added 1-28-2009 by Ord. No. 09-004] : 
(a)  Purpose. This subsection shall be known as the "Green Fleet Vehicle Initiative." Its purpose is to promote the purchase of products which minimize damage to human health and the City's natural environment, to reduce carbon and greenhouse gas emissions in the City, to reduce the City's dependence on fossil fuels, and reduce the City's costs by increasing the fuel efficiency of its fleet of non-emergency vehicles. 
(b)  Definitions. For the purposes of subsection F(4) the following definitions apply: 
"Alternative fuel vehicles" mean vehicles which utilize any combination of one (1) or more alternative fuels as a means to produce all of the energy necessary for their locomotion. 
"Alternative fuels" include one hundred percent (100%) biodiesel fuel (B100), blends of twenty percent (20%) biodiesel blend stock (B20) or higher, Ethanol, blends of eighty-five percent (85%) Ethanol (E85) or higher, compressed natural gas, propane, hydrogen, methanol, electricity or any fuel that is substantially non-petroleum in nature, is not gasoline or diesel, and is defined as an alternative fuel by the U.S. Dept of Energy through the authority granted by the Energy Policy Act of 1992. 
"Bio-based automotive lubricants" mean motor oil and refined lubricants such as hydraulic and transmission fluid and similar oils that utilize biological products or renewable animal, marine, or forestry materials. 
"Biodiesel fuel" or "biodiesel" is hereby defined as a fuel comprised of mono-alkyl esters of long chain fatty acids derived from vegetable oils or animal matter, designated B100 or "neat biodiesel", that meet the requirements for fuels and fuel additives established by the Federal Environmental Protection Agency and standards established by the American Society of Testing and materials (ASTM) according to ATSM D 6751. 
"B5" means a blend of five percent (5%) Biodiesel and ninety-five percent (95%) petroleum that meets the most current applicable ASTM standards. 
"B10" means a blend of ten percent (10%) Biodiesel and ninety percent (90%) petroleum that meets the most current applicable ASTM standards. 
"B20" means a mixture of twenty percent (20%) Biodiesel and eighty percent (80%) petroleum that meets the most current applicable ASTM standards. 
"E10" means a blend of ten percent (10%) Ethanol and ninety percent (90%) gasoline that meets the most current applicable ASTM standards. 
"E85" means a blend of eighty-five percent (85%) Ethanol and fifteen percent (15%) gasoline that meets the most current applicable ASTM standards. 
"Diesel" means petroleum based liquid that is suitable for use as fuel in diesel powered vehicles. 
"Ethanol" means ethyl alcohol, a flammable liquid used or sold for the purpose of blending or mixing with gasoline. 
"Excessive costs" are hereby defined as costs of purchasing green vehicles where either the immediate cost of purchasing the green vehicle exceeds by thirty percent (30%) the immediate cost of purchasing a non-green vehicle in the current fiscal year, or where the projected average yearly cost of the green vehicle exceeds by thirty percent (30%) the average yearly cost of purchasing and operating the non-green vehicle. Average yearly cost is to be amortized over the entire lifetime of both the green vehicle and non-green vehicles and calculations shall compare purchase price, financing costs, shipping costs, maintenance and repair costs, cost of procuring or producing fuel or parts, purchasing discounts, projected economies of scale, and resale value. 
"Fuel efficient vehicles" means non-green vehicles which are rated at both twenty (20) or more miles/gallon in city driving and twenty-nine (29) or more miles/gallon in highway driving according to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and U.S. Department of Energy's Fuel Economy Guide. 
"Green vehicles" mean either alternative fuel vehicles and or hybrid Electric vehicles. 
"Hybrid electric vehicles" mean vehicles that get a substantial percentage of the power necessary for their locomotion from an electric motor powered by a battery pack which supplements an internal combustion engine that runs on gasoline or diesel, and which are rated by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and U.S. Department of Energy's Fuel Economy Guide at least thirty (30) miles/gallon in city driving and twenty-five (25) miles/gallon in highway driving. 
"Purchasing Agent" is hereby defined as the Purchasing Agent for the City of Jersey City or his or her designees. 
(c)  Green vehicles required for new purchases or leases. Subject to subsections (d)—(f) below, the Purchasing Agent shall: 
[1]  Purchase or lease only green vehicles where such vehicles are available. 
[2]  Where such a green vehicle is not available or where purchase of a green vehicle has been waived pursuant to subsection (e), purchase or lease only fuel efficient vehicles. 
(d)  Waiver of green vehicle purchasing requirement. Purchasing Agent may waive subsection (c)[1] requirements for purchasing green vehicles and may purchase, lease, or allow the purchase or lease of non-green vehicles where: 
[1]  There are significant concerns regarding the green vehicle's safety, performance, effect on human health, or suitability for its intended use. 
[2]  A suitable green vehicle is not available within a reasonable period of time or available only at an excessive cost. 
[3]  Purchase of the green vehicle conflicts with federal, state or local law. 
(e)  Waiver of fuel efficient vehicle requirement. Where green vehicle purchasing requirement has been waived, Purchasing Agent may also waive subsection (c)[2] requirements for purchasing fuel efficient vehicles and may purchase, lease, or allow the purchase or lease of non-fuel efficient vehicles where: 
[1]  There are significant concerns regarding the fuel efficient vehicle's safety, performance, affect on human health, or suitability for its intended use. 
[2]  A suitable fuel efficient vehicle is not available within a reasonable period of time or available only at an excessive cost. 
[3]  Purchase of the fuel efficient vehicle conflicts with federal, state or local law. 
(f)  Documentation of waiver. Reasons for any waiver pursuant to subsections (e) or (f) shall be detailed in writing by the Purchasing Agent and maintained in the contract file. 
(g)  Vehicle maintenance. For maintenance, all City vehicles shall use recycled-content or bio-based automotive lubricants and recycled oil unless these products are: 
[1]  not available; or 
[2]  not available within a reasonable time; or 
[3]  not able to meet appropriate performance, health or safety standards; or 
[4]  available only at price that exceeds by thirty percent (30%) the price of competing products. 
(h)  Biodiesel initiative for City-owned vehicles. Department of Public Works in conjunction with the Purchasing Agent shall develop and implement a plan whereby: 
[1]  City-owned diesel vehicles shall be converted to operate using blends of twenty percent (20%) Biodiesel (B20) or greater concentration, wherever practicable. 
[2]  All City-owned diesel vehicles not so converted shall be operated using B5 to the greatest extent practicable. 
[3]  The City shall make reasonable efforts to procure, produce, or otherwise acquire blends of B20 of greater as necessary for the operation of converted City-owned vehicles and B5 for the operation of non-converted city vehicles. 
G.  Bid specifications; minimum hourly pay, benefits and paid leave for contractor employees. All purchases, contracts or agreements which require public advertisement for bids under the Local Public Contracts Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq., shall contain a specification which mandates that certain employees of certain entities entering into qualified contracts with the City shall be paid a standard hourly rate of pay and provided paid leave and standard benefits in accordance with the following minimum standards and conditions [ Amended 7-18-2012 by Ord. No. 12-090 ]: 
(1)  All employees employed either full time or part time by an entity that has entered into a qualified contract with the City or a contract to furnish janitorial, unarmed security, clerical or food services for any property or premises owned or leased by the City, shall be provided with standard paid leave. 
(2)  Those employees employed either full time or part time by an entity that has entered into a qualified contract with the City, who qualify under this subsection, shall receive an hourly rate of pay of no less than the standard hourly rate of pay for the relevant classification for each full hour of work performed under that contract, and shall receive no less than the standard benefits for the relevant classifications. The contract shall provide for annual adjustments of the standard hourly rate of pay, benefits and paid leave during the term of the contract. The provisions of this subsection shall apply to all part-time and full-time entity employees performing work exclusively for the City under the entity's qualified contract with the City and exclusively on property either owned or controlled by the City. 
(3)  Every contact to furnish janitorial or unarmed security services for any property or premises owned or leased by the City shall contain a provision indicating the number of hours of work required, and stating the standard hourly rate of pay and benefits for the relevant classification that are applicable to the workers employed in the performance of the contract and shall contain a stipulation that those workers shall be paid not less than the standard hourly rate for the relevant classifications and shall receive no less than the standard benefits for the relevant classifications. The contract shall provide for annual adjustments of the standard hourly rate of pay, benefits and paid leave during the term of the contract. The entity contracting to furnish janitorial or security services shall provide proof that its employees have been provided with the standard rate of pay, benefits and paid leave mandated hereunder. A contracting entity performing janitorial or security services shall also make a good faith effort to hire persons, as janitors or security guards, who are residents of Jersey City. A "good faith" effort means that the Qualified Contractor will advertise in a local newspaper and seek and consider referrals from the Employee Register of the Jersey City Employment and Training Program list. A contracting entity's failure to follow the requirements of this subparagraph may result in termination of the contract. 
(4)  Remedy. Violation of these provisions shall constitute a breach of contract by the contractor or subcontractor, and such provisions shall be considered to be a contract for the benefit of the building service workers upon which such workers shall have the right to maintain action for the difference between the hourly rate of pay, benefits and paid leave and the hourly rate of pay, benefits and paid leave actually received by them. 
(5)  For purposes of this section, the word "full time" shall mean those employees who work a minimum of 25 hours per week exclusively under a qualified contract with the City, excluding meal periods; the word "part time" shall mean those employees who work less than 25 hours per week. 
(6)  For purposes of this section, the words "employee" and "employment" shall include only those employees of an entity that have entered into a qualified contract with the City and who work exclusively under that contract in the job categories of clerical workers, food service workers, janitorial workers and unarmed security guards. 
(7)  For purposes of this section, the words "qualified contract" shall mean only those contracts awarded by the City, requiring advertisement for bids, under the Local Public Contracts Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:1-1 et seq. 
(8)  For purposes of this section, the word "entity" shall mean any person, partnership, corporation or other form of legally recognized business organization that submits a bid or enters into a qualified contract with the City under the Local Public Contracts Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq. 
(9)  For the purposes of this section, "standard paid leave" shall mean paid leave as provided by the collective bargaining agreement covering the largest number of hourly non-supervisory employees, employed within Hudson County in the relevant classification, provided the collective bargaining agreement covers no less than two hundred (200) employees in the classification. If there is no such collective bargaining agreement the following provision shall apply. Those employees employed full time by an entity that has entered into a qualified contract with the City or a contract to furnish janitorial or security services for any property or premises owned or leased by the City, who qualify under this subsection, shall accrue at least five (5) days of paid vacation for the first six (6) months of continuous employment and an additional five (5) days for the second six (6) months of continuous employment under the same contract. 
(10)  For the purposes of this section, "leased by the City" means any agreement whereby a contracting agency contracts for, or leases or rents, commercial office space or commercial office facilities of 10,000 square feet or more from a non-governmental entity provided the City, whether through a single agreement or multiple agreements, leases or rents no less than fifty-one percent (51%) of the total square footage of the building to which the lease applies. 
(11)  For the purposes of this section, the "standard hourly rate of pay" shall be 150% of the federal minimum wage, or the hourly rate of pay for work performed within the City under the collective bargaining agreement covering the largest number of hourly non-supervisory employees employed within Hudson County in the relevant classification, provided the collective bargaining agreement covers no less than two hundred (200) employees in the classification, or the hourly rate paid to workers in the relevant classification under a preceding qualified contract, whichever is higher. 
(12)  For the purposes of this section, "standard benefits" shall be an hourly supplement furnished by a contractor to an employee in one of the following ways: 1) in the form of health benefits that cost the employer the entire required hourly supplemental amount to provide; 2) by providing a portion of the supplement in the form of health benefits and the balance in cash; or 3) by providing the entire supplement in cash. The required hourly supplemental rate shall be equal to the monetary value of the benefits provided by the collective bargaining agreement covering the largest number of hourly non-supervisory employees employed within Hudson County in the relevant classification, provided the collective bargaining agreement covers no less than two hundred (200) employees in the classification. If there is no such collective bargaining agreement "standard benefits" shall be an additional hourly rate of $3.10 provided as a supplement to cover health benefits. 
(13)  For the purposes of this section, "relevant classification" shall mean food service worker for food service workers, clerical workers, janitors and security guards. 
(14)  For the purpose of this section, "health benefits" shall not include workers compensation insurance, nor shall it include the value of any benefit for which an employee is eligible but for which no payment is actually made by a contractor to the employee or to any other party on the employee's behalf because the employee either does not actually utilize or does not elect to receive the benefit for any reason. 
(15)  For the purposes of this section, the annual adjustments of the hourly rate of pay and benefits shall be made in the following way: The annually adjusted hourly rate of pay shall be the previous hourly rate of pay increased by the annual percentage difference between the current New York Metropolitan Area Consumer Price Index (CPI) for all items for All Urban Consumers and the same CPI for same month of the previous year, or the hourly rate of pay for work performed within the City under the current collective bargaining agreement covering the largest number of hourly non-supervisory employees employed within Hudson County in the relevant classification, provided the collective bargaining agreement covers no less than two hundred (200) employees in the classification, whichever is higher. The benefit rate shall be annually adjusted accordingly. 
(16)  The provisions of this section shall apply to all contracts awarded, renewed, modified or extended after the date of enactment of this section. However, to provide an orderly transition for implementation of this section, the City may, after the date of enactment of this section, enter into short-term extensions of extant contracts, so that the extended contract extends no more than ninety (90) days beyond the date of enactment of this section. Such short-term extensions may be exempted from the requirements of this section at the discretion of the City. 
H.  The Division of Purchasing and Central Services shall approve printing requests of all city departments for new and current forms. 
I.  Affirmative action in public contracting; the Division of Purchasing and Central Services to administer affirmative action in contracting program. The Director of the Division of Purchasing and Central Services is designated as the compliance officer for administrative action in contracting and shall be responsible for monitoring construction contracts and subcontracts for compliance with affirmative action guidelines promulgated by the State of New Jersey. In cooperation with the State Office of Affirmative Action, the Division of Purchasing and Central Services shall: 
(1)  Act as liaison between the City of Jersey City and the Affirmative Action Office of the Department of Treasury of the State of New Jersey. 
(2)  Gather all information necessary to make any determination or recommendation required by this section, the affirmative action guidelines of the Department of Treasury or an approved affirmative action program. 
(3)  Monitor the performance of contractors and subcontractors subject to an approved affirmative action program. 
(4)  Report to the Business Administrator contractors' and subcontractors' compliance with applicable affirmative action guidelines and any approved affirmative action program and recommend appropriate action that may be proper to correct noncompliance. 
(5)  Issue alert notices and violation notices pursuant to N.J.A.C. 17:27-10 et seq. for a contractor's or subcontractor's failure to comply with the work force requirements of an approved affirmative action program. 
(6)  Under an approved local agency affirmative action construction program, conduct hearings and recommend sanctions and corrective action with respect to contractors not in compliance. 
(7)  Perform other tasks reasonably necessary to facilitate compliance with affirmative action guidelines of the Division of Treasury and any approved affirmative action program. 
(8)  Act as staff to the Affirmative Action Advisory Council. 
Footnotes: 
--- (17) --- 
State Law reference— See N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq. 
 
§ 3-51.1. - Contractor pay-to-play regulations. 
[Added 9-3-2008 by Ord. No. 08-128] 
A.  Definitions. As used in this ordinance: 
(1)  "Campaign Committee" means (i) every candidate for City of Jersey City elective municipal office; (ii) every candidate committee established by or for the benefit of a candidate for City of Jersey City elective municipal office; (iii) every joint candidate committee established in whole or in part by or for the benefit of a candidate for City of Jersey City elective municipal office; (iv) every political party committee of the City of Jersey City; (v) every political party committee of the County of Hudson; and (vi) every political committee, continuing political committee, or other form of association or organization that regularly engages in the support of candidates for the City of Jersey City municipal or Hudson county elective offices or City of Jersey City municipal or Hudson county political parties or political party committees. The terms in the foregoing paragraph have the meaning prescribed in N.J.A.C. 19:25-1.7. 
(2)  "Contribution" has the meaning prescribed in N.J.A.C. 19:25-1.7. by way of illustration, and not limitation, this definition includes pledges, loans, and in-kind contributions. 
(3)  A "contract for professional or extraordinary services" means all contracts for "professional services" and "extraordinary unspecifiable services" as such term is used in N.J.S.A. 40A:11-5. 
(4)  For purposes of this Ordinance, a "Business Entity" whose contributions are regulated by this ordinance means: (i) an individual including the individual's spouse, and any child/children; (ii) a firm; corporation; professional corporation; partnership; limited liability company; organization; association; and any other manner and kind of business entity; (iii) any person who owns ten percent (10%) or more of the equity or ownership or income interests in a person or entity as defined in sections (i) and (ii) above and their spouses and child/children; (iv) all partners or officers of such an entity, in the aggregate, and their spouses and child/children; (v) any person, subcontractor, subsidiary, corporation, firm, partnership, limited liability company, organization or association who has received or indefeasibly acquired the right to receive, from a person described in subparagraph (i) above, more than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) in compensation or income of any kind (including, by way of illustration, and not limitation: wages, salaries, sums paid to independent contractors, benefits, dividends, profit-sharing, pension contributions, deferred contributions, stock, stock options or gifts), in any twelve (12) month period prior to the award of, or during the term of, a contract subject to this ordinance; and (vi) all persons who are an "affiliate" of a Business Entity as defined in sections (i), (ii) and (v) above, as such term is used in 11 U.S.C. 101(2). 
B.  Prohibition on Awarding Public Contracts to Certain Contributors. 
(1)  To the extent that it is not inconsistent with state or federal law, the City of Jersey City and any of its departments, instrumentalities or purchasing agents shall not enter into any agreement or otherwise contract to procure "professional services" as such term is defined at N.J.S.A. 40A:11-2(6) and used at N.J.S.A. 40A:11-5(1)(a)(i) and/or banking, insurance or other consulting service (hereinafter "Professional Services"), nor "extraordinary unspecified services" as such term is defined at N.J.S.A. 40A:11-2(7) and used at N.J.S.A. 40A:11-5(1)(a)(ii) and/or media, public relations, lobbying, parking garage management or other consulting and/or management service (hereinafter "Extraordinary Unspecified Services") from any Business Entity if such Business Entity has solicited or made any Contribution to (i) a candidate, candidate committee or joint candidates committee of any candidate for elective municipal office in Jersey City or a holder of public office having ultimate responsibility for the award of a contract, or (ii) to any Jersey City or Hudson County political committee or political party committee, or (iii) to any continuing political committee or political action committee that regularly engages in the support of Jersey City municipal or Hudson County elections and/or Jersey City municipal or Hudson County candidates, candidate committees, joint candidate committees, political committees, political parties, political party committees, (hereinafter "PAC"), in excess of the thresholds specified in Subsection B(3) within one calendar year immediately preceding the date of the contract or agreement. 
(2)  No Business Entity who submits a proposal for, enters into negotiations for, or agrees to any contract or agreement with the City of Jersey City or any of its departments or instrumentalities, for the rendition of Professional Services or Extraordinary Unspecified Services shall knowingly solicit or make any Contribution, to (i) a candidate, candidate committee or joint candidates committee of any candidate for elective municipal office in Jersey City, or a holder of public office having ultimate responsibility for the award of a contract, or (ii) to any Jersey City or Hudson County political committee or political party committee, or (iii) any PAC between the time of first communication between that Business Entity and the municipality regarding a specific agreement for Professional Services or Extraordinary Unspecified Services, and the later of the termination of negotiations or rejection of any proposal, or the completion of the performance or specified time period of that contract or agreement. 
(3)  The monetary thresholds of this Ordinance are: (i) a maximum of three hundred dollars ($300.00) per calendar year each for any purpose to any candidate or candidate committee for mayor or governing body, or five hundred dollars ($500.00) per calendar year to any joint candidates committee for mayor or governing body, or three hundred dollars ($300.00) per calendar year to a political committee or political party committee of the City of Jersey City; (ii) five hundred dollars ($500.00) maximum per calendar year to a Hudson County political committee or political party committee; and (iii) five hundred dollars ($500.00) maximum per calendar year to any PAC. However, for each Business Entity party to a contract for Professional or Extraordinary Unspecified Services as defined in Subsection B(1), or engaged in negotiations for a contract defined in Subsection B(1), when such Business Entity's Contribution is aggregated with all "persons" defined in Subsection A(4) of "Definitions" above, by virtue of their affiliation to that Business Entity party, a maximum of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) to all City of Jersey City candidates, candidate committees, joint candidate committees, and holders of public office having ultimate responsibility for the award of a contract, all City of Jersey City or Hudson County political committees and political party committees as described herein combined, without violating Subsection B(1) of this section. 
(4)  For purposes of this section, the office that is considered to have ultimate responsibility for the award of the contract shall be (i) the City of Jersey City Mayor or Governing body, if the contract requires approval or appropriation from the Mayor or Governing body, or (ii) the Mayor of the City of Jersey City, if the contract requires approval of the Mayor, or if a public officer who is responsible for the award of a contract is appointed by the Mayor. 
(5)  Rules regarding subcontractors. No person may be awarded a subcontract to perform under a contract subject to this Ordinance, if the subcontractor would be disqualified by Subsection B(1) from receiving the contract at the time that the subcontract is awarded. Nor may any person who would be disqualified by Subsection B(1) from receiving the contract perform substantially all of obligations described in a contract for professional or extraordinary services that is subject to this ordinance. 
C.  Contributions Made Prior to the Effective Date. No Contribution or solicitation of contributions made prior to the effective date of this Ordinance shall be deemed to give rise to a violation of this Ordinance. 
D.  Contract Renewal. No contract subject to this ordinance may be renewed, extended, or materially modified unless the resulting renewal, extension, or modification would be allowable under the provisions of this ordinance if it were an initial contract. 
E.  Contribution Statement by Business Entity. 
(1)  Prior to awarding any contract or agreement to procure "Professional Services" or "Extraordinary Unspecified Services" from any Business Entity, the City of Jersey City or its purchasing agents and departments, as the case may be, shall receive a sworn statement from said Business Entity which is the intended recipient of said contract that he/she/it has not made a Contribution in violation of Subsection B of this section. The City of Jersey City, its purchasing agents and departments shall be responsible for informing the City Council that the aforementioned sworn statement has been received and that the Business Entity is not in violation of this ordinance, prior to awarding the contract or agreement. 
(2)  A Business Entity shall have a continuing duty to report to the City of Jersey City any Contributions that constitute a violation of this act that are made during the negotiation, proposal process or the duration of a contract. The City of Jersey City, its purchasing agents and departments shall be responsible for informing the governing body within ten (10) business days after receipt of said report from the Business Entity, or at the next City Council meeting following receipt of said report from the Business Entity, or whichever comes first. 
(3)  The certification required under this subsection shall be made prior to entry into the contract or agreement with the City of Jersey City, or prior to the provision of services or goods, as the case may be, and shall be in addition to any other certifications that may be required by any other provision of law. 
F.  Return of Excess Contributions. A Business Entity that is a party to a contract for Professional Services or Extraordinary Unspecified Services may cure a violation of Subsection B of this section, if, within thirty (30) days after the date on which the applicable ELEC report is published, said Business Entity notifies the municipality in writing and seeks and receives reimbursement of the Contribution from the recipient of such Contribution. 
G.  Exemptions. The contribution limitations prior to entering into a contract in Subsection B(1) do not apply to contracts which (i) are awarded to the lowest responsible bidder after public advertising for bids and bidding therefor within the meaning of N.J.S.A. 40A:11-4, or (ii) are awarded in the case of emergency under N.J.S.A. 40A:11-6. There is no exemption for contracts awarded pursuant to a "Fair and Open Process" under N.J.S.A. 19:44A-20 et seq. 
H.  Penalty. 
(1)  It shall be a material breach of the terms of a City of Jersey City agreement or contract for Professional Services or Extraordinary Unspecified Services when a Business Entity that is a party to such agreement or contract has: (i) made or solicited a Contribution in violation of this Ordinance; (ii) knowingly concealed or misrepresented a Contribution given or received; (iii) made or solicited Contributions through intermediaries for the purpose of concealing or misrepresenting the source of the Contribution; (iv) made or solicited any Contribution on the condition or with the agreement that it will be re-contributed to a candidate, candidate committee or joint candidates committee of any candidate for elective municipal office in Jersey City, or a holder of public office having ultimate responsibility for the award of a contract, or any Jersey City or Hudson County political committee or political party committee, or any PAC; (v) engaged or employed a lobbyist or consultant with the intent or understanding that such lobbyist or consultant would make or solicit any Contribution, which if made or solicited by the professional Business Entity itself, would subject that entity to the restrictions of this Ordinance; (vi) funded contributions made by third parties, including consultants, attorneys, family members, and employees; (vii) engaged in any exchange of Contributions to circumvent the intent of this Ordinance; or (viii) directly or indirectly, through or by any other person or means, done any act which if done directly would subject that entity to the restrictions of this Ordinance. 
(2)  Furthermore, any Business Entity that violates Subsection H(1) shall be disqualified from eligibility for future City of Jersey City contracts for a period of four calendar years from the date of the violation. 
(3)  Any person who knowingly, purposely, or recklessly violates any provision of this ordinance, or who conspires with another person to violate any provision of this ordinance, or who, with the purpose of promoting or facilitating a violation of this ordinance, solicits another person to commit it, or aids or agrees, or attempts to aid another person in planning or committing it, shall be subject to punishment including fines and/or imprisonment as fixed by law for violations of the ordinances of the City of Jersey City. 
I.  Citizens Private Right of Action. In addition to any rights that were heretofore available, or which may hereafter be available, to citizens, taxpayers, or associations, to challenge violations of this ordinance, every person aggrieved by a violation of the ordinance, or any taxpayer or resident of the City of Jersey City has the right, consistent with the Rules of Court, to file charges in a court of competent jurisdiction, and/or to pursue a civil action for a violation of this ordinance in a court of competent jurisdiction, and to seek and obtain declaratory, injunctive, or other legal or equitable relief, including but not limited to, attorneys fees and costs, arising from or related to a violation of this ordinance. 
J.  Severability. If any provision of this ordinance, or the application of any such provision to any person or circumstances, shall be held invalid, the remainder of this ordinance to the extent it can be given effect, or the application of such provision to persons or circumstances other than those to which it is held invalid shall not be affected thereby, and to this extent the provisions of this ordinance are severable. The drafters of this ordinance, the persons signing the petition in support of this ordinance, and the persons who cast votes in favor of the ordinance, declare that they would have supported the ordinance and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or provision or application thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one (1) or more other sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, phrases, or provisions or applications thereof may be held invalid. 
Committee of Petitioners pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:69A-186 
James Carroll, 44 Terrace, Jersey City, New Jersey 07307 
Steven Fulop, 76 Essex Street, Jersey City, N.J. 07302 
Daniel Levin, 228½ Third Street, Jersey City, NJ 07302 
Aaron Morrill, 209 Washington Street, Jersey City, N.J. 07302 
Shelly Skinner, 286 Pavonia, Jersey City, N.J. 07302 
K.  Repealed. All ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent with any provisions of this ordinance are hereby repealed as to the extent of such inconsistencies. 
L.  Indexing. The monetary thresholds of "Definitions" Section (d) and Section 1(c) of this ordinance shall be increased effective March 1 of each calendar year by the percentage increase, in the prior calendar year, of the consumer price index for all urban consumers (CPI-U) for the New York-Northern New Jersey-Long Island region, rounded to the nearest ten dollars ($10.00). The Clerk of the City of Jersey City shall, by no later than April 1 of each calendar year, prepare and publish the revised thresholds on the official municipal website and in an official municipal newspaper. 
M.  Effective date. This ordinance shall become effective twenty (20) days following the final adoption thereof by the Municipal Council of the City of Jersey City and shall be published as required by law.  
§ 3-51.2. - Redevelopment pay-to-play reform. 
[Added 9-9-2009 by Ord. No. 09-096] 
A.  Prohibition of entering into or amending redevelopment agreements with certain contributors. 
(1)  Any other provision of law to the contrary notwithstanding, the City of Jersey City or any of its purchasing agents or agencies or those of its independent authorities, as the case may be, shall not enter into an agreement, amend an agreement, or otherwise contract with any redeveloper, as defined in section (3) below, for the planning, re-planning, construction or undertaking of any redevelopment project, including the acquisition or leasing of any public property in conjunction with the redevelopment of any area within the City of Jersey City pursuant to the Local Redevelopment and Housing Law, if that redeveloper has made any "contribution" (as such term is defined at N.J.A.C. 19:25-1.7, which definition includes loans, pledges and in-kind contributions) (hereinafter "contribution"), to: 
(a)  A candidate, candidate committee or joint candidates committee of any candidate for elective municipal office in Jersey City or a holder of public office having ultimate responsibility for arranging, entering into, or approving the redevelopment agreement, or for appointing those who enter into the agreement on behalf of the City of Jersey City, or 
(b)  To any Jersey City or Hudson County political committee or political party committee, or 
(c)  To any continuing political committee or political action committee that regularly engages in the support of Jersey City municipal or Hudson County elections and/or Jersey City municipal or Hudson County candidates, candidate committees, joint candidate committees, political committees, political parties, political parry committees, (hereinafter "PAC"), during the applicable time period which, for purposes of this section, shall be defined as three (3) months prior to applying to enter into the redevelopment agreement, amended agreement, or contract (hereinafter "agreement"). 
(2)  All redevelopment agreements or amendments thereto entered into by the City of Jersey City shall contain a provision prohibiting redevelopers, as defined in section (3) below, to solicit or make any contribution to: 
(a)  A candidate, candidate committee or joint candidates committee of any candidate for elective municipal office in Jersey City or a holder of public office having ultimate responsibility for arranging, entering into, or approving the redevelopment agreement, or for appointing those who enter into the agreement on behalf of the City of Jersey City, or 
(b)  To any Jersey City or Hudson County political committee or political party committee, or 
(c)  To any "PAC", between application to enter into a redevelopment project and the later of the termination of negotiations or rejection of any proposal, or the completion of all matters or time period specified in the redevelopment agreement. 
(3)  As defined in N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-3, a "redeveloper" means any person, firm, corporation, partnership, limited liability company, organization, association, or public body that shall enter into or propose to enter into an agreement with a municipality or other redevelopment entity for the redevelopment or rehabilitation of an area in need of redevelopment, or an area in need of rehabilitation, or any part thereof, under the provisions of this act, or for any construction or other work forming part of a redevelopment or rehabilitation project. For the purposes of this ordinance the definition of redeveloper also includes all principals who own ten percent (10%) or more of the equity in the corporation or business trust as well as partners and officers of the redeveloper and any affiliates or subsidiaries directly controlled by the redeveloper. Spouses and any child/children shall also be included. 
(4)  For the purposes of this section, the office that is considered to have responsibility for arranging and entering into the redevelopment agreement under the Act shall be: 
(a)  The Jersey City City Council if the redevelopment agreement requires approval or appropriation from the Council or a public officer who is responsible for arranging and entering into the redevelopment agreement if that public officer is appointed by the Council, or 
(b)  The Mayor of Jersey City if the redevelopment agreement requires the approval of the Mayor or a public officer who is responsible for arranging and entering into the redevelopment agreement if that public officer is appointed by the Mayor, or 
(c)  A designated redevelopment entity, if the redevelopment agreement requires the approval of the redevelopment entity. 
B.  Contributions made prior to the effective date. No contribution or solicitation of contributions made prior to the effective date of this section shall be deemed to give rise to a violation of this section. 
C.  Contribution statement of redeveloper; notice given by municipality. 
(1)  Prior to arranging and entering into the redevelopment agreement with any redeveloper, the City of Jersey City or any of its purchasing agents or agencies or independent authorities, as the case may be, shall receive a sworn statement from the redeveloper: 
(a)  That the redeveloper has not made any contribution in violation of subsection A.(1) above and 
(b)  That all persons or entities representing or in the employ or acting as an agent of the redeveloper have agreed to be bound by the terms of this section. 
The City of Jersey City, through any appropriate redevelopment agent, agency, officer, authority, or department, shall be responsible for informing the City Council that the aforementioned sworn statement has been received and that the redeveloper is not in violation of this ordinance, prior to awarding the agreement. Furthermore, the redeveloper shall have a continuing duty to report any violations of this ordinance that may occur while arranging and entering into the redevelopment agreement, and until all specified terms or time period of the agreement have been completed. The certification required under this subsection shall be made prior to entry into the agreement with the municipality and shall be in addition to any other certifications that may be required by any other provision of law. 
(2)  It shall be the municipality's continuing responsibility to give notice of this section when the municipality gives notice of redevelopment pursuant to 40A:12A-6 and when the municipality adopts a resolution directing the planning board to prepare a redevelopment plan and at the time that the municipality adopts the ordinance to implement the redevelopment plan. 
D.  Disclosure requirement applicability to consultants. 
(1)  The contribution and disclosure requirements in this section shall apply to all redevelopers as well as professionals, consultants or lobbyists contracted or employed by the business entity ultimately designated as the redeveloper to provide services related to the: 
(a)  Lobbying of government officials in connection with the examination of an area and its designation as an area in need of redevelopment or in connection with the preparation, consultation and adoption of the redevelopment plan; 
(b)  Obtaining the designation or appointment as redeveloper; 
(c)  Negotiating the terms of a redevelopment agreement or any amendments or modifications thereto; and 
(d)  Performing the terms of a redevelopment agreement. 
(2)  It shall be a breach of the consultant's contract, and shall require immediate termination, for a consultant to violate the contribution limits and disclosure requirements in this section. 
(3)  A redeveloper who participates in, or facilitates, the circumvention of the contribution restrictions through consultants, professionals or agents shall be deemed to be in breach. 
E.  Return of excess contributions. A redeveloper or municipal candidate or officeholder or municipal or county party committee or "PAC" referenced in this ordinance may cure a violation of subsection A. of this section, if, within thirty (30) days after the date on which the applicable ELEC report is published, the redeveloper notifies the Municipal Council in writing and seeks and receives reimbursement of a contribution from the recipient of such contribution. 
F.  Penalty. 
(1)  It shall be a breach of the terms of the Jersey City redevelopment agreement for a redeveloper to: 
(a)  Make or solicit a contribution in violation of this ordinance; 
(b)  Knowingly conceal or misrepresent a contribution given or received; 
(c)  Make or solicit contributions through intermediaries for the purpose of concealing or misrepresenting the source of the contribution; 
(d)  Make or solicit any contribution on the condition or with the agreement that it will be contributed to a candidate, candidate committee or joint candidates committee of any candidate for elective municipal office in Jersey City, or a holder of public office having ultimate responsibility for arranging, entering into, or approving the redevelopment agreement, or for appointing those who enter into the agreement on behalf of the City of Jersey City, or any Jersey City or Hudson County political committee or political party committee, or any "PAC;" 
(e)  Engage or employ a lobbyist or consultant with the intent or understanding that such lobbyist or consultant would make or solicit any contribution, which if made or solicited by the redeveloper itself, would subject that entity to the restrictions of this section; 
(f)  Fund contributions made by third parties, including consultants, attorneys, family members, and employees; 
(g)  Engage in any exchange of contributions to circumvent the intent of this ordinance; or 
(h)  Directly or indirectly, through or by any other person or means, do any act which would subject that entity to the restrictions of this section. 
(2)  Furthermore, any redeveloper who violates (a) ii-viii shall be disqualified from eligibility for future Jersey City redevelopment agreements for a period of four (4) calendar years from the date of the violation. 
G.  Severability. If any provision of this section, or the application of any such provision to any person or circumstances, shall be held invalid, the remainder of this section to the extent it can be given effect, or the application of such provision to persons or circumstances other than those to which it is held invalid shall not be affected thereby, and to this extent the provisions of this section are severable. The drafters of this section, the persons signing the petition in support of this section, and the persons who cast votes in favor of the section, declare that they would have supported the section and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or provision or application thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one (1) or more other sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, phrases, or provisions or applications thereof may be held invalid. 
H.  Repealer. All ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent with any provisions of this section are hereby repealed as to the extent of such inconsistencies. 
I.  Effective date. This section shall become effective twenty (20) days following the final adoption thereof by the Municipal Council of the City of Jersey City.  
§ 3-51.3. - Transitional Employment Period. 
[Added 7-18-2012 by Ord. No. 12-090 ] 
A.  The City shall give advance notice to a service contractor and any collective bargaining representative of the service contractor's employees that a service contract will be terminated, and the City shall also provide the name, address, and telephone number of the successor contractor or contractors where known. The terminated contractor shall, within five (5) days after receipt of such notice, provide to the successor contractor, the name, address, date of hire, and employment occupation classification of each employee employed at the site or sites covered by the service contract at the time of receiving said notice. If a successor contractor has not been identified by the City by the end of the five-day period, the terminated contractor shall provide the information to the City. At the same time that the terminated contractor provides this information to the successor contractor or the City, the terminated contractor shall provide each affected employee with notice of his/her right to obtain employment with the successor contractor. 
B.  A successor contractor or subcontractor where applicable shall retain for a 90-day transitional employment period all employees who were employed by the terminated contractor and its subcontractors at the building(s) covered by the terminated contract. 
C.  If at any time the successor contractor determines that fewer employees are required to perform the new service contract than had been performing such services under the terminated contract the successor contractor shall retain the employees by seniority within job classification. Except for such layoffs, during the 90-day transition period, the successor contractor shall not discharge without cause an employee retained pursuant to this section. During the 90-day transition period, the successor contractor shall maintain a preferential hiring list of those employees not retained, from which the successor contractor or its subcontractors shall hire additional employees. 
D.  At the end of the 90-day transition employment period, the successor contractor shall perform a written performance evaluation for each employee retained pursuant to this section. If employee's performance during such 90-day period is satisfactory, the successor contractor or subcontractor shall offer the employee continued employment under the terms' and conditions established by the successor contractor or subcontractor or as required by law.  
§ 3-51.4. - Compliance. 
[Added 7-18-2012 by Ord. No. 12-090 ] 
A.  Compliance with this section shall be required in all City contracts to which it applies, and such contracts shall provide that violation of this section shall entitle the City to terminate the contract. In addition, failure to comply with these requirements may ban the contractor from holding contracts with the City for a period of three (3) years. Upon the City's request the contractor or subcontractor shall make all relevant records available to the City or its designee in order for the City to determine whether the contractor or subcontractor is in compliance with said requirements. 
B.  An employee displaced or terminated in violation of this section may bring an action in any court of competent jurisdiction against the terminated contractor and/or the successor contractor for violations pursuant to this section.  
§ 3-52. - Office of Sustainability. 
[Added 10-11-17 by Ord. No. 17-137 ] 
Within the Department of Administration there shall be an Office of Sustainability.  
§ 3-52.1. - Powers and Duties of the Office of Sustainability. 
[Added 10-11-17 by Ord. No. 17-137 ] 
The Office of Sustainability shall improve the City's quality of life by developing and implementing initiatives to ensure the social, environmental, and economic sustainability of the City, and improve the efficiency, resiliency, and sustainability of City operations.  
§ 3-53. - Division of Information Technology. 
[Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
A.  Creation of the Division of Information Technology; Director of Information Technology in charge. There is hereby created within the Department of Administration, the Division of Information Technology, the head of which shall be the Director of Information Technology. The Director of Information Technology shall be a person qualified by training and experience in the installment and operation of governmental or private computer systems. 
B.  Division of Information Technology; function. The Division of Information Technology shall: 
(1)  Be responsible for developing, maintaining and operating a centralized computer processing facility to service all city departments and agencies. 
(2)  Counsel and assist all city departments and agencies in the development and installation of computerized systems programs. 
(3)  Establish controls and procedures to safeguard computer equipment, files, tapes, disks and all other pertinent materials. 
(4)  Provide for the design, implementation and maintenance of telecommunications. 
(5)  Provide for the coordination and cooperation between the City of Jersey City and any agent or company providing communications service to the city. 
(6)  Advise the city relative to the adoption of new services and/or techniques in the field of communications. 
(7)  Provide cooperation and coordination among the communication services of the various branches of city government.  
§ 3-54. - Office of Diversity and Inclusion; Heads. 
[Added 2-24-2016 by Ord. No. 16-026 ] 
A.  There is hereby created within the Office of the Department of Administration an Office of Diversity and Inclusion. The head of the Office shall be the Chief Diversity and Inclusion Officer. There shall also be a Deputy Chief Diversity and Inclusion Officer, who shall assist the Chief in the management of the Office and assume the duties and responsibilities of the Chief in his or her absence. 
B.  Should the Mayor by Executive Order establish an Advisory Board for either Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender (LGBT) or Diversity and Inclusion matters, the Office of Diversity and Inclusion shall consider its advice and recommendations.  
§ 3-54.1. - Powers and Duties of Diversity and Inclusion. 
[Added 2-24-2016 by Ord. No. 16-026 ] 
The Office of Diversity and Inclusion shall: 
A.  Be the central office for inter-departmental and community collaboration on issues to promote the protection and inclusion of all persons irrespective of race, color, religion, sex (including pregnancy or gender identity), national origin, age, disability, sexual orientation or other protected characteristic; 
B.  Be responsible for collecting and analyzing all data and other relevant information pertinent to the City's remedial hiring and purchasing efforts; 
C.  Maintain a database of minority and women-owned business enterprises: 
D.  Be responsible for reviewing the annual report of the Abatement and Compliance Officer and coordinating with the City's Employment and Training Office to ensure that developers hire minority and women-owned businesses from the City's minority and women-owned business database; 
E.  Organize training seminars for all eligible businesses on how they can become certified as minority and women-owned business enterprises; 
F.  Maintain a database of all contracts with minority and women-owned business enterprises organized by department as well as serve as the custodian of all research, information and data pertaining to the City's diversity and inclusion efforts; 
G.  Host a biannual workshop, in conjunction with the Division of Purchasing, on how minority and women business owners can become City vendors or service providers; 
H.  Create a webpage on the City's website providing access to the minority and women-owned business enterprises database. The page should also provide automatic notice to qualifying businesses of relevant opportunities and should allow other businesses to post opportunities. The website shall also feature career and contracting opportunities jobs with the City; 
I.  Initiate a public relations campaign to create awareness of the City's minority and women-owned business enterprise database, and the goals underlying it, to encourage all relevant businesses to sign up and use it when sourcing goods and services; 
J.  Review the monthly reports from the Director of Purchasing detailing how many of the goods and services procured that month by the City were to local, minority or women-owned businesses; 
K  Coordinate with the Compliance Office to ensure the following City goals: 
(1)  Work with developers to ensure that they utilize the minority and women-owned business enterprises database for subcontractors and goods; 
(2)  Monitor the activities of local minority and women contractors and subcontractors to determine if the targets established in Project Employment and Contracting Agreement (PECA) and Project Labor Agreement (PLA) have been achieved; 
L.  Engage in outreach efforts at local schools and institutions to cultivate relationships with local youth; 
M.  Undertake periodic demographic and salary audits of all City employees to determine if there are any pay equality issues; 
N.  Monitor its own outreach initiates to track how often each initiative is utilized in order to evaluate its effectiveness and collaborate with the Diversity and Inclusion Advisory Board to improve its efforts; 
O.  Issue an annual report to the Mayor detailing the activities of the Office of Diversity and Inclusion during the prior year and the status of ongoing and future initiatives; 
P.  Oversee, review, implement and update the Diversity and Inclusion strategic plan; 
Q.  Be the central coordination and oversight entity for the inter-departmental collaboration on issues impacting diversity; 
R.  Be the central coordination and oversight entity for the inter-departmental collaboration on issues impacting hiring; 
S.  Obtain data pertinent to the City's remedial hiring and purchasing efforts and updating the ODI website; 
T.  Oversee the periodic review and update of the disparity study, commonly known as the Croson Study.  
§ 3-54.2. - Bureaus under the Office of Diversity and Inclusion; heads. 
[Added 2-24-2016 by Ord. No. 16-026 ] 
A.  Bureau of Business Opportunity, Procurement and Training. There is hereby created the Bureau of Business Opportunity, Procurement and Training, the head of which shall be the Field Officer of Bureau of Business Opportunity, Procurement and Training. The Bureau of Business Opportunity, Procurement and Training shall assist the Chief Diversity and Inclusion Officer in the implementation of the Powers and Duties listed under Subsections D, E, G, J, K and M of Section 3-19.6 above, and shall assist in organizing job fairs and training programs. 
B.  Bureau of Community Resources & Services. There is hereby created the Bureau of Community Resources & Services, the head of which shall be the Field Officer of Bureau of Community Resources & Services. The Bureau of Community Resources & Services shall Assist the Chief of Diversity and Inclusion (ODI) in the implementation of Powers and Duties listed under Subsections C, F, H, I, and L of Section 3-19.6 above, and shall assist the Chief Diversity and Inclusion Officer as community liaison.  
§ 3-55. - Office of Utility Management. 
[Amended 2-23-1994 by Ord. No. 94-007; 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
There is hereby established the Office of Utility Management within the Department of Administration, the head of which shall be the Business Administrator to oversee the administration of the city's water utility function.  
§ 3-56. - Bureau of Innovation. 
[Added 10-25-17 by Ord. No. 17-141 ] 
Within the Department of Administration there shall be a Bureau of Innovation.  
§ 3-56.1. - Powers and Duties of the Bureau of Innovation. 
[Added 10-25-17 by Ord. No. 17-141 ] 
The Bureau of Innovation shall improve the City's quality of life by developing bold, forward-thinking, data-driven solutions for the most challenging and complex issues faced by the City. 
Whenever possible the Bureau will cooperate with the various City Departments and autonomous agencies, members of the community and with outside funding sources, as appropriate. 
The Bureau will provide such reports as requested by the Mayor and Business Administrator.  
§ 3-57. - (Reserved) 
Editor's note— § 3-57 was reserved 12-27-01 by Ord. No. 01-141.  
§ 3-58. - (Reserved) 
Editor's note— § 3-58 was reserved 12-27-01 by Ord. No. 01-141.  
§ 3-59. - (Reserved) 
Editor's note— § 3-59 was reserved 12-27-01 by Ord. No. 01-141.  
§ 3-60. - Division of Economic Opportunity created; head. 
[Amended 11-7-01 by Ord. No. 01-121] 
There is hereby created under the Department of Administration a Division of Economic Opportunity, the head of which shall be the Director of Economic Opportunity.  
§ 3-60.1. - Duties of Director. 
[Added 11-7-01 by Ord. No. 01-121] 
The Director of Economic Opportunity shall be responsible for the proper and efficient operation of the employment, training, job registry, and economic assistance functions of City government, shall act as liaison with the Jersey City Office of Employment and Training, and shall develop, implement and coordinate programs and policies to improve the availability of jobs and economic opportunities to City residents. The Division of Economic Opportunity shall consist of the following Offices: 
A.  Division of Economic Assistance; 
B.  Division of Equal Opportunity.  
§ 3-60.2. - Division of Economic Opportunity. 
[Added 11-7-01 by Ord. No. 01-121] 
A.  Creation of the Division of Economic Opportunity; Director of the Division of Economic Opportunity in charge. There is hereby created in the Department of Administration the Division of Economic Opportunity, the head of which shall be the Director of the Division of Economic Opportunity. 
B.  Division of Economic Opportunity; functions. The Division of Economic Opportunity, under the supervision of the Business Administrator, shall administer the proper and efficient operation of the employment, training, job registry, and economic assistance functions of City government, shall act as liaison with the Jersey City Office of Employment and Training, and shall develop, implement and coordinate programs and policies to improve the availability of jobs and economic opportunities to City residents. The Division of Economic Opportunity shall consist of the following Offices: 
(1)  Office of Economic Assistance; 
(a)  Creation of the Office of Economic Assistance; Director of Economic Assistance in charge; abolition of the Local Assistance Board; abolition of terms of office of members of the Local Assistance Board. 
(b)  There is hereby created within the Division of Economic Opportunity, the Office of Economic Assistance, the head of which shall be the Director of Economic Assistance. The Office of Economic Assistance shall have all of the powers and duties formerly assigned to the Local Assistance Board. 
(c)  The Jersey City Local Assistance Board is abolished and all of its powers and duties under state law and regulations are transferred to the Office of Economic Assistance within the Department of Administration. 
(d)  The terms of all present members of the Local Assistance Board are abolished and all appointments are rescinded. 
(e)  Office of Economic Assistance; functions. Under the supervision and direction of the Director of the Division of Economic Opportunity, the Office of Economic Assistance shall: 
(A)  Provide financial assistance and medical care to all eligible persons resident within the City of Jersey City in accordance with the General Public Assistance Law ( N.J.S.A. 44:8-112 et seq.) and the regulations adopted by the New Jersey Department of Human Resources. 
(B)  Provide related social services, such as domestic relations counseling, investigation of paternity cases, indigent burials and other public economic assistance activities. 
(C)  Cooperate with other public agencies and with voluntary agencies in the certification of medically indigent patients for care and treatment. 
C.  Office of Equal Opportunity; 
(1)  Statement of policy. 
(a)  It is the policy of the City of Jersey City to promote and encourage respect, harmony and cooperation among all of the ethnic, national, racial, cultural and religious groups which make up the population of this City; to provide for equal opportunity and fair treatment for all; and to vigorously enforce all federal, state and local laws, regulations and policies to assure nondiscrimination and equal opportunity for its residents, businesses, workers and others, regardless of gender, race, national origin, age, disability or religion. 
(b)  The governing body has determined that the consolidation and unification of all City functions related to the overall policy of equal opportunity and nondiscrimination will improve the quality and efficiency of services and facilitate compliance with federal, state and local laws, regulations and public policy with respect to equal opportunity and disability, as well as activities and programs designed to promote respect, understanding, harmony and cooperation among the various cultural, national and ethnic groups comprising the population of Jersey City. 
(c)  Cooperation of City departments and agencies. All departments and agencies shall cooperate with the work of the Division of Equal Opportunity to the degree possible permitted by law. 
(2)  Office of Equal Opportunity; Director in charge; functions of the Office. 
(a)  There is hereby established within the Department of Administration, the Office of Equal Opportunity, the head of which shall be the Director of the Office of Equal Opportunity. The Director prior to appointment shall have at least four (4) years experience in managing equal opportunity, nondiscrimination, affirmative action-type programs. 
(b)  The Office shall be responsible for all programs of implementation and enforcement of public policy and local, state and federal laws with respect to nondiscrimination, equal opportunity, affirmative action, including specifically but not limited to: 
[1]  The City's Affirmative Action Plan. 
[2]  Implementation of Affirmative Action in Public Contracting, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 10:5-31 et seq. and N.J.A.C. 17:27. 
[3]  Minority and Women Business Enterprise Development Program. 
[4]  The Human Rights Commission. 
[5]  Prepare and produce a publication to help further the goals of the Office and its various programs. 
[6]  Monitor the implementation of affirmative action goals citywide. 
[7]  Provide and develop programs for recruitment, selection and training for protected classes. 
[8]  Maintain liaison with federal and state authorities engaged in the enforcement of equal employment opportunity laws and regulations, concerning non-municipal hiring. 
[9]  Maintain a working liaison with equal employment opportunity program representatives of federal and state agencies to ensure compliance with the law. 
[10]  Prepare clear, technically sound, accurate and detailed reports containing findings, conclusions and recommendations. 
(c)  Additional statement of policy. 
[1]  Minority- and women-owned businesses have received only a minute share of contracts for goods and services awarded by the City of Jersey City. 
[2]  A review of past and recent contracts awarded by the city discloses a disparity between the number of minority- and women-owned businesses operating in the community and in the larger geographical area where vendors/contractors who do business with the city are located, and the number of minority- and women-owned businesses receiving public contracts. 
[3]  In addition to other impediments, difficulties in financing and bonding have kept minority- and women-owned businesses from participating in public contracting in Jersey City. 
[4]  This lack of participation in public contracting by minority- and women-owned businesses has deprived minorities of employment opportunities. 
[5]  The City of Jersey City is committed to a policy of equal opportunity for minorities and women and has, therefor, adopted the ordinance codified in this section to address the imbalance between the number of minority- and women-owned businesses in the community and their participation in government contracting and to remedy the history of discrimination against minorities and women in this area. 
[6]  The minority and women-owned contracting goals established by this section attempt to overcome the effects of discrimination against minority and women-owned business in public contracting opportunities. 
(d)  Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
CONTROL—Authority over the affairs of a business, including but not limited to capital investment, property acquisition, employee hiring, contract negotiations, legal matters, officer and Director selection, operating responsibility, financial transactions and the rights of other shareholders or joint partners; except that "control" shall not include absentee ownership, nor shall it be deemed to exist where an owner or employee who is not a minority group member in the case of a minority business, or a male owner or employee in the case of a women's business, is disproportionately responsible for the operation of the business or for policy and contractual decisions. "Control" will also not be deemed to exist where minority group members or women are not reasonably judged to be in control of that business. 
MINORITY GROUP MEMBERS, QUALIFIED WOMEN BUSINESS ENTERPRISE (WBE), QUALIFIED MINORITY BUSINESS ENTERPRISE (MBE), SET-ASIDE CONTRACTS, and TOTAL PROCUREMENTS—In accordance with P.L. 1985, c. 482 (Chapter 482) and subsequent amendments and supplements thereto. 
(e)  Establishment of Minority and Women Business Enterprise Development Program. 
[1]  There is established within the Office of Equal Opportunity the Minority and Women Business Enterprise and Development Program (MWBED) of the City of Jersey City. With respect to all contracts and procurements, the Director of the Office of Equal Opportunity, under the supervision of the Business Administrator shall: 
[a]  Ensure, through the certification and procedure herein provided, that businesses taking advantage of the city's set-aside program are legitimate MBE/WBE's. 
[b]  Maintain a listing of all qualified minority and women business enterprises for referral by the City departments and the Purchasing Agent. 
[c]  Submit quarterly reports to the Business Administrator to document the percentage of set-aside contracts which have been awarded to the MBE/WBE's pursuant to the City's set-aside program. 
[d]  Have access to all records and files of all City departments, which relate to construction, service and procurement contracts, in order to monitor and review compliance. 
[e]  Submit by July 31 of each year a written annual report to the Business Administrator containing such findings, recommendations and proposals as are necessary and appropriate to good-faith effort made by the City administration and its individual departments to attain the goals set forth in this section. 
[f]  Ascertain, with the assistance of the Purchasing Agent, the identity of qualified MBE's and WBE's. 
[g]  Classify each business according to contract types in which the business represents itself to have capabilities, place all businesses on a solicitation list and distribute the list to City departments and the Purchasing Agent. Such solicitation shall be filed with the City Clerk for public review. 
[h]  Survey all businesses placed on the solicitation list to determine their past and current participation level in the administration's good-faith effort to attain the goals as established in this section. 
[2]  If the Director of the Office of Equal Opportunity determines that the goals set forth in this section are not being met, he or she may recommend to the Business Administrator such revisions to the City's plan designed to provide additional opportunities for MBE/WBE participation, including but not limited to any or all of the following actions: 
[a]  Elimination of extended experience or capitalization requirements, when programmatically feasible, to permit more extensive participation of MBE/WBE's in the set-aside program; and 
[b]  Publication of advertisements for bids in more than one (1) newspaper, e.g., city minority-oriented newspapers. 
(f)  Goals; duties; responsibilities; authorities. 
[1]  The City of Jersey City shall make a good-faith effort to reach a goal of awarding twenty percent (20%) of the dollar amount of total procurement to minority-owned business enterprises and five percent (5%) of the dollar amount of total procurement to woman-owned business enterprises. Verified amounts paid to minority- and woman-owned subcontractors shall be included in computing the dollar amount of total procurement by the city awarded to minority- and woman-owned businesses. 
[2]  The Business Administrator and the Director of the Office of Equal Opportunity shall compute the percentage dollar amount of contracts awarded, eliminating from the calculation those items over which the city has no control as to selection of vendor, e.g., utilities, leases, required books, reports and journals, etc. 
[3]  Upon receipt of the annual report from the MWBED Program, the Mayor and Council shall annually review the goals established under this section and consider appropriate amendments. 
[4]  Actions which demonstrate good-faith effort on the part of the City may include but are not limited to: 
[a]  Notice to minorities and MBE's and WBE's soliciting their participation in the set-aside program; 
[b]  The Purchasing Agent's provision of plans, specifications and requirements of the contract(s) to interested MBE's and WBE's; and 
[c]  The Purchasing Agent's compilation of an annual list of anticipated City purchases (approximate) by the item category, dollar amount and month of bid. 
(g)  Set-aside program. To achieve the goals set forth in this section, programs designed to assist minority and women business enterprises shall be established within the Office of Equal Opportunity. After appropriate fact-finding in accordance with Federal Court rulings, programs may include, but not be limited to, a set-aside approach to contracts consistent with Sections 2 and 6 of P.L. 1985, c. 482. Minority and women business enterprises shall not be limited to bidding or negotiating for contracts within these programs. 
(h)  Certificate of registration required. 
[1]  Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no business shall be permitted to participate in any program established under this section unless the business is registered and/or certified with the State of New Jersey, Department of Commerce and Economic Development, Division of Development for Small Business and Women and Minority Businesses (SWMB); provided, however, as follows: 
[a]  If the business is certified by SWMB pursuant to the Unified Certification Act (P.L. 1986, c. 195) as a minority-owned business or as a woman-owned business, the Director of the Office of Equal Opportunity shall accept such certification as evidence that the business is a bona fide minority or woman-owned enterprise. 
[b]  If the business is registered but not certified with SWMB, the Director of the Office of Equal Opportunity may require additional information if not satisfied that the business is a bona fide minority- or woman-owned business before including the business on the solicitation list. 
[c]  If the application for registration or certification by SWMB is pending, and the Director of the Office of Equal Opportunity is satisfied that the business is a bona fide minority-owned or woman-owned enterprise, the business may be added to the solicitation list and permitted to participate in programs under this subsection. 
[d]  The Director of the Office of Equal Opportunity may require businesses wishing to participate in the program to provide a copy of their application filed with SWMB or applications filed with other agencies (for example, Port Authority, N.J. Transit). 
[2]  Any person may refer charges of a violation of this section against any applicant for registration or a contractor registered hereunder. Such charges will be in writing and sworn to by the complainant. Such charges, unless dismissed without hearing as unfounded or trivial, shall be heard and determined within three (3) months after the date on which they were referred. A time and place for such hearing shall be fixed by the City of Jersey City. A copy of the charges, together with the notice of the time and place of hearing, shall be served on the accused personally or by certified or registered mail thirty (30) days before the fixed date for the hearing. At the hearing the accused shall have the right to appear personally or by representative and to cross-examine witnesses against him and to present evidence and witnesses in his or her defense. If after such hearing the city shall find that the charges are upheld, it shall revoke the registration of the accused or take such other action as it deems appropriate. 
(i)  Procedures and guidelines; regulations; adjustment of goals; bonding; maintenance of contracts; recommendation of amendments to section. The City of Jersey City shall from time to time: 
[1]  Establish procedures and guidelines for the implementation of the goals and programs established pursuant to this section. 
[2]  Recommend regulations to determine whether minority and women business enterprises will be eligible for certification under this section. 
[3]  Review procurement plans and recommend, if it deems appropriate, which contracts or parts thereof shall be reserved from programs established under this section. 
[4]  Consider requests for adjustment of goals in particular instances, provided that any such change shall be accompanied by any supporting data required by law. 
[5]  Subject to law, recommend waiver of bonding. 
[6]  Recommend subdividing a contract into smaller parts if such subdivisions are necessary to achieve the purposes of this section. 
[7]  Maintain contacts with the business community (financial institutions and bonding companies) and elicit cooperation for economic development for Jersey City. 
[8]  Review minority and women contracting problems and make further recommendations that increase minority and women contractors' participation with the Jersey City government. Such recommendations shall include, but not be limited to, improved schedules that ensure prompt payment to contractors, special geographic radii requirements on certain contracts, innovative contract advertising procedures, the encouragement of joint ventures and advising the Mayor on methods to be utilized to assure minority participation. 
[9]  Review and determine the continued eligibility of contractors certified as minority or women-owned business enterprises. 
(j)  Responsibilities of the Director of the Office of Economic Opportunity in the implementation of the MBE/WBE program. In the implementation of Jersey City's MBE/WBE program and pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:11-41 et seq., the Director of the Office of Economic Opportunity shall have the following duties and responsibilities: 
[1]  To make a good-faith effort to attain the goals established by the City of Jersey City pursuant to this program. 
[2]  To make available to the Business Administrator and his/her designees all records and documents necessary for implementation and monitoring of the MWBE program. 
[3]  To send bid packages to minority- and women-owned businesses as requested by the Business Administrator. 
(k)  Responsibility of Department Directors in the implementation of the MBE/WBE program. In the implementation of Jersey City's MBE/WBE program, and pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:11-41 et seq., the City department heads shall have the following duties and responsibilities: 
[1]  When requested, to furnish information, assistance and reports to, and shall otherwise cooperate with, the program and the Purchasing Agent in the furtherance of this program. 
[2]  To designate a deputy or other similar official to have primary and continuing responsibility for the participation and cooperation of that department with the MWBED program and the Purchasing Agent as relates to the implementation of this set-aside program and for assuring the appropriate utilization of MBE/WBE's by that department. 
(l)  Affirmative Action Advisory Council. There is hereby established an Affirmative Action Advisory Council of the City of Jersey City with the powers and duties hereinafter provided. 
[1]  The Affirmative Action Advisory Council shall consist of nine (9) members. Five (5) members of the nine (9) members first appointed shall serve terms of two (2) years and four (4) members terms of one (1) year. Thereafter, all members appointed shall serve terms of two (2) years. 
[2]  Members of the Affirmative Action Advisory Council shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of City Council. The Mayor shall make every effort to include as part of the Administrative Action Advisory Council representation from organized labor, contractors' associations, government and the minority community. The Mayor and Council shall appoint individuals to the Council who are committed to the purposes which this section seeks to advance. 
[3]  Members of the Affirmative Action Advisory Council may be removed for nonperformance or neglect of duties or for other good cause by the Mayor with the concurrence of the majority of the Council. 
[4]  Members of the Affirmative Action Advisory Council shall serve without compensation. 
[5]  Vacancies in the Affirmative Action Advisory Council, for whatever reason, shall be filled in the manner provided for new appointments. 
(m)  Powers and duties of Affirmative Action Council. The powers and duties of the Affirmative Action Advisory Council shall include the following: 
[1]  Review contractors' work force reports and other documents to evaluate compliance with N.J.A.C. 17:27-1.1 et seq. and any approved affirmative action construction program established by the City of Jersey City. 
[2]  Review corrective action taken with respect to contractors not in compliance with Affirmative Action Regulations. 
[3]  Advise and assist the Director of the Office of Equal Opportunity in the preparation of a construction affirmative action program for submission to the Mayor and City Council and the Division of Treasury pursuant to N.J.A.C. 17:27-6.5 for designation as a state approved construction affirmative action program. 
[4]  Promote understanding of the goals, purposes and progress of the affirmative action in public contracting program by disseminating information to the public and to various groups, including minority organizations, women's organizations, labor and community groups. 
[5]  Promote employment opportunities for minorities, women and local residents in public construction projects and development projects in the City of Jersey City. 
[6]  Advise the Mayor and Council as to training programs required to prepare minority and female workers and Jersey City residents for jobs in the construction industry. 
[7]  Prepare an annual report and recommendations to the City Council on the progress of an approved construction affirmative action program. 
(n)  Human Rights Commission. 
[1]  Creation of the Jersey City Human Rights Commission. There is hereby created the Jersey City Human Rights Commission to exercise the powers and functions as set forth herein. 
[2]  Commission; membership; term; officers. The Human Rights Commission shall consist of seventeen members to be appointed by the Mayor commencing with the initial appointments, five members for a term of one year; five members for a term of two years; and five members for a term of three years; and with two members whose initial term shall expire on January 31, 1985; and they shall serve until their successors shall be appointed and qualified. Thereafter, all new members shall be appointed for a term of three years. All appointments to fill vacancies shall be for the unexpired term of such vacancy. Members of the Commission shall annually select from among their membership a Chairman, one or more Vice Chairmen and a Secretary. 
[3]  Human Rights Commission; functions. 
[a]  Under the direction and supervision of the Business Administrator and the Director of the Division of Equal Opportunity, the Human Rights Commission shall: 
1.  Foster mutual understanding and respect among all racial, religious and ethnic groups in the City. 
2.  Promote programs designed to discourage discriminatory practices. 
3.  Cooperate with all appropriate governmental and private agencies and organizations designed to foster a spirit of racial, ethnic and religious harmony. 
4.  Make such studies in any field of human relationships which will aid in effectuating its general purposes. 
5.  Attempt to foster, through community effort, goodwill, cooperation and conciliation among the groups and elements of the inhabitants of the community. 
6.  Formulate and carry out educational programs that will aid in eliminating and preventing all types of discrimination based on race, creed, national origin and/or ancestry. 
7.  Enlist the cooperation of the various racial, religious and ethnic groups in the community, civil organizations, fraternal and benevolent associations, veterans organizations and other groups in educational campaigns and programs devoted to teaching the need for eliminating group tensions, prejudices, intolerance, bigotry and discrimination and breach of the peace and disorder occasioned thereby. 
8.  Cooperate with federal, state and local agencies in developing programs showing the contributions of the various races, religious and ethnic groups to the culture and traditions of our City and nation, the menace of prejudice, intolerance, bigotry and discrimination and the need for mutual self-respect. 
9.  Make recommendations to the governing body for the development of policies and procedures in general and for the programs of formal and informal education that will aid in eliminating all types of discrimination based on race, creed, national origin and/or ancestry and disability. 
10.  Recommend to the governing body legislation to aid in carrying out the purposes of this section. 
[b]  The Human Rights Commission shall have the following functions, powers and duties in addition to those provided otherwise by law: 
1.  To adopt, promulgate, amend and rescind suitable regulations to carry out the provisions of this section, provided that such rules and regulations shall be approved by the Municipal Council and, upon approval, filed with the City Clerk. 
2.  To receive and investigate complaints alleging violations of the provisions of this section. 
3.  To hold conferences and conduct investigations and for this purpose to call upon City officials and employees and other bodies to assist the Commission in enforcing the provisions of this section. 
D.  Human Rights Commission; powers, Equal Opportunity Director; duties. 
(1)  The Division of Equal Opportunity shall serve as staff to the Human Rights Commission. 
(2)  Under direction of the Business Administrator, the Director of Equal Opportunity shall: 
(a)  Be responsible for the implementation of the purposes of this section and shall have such further administrative responsibilities as assigned by the Business Administrator. 
(b)  Plan and organize meetings of the Human Rights Commission and maintain a calendar of the same. 
(c)  Organize and plan projects, conferences, action programs, institutes and leadership conferences to carry out the provisions of this section and to make recommendations to the Human Rights Commission and the Mayor for program activities. 
(d)  Prepare, organize and conduct statically sound research studies, surveys and inquiries on intergroup relations, changing neighborhoods and community resources with special emphasis on private housing and the aspects of prejudice and discrimination which are a threat to the peace and welfare of the community. 
(e)  Maintain a continual liaison with community groups, religious and civic organization, human relations agencies and individuals to render the services of the Human Rights Commission and involve such individuals and groups in the programs of the Commission to the degree possible. 
(f)  Cooperate and work with City agencies and other organizations which function in the field of housing. 
(g)  Keep abreast of the most recent surveys, studies, projects and techniques in housing and all other fields of human relations which can be applied in the City to effect the purposes of this section. 
(h)  Carry a program of education and related activities to promote peace and harmony within the neighborhoods of this City to reduce prejudice and discrimination. 
(i)  Maintain records, prepare reports and make recommendations to the Human Rights Commission and the Business Administrator and Mayor based upon such surveys and reports. 
E.  Human Rights Commission; budget. For the purposes of effectuation of the goals of this section, the Human Rights Commission shall have such clerical and technical assistance, materials, supplies and provisions for such other costs and expenses of the Commission as shall annually be budgeted by the Business Administrator.  
§ 3-60.3. - Office of Risk Management. 
[Added 11-7-01 by Ord. No. 01-121] 
There is hereby created under the Department of Administration, the Office of Risk Management, the head of which shall be the Risk Manager. Under the supervision of the Business Administrator, the Risk Manager shall: 
A.  In coordination with the Corporation Counsel, supervise the administration and payment of workers' compensation, benefits and claims for City employees. 
B.  Administer the City's self-insurance and general insurance programs. 
C.  Review all contracts and agreements to recommend risk transfer of liability to other parties, including vendors, contractors, licensees and franchises. 
D.  Administer the Risk Management program for the City of Jersey City to include self-insurance administration, implementation of loss prevention and loss reduction programs, and investigation of property damage liability claims. 
E.  Advise all City departments on miscellaneous risk management issues. 
F.  Assist in the preparation of the monthly agenda for the Insurance Fund Commission. 
G.  Assist in the coordination of Insurance Fund Commission activities and in the investment of insurance funds.  
§ 3-60.4. - Division of Collections. 
[Added 6-25-2008 by Ord. No. 08-092] 
A.  Creation of the Division of Collections; City Tax Collector in charge; qualifications. There shall be a Division of Collections, which shall be headed by the City Tax Collector, who shall be a certified tax collector. 
B.  City Tax Collector; functions. The City Tax Collector shall perform the duties assigned to him or her by the Business Administrator and state law and shall supervise the following responsibilities of his/her division relating to the collection of real estate taxes, assessments and other municipal charges: 
(1)  Administer all ordinances and state statutes necessary for the billing, collection and enforcement of other municipal charges that he/she is responsible for. 
(2)  Maintain the necessary records and periodically report upon his/her activities in order to keep municipal governing officials and citizens aware of the state of municipal finances. 
(3)  Impose interest and other penalties for the nonpayment of real estate taxes, assessments and other municipal charges. 
(4)  Ensure that all taxpayers are treated fairly and honestly and that there is no discrimination in his/her performance. 
(5)  Assign by private sale municipally owned tax sale certificates pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-113; except that no municipally owned tax sale certificate shall be assigned to any employee of the City of Jersey City. 
(6)  Post payments to account records and produce delinquent notices as is required. 
(7)  Monitor and ensure the payment of land taxes. 
(8)  Hire and monitor as is necessary external auditing firms to ensure compliance as is required by the Local Fiscal Affairs Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:5-1 et seq. 
C.  Fees. 
(1)  The City Tax Collector shall impose the service charges as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges, to be added to any account owing to the City of Jersey City. 
(2)  If the payment for which a check or other written instrument has been returned for insufficient funds is for a tax or special assessment, the service charge as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges, shall be included on any list of delinquent accounts prepared for the enforcement of liens. 
(3)  Any service charge authorized by Subsection C(1) dealing with checks returned for insufficient funds shall be collected in the same manner prescribed by law for the collection of the account for which the check or other written instrument was tendered in cash or by certified or cashier's check. 
(4)  Persons aged sixty-five (65) and older shall be exempt from the fees specified under Subsection C(1) dealing with redemption statements, issuance of duplicate tax bills or responses to inquiries regarding tax payments.  
§ 3-60.5. - Division of Treasury and Debt Management. 
[Added 6-25-2008 by Ord. No. 08-092] 
A.  Creation of the Division of Treasury and Debt Management; City Treasurer in charge. There is hereby created within the Department of Administration, the Division of Treasury and Debt Management, the head of which shall be the City Treasurer. He or she shall be assisted in the operation of the Division by such personnel as he or she shall select with the approval of the Business Administrator. 
B.  Division of Treasury and Debt Management functions. 
(1)  Receive funds entrusted to or under the control of any department, administrative unit or statutory agency and deposit all funds received by him or her in depositories authorized by the Council by resolution. 
(2)  Have custody of all investments and invested funds of the city or in possession of the city in fiduciary capacity, except as otherwise provided by law. 
(3)  Have the safekeeping of all bonds and notes of the city and the receipt and delivery of city bonds and notes for transfer, registration or exchange. 
(4)  Receive, account for separately and safely keep and disburse all moneys raised and received for the public schools, provided that no money shall be paid out of the public school funds by the Treasurer except on warrant signed by the President and Clerk of the Board of Education pursuant to an order or resolution passed at a stated meeting of the Board of Education and entered in its minutes. 
(5)  Make disbursements of the city funds upon warrant of the Business Administrator by an individual warrant check for each bill, claim wage and salary payment, provided that the person entitled to receive the same shall specify the purpose for which it is drawn and the account or appropriation to which it is chargeable, and shall bear such signatures as are required by the Administrative Code. 
(6)  Keep a full account of all cash receipts and disbursements by the Division according to the system of accounts approved by the Business Administrator and, at least once a month and more often if the Council requires, furnish the Business Administrator with a statement of all money received and expended by him, including school moneys.  
§ 3-60.6. - Division of Accounts and Control. 
[Added 6-25-2008 by Ord. No. 08-092] 
A.  Creation; officer in charge; assistance. There is hereby created in the Department of Administration, the Division of Accounts and Control, the head of which shall be the Comptroller. The Comptroller shall be assisted in the operation of the Division by the Chief Accountant. 
B.  Functions. Under the direction of the Comptroller, the Chief Accountant shall be responsible for the following functions: 
(1)  Develop, maintain and enforce a uniform system of accounts for all departments and agencies of the city and all federal and state grants and subsidized programs. 
(2)  Maintain and operate the city's central bookkeeping and accounting records to sound principles, including such records and reports as may be prescribed or approved by the business Administrator for the determination of the cost of performance of each functional program or activity in such work units as may be appropriate thereto. 
(3)  Certify searches for tax, water and other liens on real property as may be authorized by law after such information has been received from the respective departments; and charge for the use of the city the fee required pursuant to law for any such search, and the Division may appoint or designate one of its employees as Official Tax Searcher to perform these functions. 
(4)  Preaudit all bills, claims and demands against the city, including payrolls, and require each department head to certify that the materials, supplies or equipment have been received and accepted as specified and that the services have been duly rendered. 
(5)  Audit receipts and disbursements of each department and require reports thereon to be made daily or at such intervals as will most efficiently protect the public interest. 
(6)  Control all expenditures to assure that budget appropriations are not exceeded and maintain such books and records as may be required for the proper exercise of such budgetary control, including an encumbrance system of budget operations. 
(7)  Review each proposed expenditure and commitment to be made on behalf of any city department for conformity with the Charter and applicable provisions of the Jersey City Code and authorize only such expenditures and commitments as conform with the requirements of the Code.  
§ 3-60.7. - Repealed. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13-081, adopted September 11, 2013, amended the Code by repealing former § 3-60.7 in its entirety. Former § 3-60.7 pertained to the Division of Pension, and derived from Ord. No. 08-092, adopted June 25, 2008.  
§ 3-60.8. - Repealed. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13-081, adopted September 11, 2013, amended the Code by repealing former § 3-60.8 in its entirety. Former § 3-60.8 pertained to the Division of Payroll, and derived from Ord. No. 08-092, adopted June 25, 2008.  
§ 3-60.9. - Division of Internal Audit. 
[Added 6-25-2008 by Ord. No. 08-092] 
A.  Creation of the Division of Internal Audit. There is hereby created within the Department of Administration the Division of Internal Audit, the head of which shall be the Chief Auditor of the City. The authority of the Business Administrator over the Division of Internal Audit shall extend only to matters of budget, personnel and purchasing. 
B.  Division of Internal Audit functions. 
[Amended 11-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-172 ] 
(1)  The Division of Internal Audit is hereby authorized to conduct an independent audit of the books and records of all administrative units of the city, independent agencies and other persons and organizations receiving moneys from the city directly or from grants by the federal or state governments. Independent agencies shall include but shall not be limited to the following: 
(a)  The Bureau of Licenses. 
(b)  The Board of Adjustment. 
(c)  The Jersey City Board of Education. 
(d)  The Jersey City Housing Authority. 
(e)  The Jersey City Free Public Library. 
(f)  Public Agency Compliance Office (PACO). 
(g)  The Planning Board. 
(h)  The Jersey City Redevelopment Agency. 
(i)  Jersey City Municipal Utilities Authority. 
(2)  Such audits of the aforesaid organizations and administrative units shall be conducted at the discretion of the Business Administrator. 
(3)  Upon the completion of each audit the Division of Internal Audit shall furnish a copy to the Municipal Council, Business Administrator and to the unit which is the subject of the audit.  
§ 3-60.10. - Office of Tax Abatement Management. 
[Added 6-25-2008 by Ord. No. 08-092] 
There is hereby established under the Department of Administration the Office of Tax Abatement Management, the head of which shall be the Director of Tax Abatement Management.  
§ 3-60.11. - Office of Tax Abatement Management functions. 
[Added 6-25-2008 by Ord. No. 08-092] 
A.  Maintain in one place and ensure the security of all of the records, papers and submissions that pertain to all tax abatement and exemption financial agreements. 
B.  Monitor and ensure compliance with the terms of all tax abatement and exemption financial agreements following approval by the Municipal Council. 
C.  Insure the timely submission and payment of quarterly service charge bills with applicable arrearages and interest and insure full compliance with the terms and conditions contained within the city's tax abatement and exemption financial agreements by conducting periodic audits. 
D.  Make recommendations, in conjunction with the Corporation Counsel and the Business Administrator, to standardize certain financial agreement terminology and provisions and to propose any needed changes in State legislation. 
E.  Coordinate and liaison, as needed, with the Mayor, the Municipal Council, the Corporation Counsel and all city departments, in the tax abatement and exemption process. 
F.  Act as a liaison with the Business Administrator and the City Council to review and analyze the financial ramifications of each tax abatement and exemption financial agreement. 
G.  Supervise a staff of internal auditors, accountants, and other employees to achieve all of the above functions.  
ARTICLE VII - Fiscal Year[18] 

Footnotes: 
--- (18) --- 
Editor's note— Former Art. VII, Department of Finance, consisting of §§ 3-61 through 3-61.10, adopted September 8, 1981 by Ord. No. MC-14, was repealed June 25, 2008 by Ord. No. 08-092. Subsequently, a new Art. VII was added at the discretion of the editor. 
 
§ 3-61. - Fiscal year established. 
[Added 8-4-2010 by Ord. No. 10-089] 
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:4-3.1 et seq., the City of Jersey City may commence operating on a Calendar Fiscal Year beginning with Calendar Year 2011.  
ARTICLE VIII - Office of Assessments 
[Amended 11-27-1985 by Ord. No. C-48; 12-10-1987 by Ord. No. C-637; 9-13-1989 by Ord. No. McC-8; 9-13-1989 by Ord. No. McC-9; 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050] 
 
§ 3-62. - Office created; head. 
There is hereby created an Office of Assessments, the head of which shall be the City Assessor. The City Assessor shall be a person qualified under Chapter 44, Laws of 1967, as amended and supplemented.* 
* Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 54:135.25.  
§ 3-63. - Powers and duties. 
The Office of Assessments shall: 
A.  Value all real and personal property in the city for the purposes of assessment and taxation in accordance with general law, the Charter and applicable provisions of the Jersey City Code and exercise all the powers of a municipal assessor pursuant to law. 
B.  Prepare the tax list and duplicate, as required by law, and maintain adequate assessment records of each and every parcel of real property assessed. 
C.  Maintain a current city Tax Map and provide for the recording thereon of all changes in ownership or character of real property assessed. 
D.  Make all special assessments of benefits for local improvements. 
E.  Be responsible for all appraisals of property for any city purpose; provided that the office may, with the approval of the Mayor and within the limits of available appropriations, retain outside experts or appraisers whenever the public interest requires. 
F.  Designate house numbers as provided in Chapter 108, Buildings, Numbering of. 
[Added 4-9-2008 by Ord. No. 08-042]  
§ 3-64. - Inspectors. 
For the purpose of enforcing its responsibilities under this Article, the Tax Assessor may request the assistance and assistance shall be extended by all appropriate inspection services of the city concerned with the inspection of properties under this Code. 
A.  For the purpose of this section, all inspectors assigned to inspect the properties owned by the city or coming within the jurisdiction of the Office of the Tax Assessor shall work under the supervision of the Tax Assessor as to these properties. 
B.  There shall be four inspectors employed in the Office of the Tax Assessor whose duties shall be the inspection of city-owned tax title lien properties and other duties assigned by the Office of the Tax Assessor.  
§ 3-65. - Fees; requests for information. 
The fee for documents maintained by the Office of the Tax Assessor shall be as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges, for documents requested in person at the office of the Tax Assessor during regular business hours. The fee for documents requested in writing shall be as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges, which shall include the fee for postage and handling. No information shall be provided by telephone. All requests for information shall be made either in person during regular business hours or in writing.  
ARTICLE IX - Department of Public Works 
 
§ 3-66. - Department created; head. 
[Amended 4-13-2016 by Ord. No. 16-059 ] 
There shall be a Department of Public Works, the head of which shall be the Director of Public Works. The Department of Public Works shall be responsible for all public works functions undertaken by the City of Jersey City and shall in addition: 
A.  Supervise the City mail room; 
B.  Provide for and supervise the City messenger service; 
C.  Provide security services for all public biddings owned, operated or occupied by the City of Jersey City; 
D.  Supervise the Mary McLeod Bethune Life Center; 
E.  Administer the Jersey City Clean Communities Program.  
§ 3-67. - Duties of Director; divisions. 
[Amended 6-28-1982 by Ord. No. MC-195; 11-8-1989 by McC-53; 1-10-1990 by Ord. No. McC-80; 1-24-1990 by Ord. No. McC-98; 12-19-1990 by Ord. No. McC-227; 9-8-1993 by Ord. No. 93-097; 9-14-1994 by Ord. No. 94-87; 6-9-2010 by Ord. No. 10-072; 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ; 7-17-2014 by Ord. No. 14-081 ] 
A.  The Director shall be responsible for the proper and efficient conduct of all public works functions of the city government and shall provide technical advice and service to other departments as needed. The Director shall serve as city liaison with the Jersey City Municipal Utilities Authority. Within the Department shall be the following divisions: 
A.  Division of Automotive Maintenance. 
B.  Division of Buildings and Street Maintenance. [Amended 6-24-1998 by Ord. No. 98-082] 
C.  Division of Park Maintenance. [Added 6-24-1998 by Ord. No. 98-082; amended 9-22-2004 by Ord. No. 04-107] 
D.  Division of Neighborhood Improvement. [Added 9-8-2004 by Ord. No. 04-087] 
E.  Division of Automobile Impounding. 
[Added 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. 15-104 ] 
F.  Division of Demolition. 
[Added 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. 15-104 ] 
G.  Division of Solid Waste Recycling. 
[Added 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. 15-104 ] 
H.  Division of Graffiti Removal. 
[Added 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. 15-104 ] 
I.  Division of Sanitation. 
[Added 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. 15-104 ] 
B.  The Director of Public Works may appoint one or more Deputy Directors who shall be responsible for the supervision of one or more divisions as assigned by the Director of Public Works. 
[Added 4-13-2016 by Ord. No. 16-059 ]  
§ 3-68. - Division of Automotive Maintenance. 
[Amended 9-14-1994 by Ord. No. 94-87; 4-13-2016 by Ord. No. 16-059 ] [19] 
A.  Creation of the Division of Automotive Maintenance; Director of Automotive Maintenance in charge. There is hereby created within the Department of Public Works a Division of Automotive Maintenance, the head of which shall be the Deputy Director of Automotive Maintenance. 
B.  Division of Automotive Maintenance; functions. Under the direction and supervision of the Director of Public Works, the Division of Automotive Maintenance shall: 
(1)  Supervise the work done in all city garages or by contract for the storage, repair and maintenance of city-owned vehicles. 
(2)  Operate a garage or garages for the storage, servicing, repair and maintenance of all city-owned motor vehicles. 
(3)  Maintain individual vehicle records of mileage, costs of operation and maintenance and replacement schedules and charge all such costs to the using department under appropriate regulations by the Business Administrator. 
(4)  Operate a motor pool consisting of all motor vehicles, equipment and apparatus of the city and allocate the use of motor vehicles, equipment and apparatus to the departments of the city. 
(5)  Operate and maintain communication equipment and supervise radio repair work done by contract. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-059 , adopted April 13, 2016, amended the Code by renumbering former §§ 3-69—3-71.3 as new §§ 3-68—3-70.2. Prior to this renumbering, Ord. No. 14-081 , adopted July 17, 2014, amended the Code by repealing former § 3-68 in its entirety. Former § 3-68 pertained to the Division of Architecture, Engineering, Traffic and Transportation, and derived from Ord. No. 10-072, adopted June 9, 2010; Ord. No. 13-081 , adopted September 11, 2013; and Ord. No. 14-017 , adopted November 12, 2014. Also, Ord. No. 13-081 , adopted September 11, 2013, amended the Code by repealing former § 3-68.1 in its entirety. Former § 3-68.1 pertained to the Division of Engineering, Traffic and Transportation, and derived from Ord. No. 10-072, adopted June 9, 2010. 
Footnotes: 
--- (19) --- 
Editor's note— For statutory provisions relating to this topic, see N.J.S.A. 40:69A-13. 
 
§ 3-69. - Division of Buildings and Street Maintenance; functions. 
[Amended 1-10-1990 by Ord. No. McC-80; 9-14-1994 by Ord. No. 94-87; 6-24-1998 by Ord. No. 98-082; 11-7-2001 by Ord. No. 01-121; 12-27-2001 by Ord. No. 01-141; 4-13-2016 by Ord. No. 16-059 ] 
A.  Creation of the Division of Buildings and Street Maintenance; Director of Buildings and Street Maintenance in charge. There is hereby created within the Department of Public Works a Division of Buildings and Street Maintenance, the head of which shall be the Director of Buildings and Street Maintenance. 
B.  Division of Buildings and Street Maintenance; functions. 
(1)  Under the supervision and direction of the Director of Public Works, the Division of Buildings and Street Maintenance shall: 
(a)  Erect barriers, ropes, lines, traffic cones and stanchions when necessary to control or regulate traffic emergencies, parades, crowds and gatherings. 
(b)  Construct, install, maintain and repair all traffic signs and traffic markings by all departments. 
(c)  Provide for the repair and maintenance of all public streets. 
(2)  Establish standards and procedures for the control, use and care of all city-owned equipment, materials and supplies in the custody of the Division. 
(3)  Supervise the performance of all contracts for public works related capital improvement projects and certify the amounts due and payable thereunder. 
(4)  Provide for the preparation of plans and specifications for the construction, repair, alteration and demolition of all City buildings and structures. 
(5)  Set standards for the construction, reconstruction and maintenance of all facilities in and/or on public lands and rights-of-way. 
(6)  Provide for custodial services for all public buildings owned and operated by the City of Jersey City. 
Note— Former § 3-70. See editor's note, § 3-68.  
§ 3-70. - Division of Park Maintenance. 
[Added 6-24-1998 by Ord. No. 98-082; amended 2-13-2002 by Ord. No. 02-008; 1-26-2011 by Ord. No. 11-001; 3-11-2015 by Ord. No. 15-026 ; 4-13-2016 by Ord. No. 16-059 ; 4-26-2017 by Ord. No. 17-044 ] 
A.  Creation of the Division of Park Maintenance; Director of Park Maintenance in charge. There is hereby created within the Department of Public Works a Division of Park Maintenance, the Director of which shall be the Director of Park Maintenance. 
(1)  Division of Park Maintenance; functions. Under the direction and supervision of the Director of Public Works, the Division of Park Maintenance shall: 
(a)  be responsible for planning and maintaining all facilities for recreational purposes offered by the City, which include parks, playgrounds, green space, sitting areas and indoor recreational facilities. 
(b)  Be responsible for the trimming of trees on sidewalks. 
(c)  Be responsible for the planting of trees within public easement areas. 
(d)  Be in charge of approving park usage permits for picnics, reunions, weddings and other private gatherings. All permits shall be issued by the Office of Cultural Affairs. 
(e)  In conjunction with the Office of Cultural Affairs and the Department of Health and Human Services, be responsible for reviewing and approving applications for flea markets and farmers' markets, respectively, provided that flea markets and farmers' markets permits are subject to the following permitting requirements: 
(i)  Subject to such rules, regulations, restrictions and requirements of § 239-15 of this Code, flea market permits shall be issued as follows: Each organization seeking a flea market permit may be issued two (2) such permits per calendar year for the passive recreation portion of any City park, space permitting, and subject to any local, State and Federal regulations, including, but not limited to Green Acres regulations. The exact location of any flea market within a City park shall be determined solely by the Director of the Division of Park Maintenance and the permit issued shall include a map indicating where the market is to be situated. No park may have more than six flea markets per year, and there shall be no flea market permitted and no permits issued for Grundy Pier. 
(ii)  Subject to such rules, regulations, restrictions and requirements of § 239-15 and § 175-16 et seq. of this Code, permits to operate farmers' markets within City parks may be issued to nonprofit organizations which have been licensed by the City Health Officer under § 175-16 et seq. When applying for a permit to operate a farmer's market within a City park, the non-profit organization shall provide proof to the Director of the Division of Park Maintenance, prior to the issuance of the permit, that the non-profit organization has been licensed to operate a farmer's market by the City Division of Health and has secured general liability insurance for the farmers' market in the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) from an A.M. Best-rated insurance company which names the City of Jersey City as an additional insured unless waived by the City's Risk Manager. Farmers' markets may be held in the passive recreation portion of any City park, space permitting, except J. Owen Grundy Pier Park. The exact location of any farmers' market within a City park shall be determined solely by the Director of the Division of Park Maintenance and the permit issued shall include a map indicating where the market is to be situated. Applications to establish a farmers' market in a City park and all supporting documents must be submitted to the Division of Health at least thirty (30) days before the planned opening of the market. 
(f)  Be responsible for codifying costs to the Tax Collector on work performed on private property. 
Note— Former § 3-71.1. See editor's note, § 3-68.  
§ 3-70.1. - Division of Neighborhood Improvement. 
[Added 9-8-2004 by Ord. No. 04-087; amended 4-27-2005 by Ord. 05-045; 4-13-2016 by Ord. No. 16-059 ; 5-10-2017 by Ord. No. 17-054 ] 
A.  Creation of the Division of Neighborhood Improvement; Director of Division of Neighborhood Improvement in charge. There is hereby created within the Department of Public Works, the Division of Neighborhood Improvement, the head of which shall be the Director of the Division of Neighborhood Improvement. 
B.  Under the supervision of the Director of Public Works and of the Division, the Director of the Division of Neighborhood Improvement and employees designated by the Director of Public Works shall: 
(1)  Direct the daily operations of all aspects of the Neighborhood Improvement Districts program within an assigned Neighborhood Improvement District. 
(2)  Act as a resident liaison through scheduling and attending neighborhood meetings, soliciting input and program evaluation, soliciting service requests, producing work orders and monitoring City employee performance regarding said requests. 
(3)  Monitor any public works contracts specifically designed to enhance a particular Neighborhood Improvement District for timely and satisfactory performance on a scheduled and random basis. 
(4)  Secure abandoned properties. 
C.  Designated employees shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  All designated employees must complete the City's Neighborhood Improvement District Summons Training Program prior to issuing any summonses. 
(2)  All designated employees must be in good standing with respect to their employment with the City. 
(3)  All designated employees must be full-time employees with the city. 
D.  Designated employees, under the supervision of the Director of Neighborhood Improvement, and in cooperation with relevant City agencies, are authorized to issue summonses for the violation of the following City ordinances: 
(1)  Chapter 296 (Streets and Sidewalks), 
(a)  Article I (Snow and Ice Removal), section(s): 
[a]  Section 296-1 (Duties of owners or occupants; time for removal); 
[b]  Section 296-2 (Snow removal); 
[c]  Section 296-3 (Ice removal); 
[d]  Section 296-4 (Injury to pavement; spreading of ashes, sawdust or sand); and 
[e]  Section 296-5 (Deposit of harmful substances prohibited; rock salt). 
(b)  Article II (Sidewalk Cleaning), section(s): 
[a]  Section 296-8 (Dirty and littered condition prohibited); 
[b]  Section 296-10 (Duty of owners, occupants and workers; depositing materials in streets or gutters); 
[c]  Section 296-11 (Areas of property to be kept clean); 
(c)  Article III (Curb and Sidewalk Improvements), section(s): 
[a]  Section 296-15 (Unauthorized objects on streets and sidewalks); 
[b]  Section 296-16 (Reflectors required for objects placed on streets or sidewalks); 
[c]  Section 296-17 (Removal of unauthorized objects); 
(2)  Chapter 287 (Solid Waste): 
(a)  Article I (Storage, Collection and Disposal), section(s): 
[a]  Section 287-3 (Storage of refuse); 
[b]  Section 287-4 (Accumulations of refuse and noxious plants on vacant lots); 
[c]  Section 287-6 (Private disposal of refuse); 
[d]  Section 287-7 (Precollection procedures); 
[e]  Section 287-8 (Refuse receptacles, approved containers and plastic bags); 
[f]  Section 287-9 (Accumulations of refuse and swill); 
[g]  Section 287-10 (Duties of owners and tenants); 
[h]  Section 287-11 (Disposal of hazardous refuse); 
[i]  Section 287-12 (Demolition containers and dumpsters); 
[j]  Section 287-13 (Dumping prohibited); 
[k]  Section 287-15 (Removal of material dumped illegally); 
[l]  Section 287-16 (Persons permitting illegal dumping); 
[m]  Section 287-17 (Burning of refuse, rubbish and other materials prohibited); 
[n]  Section 287-18 (Licensed solid waste disposal facilities); 
[o]  Section 287-19 (Depositing litter in public places); 
[p]  Section 287-20 (Owners of business premises: food refuse); 
[q]  Section 287-21 (Litter from vehicles); 
[r]  Section 287-22 (Litter prohibited; litter receptacles); 
[s]  Section 287-23 (Use of litter receptacles); 
[t]  Section 287-24 (Vehicles to be loaded to prevent littering); 
[u]  Section 287-25 (Littering in parks); 
[v]  Section 287-26 (Materials not permitted in litter receptacles); 
[w]  Section 287-27 (Handbills); 
[x]  Section 287-28 (Duties of building owners and lessees). 
(3)  Chapter 173 (Retail Florists), section(s): 
[Added 1-24-2007 by Ord. No. 07-001] 
(a)  Section 173-3 (Sale of cut flowers prohibited without proper refrigeration). 
(4)  Chapter 245 (Peddling, Soliciting and Canvassing), Article I (Licensing of Peddlers), section(s): 
[Added 11-25-2008 by Ord. No. 08-154] 
(a)  Section 245-8 (Articles not to be sold). 
(5)  Chapter 287-41 to 287-49 (Recycling). 
[Added 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] 
E.  Graffiti removal services: 
(1)  Remove graffiti from municipal, commercial and residential dwellings; 
(2)  Provide all personnel needed to perform the services and purchase (and maintain in good repair) any capital equipment as is reasonably necessary to carry out its obligations: 
(3)  Maintain accurate records concerning the cost of labor and materials it expends in order to remove graffiti from each privately-owned residential dwelling and forward a statement of costs to the Tax Collector so as to enable the City to file a lien and seek reimbursement for such costs from the private owners. The owner of record shall be entitled to a written notice of the order to remove graffiti, which notice shall be delivered to the owner by certified and regular mail and provide for 90 days to remove the graffiti from the date the notice is sent. The notice shall contain a form to be utilized by the property owner to inform the City that the graffiti has been removed. The owner may object to the order of removal within 30 days of the date of the order. If the owner does not remove the graffiti, present the owner with an itemization of cost by certified mail and if unpaid, the governing body may assess the cost as a municipal lien, all in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.59. 
Note— Former § 3-71.2. See editor's note, § 3-68.  
§ 3-70.2. - Division of Sanitation. 
[Added 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ; 4-13-2016 by Ord. No. 16-059 ] 
A.  Creation of the Division of Sanitation, Director of Sanitation in charge. Functions. There is hereby created within the Department of Public Works a Division of Sanitation, the head of which shall be the Director of the Division of Sanitation. The Division of Sanitation shall perform the following functions: 
B.  Trash collection functions: 
(1)  Place and remove of public litter baskets and receptacles at locations to be designated by the Director of Public Works and the Business Administrator or his designee; 
(2)  Remove and dispose of refuse from public litter baskets and receptacles, and from City-owned lots and from within City-owned vacant buildings; 
(3)  Inspect and enforce sanitation ordinances and remove refuse from privately owned lots; 
(4)  Maintain accurate records concerning the cost of labor and materials it expends in order to remove refuse from each privately owned lot and forward a statement of costs to the Tax Collector so as to enable the City to file a lien and seek reimbursement for such costs from the private owners. 
C.  Demolition functions: 
(1)  Demolish buildings and structures as requested by the City's Construction Code Official and/or Director of Architecture, Engineering, Traffic and Transportation. 
(2)  Maintain accurate records concerning the cost of labor and materials expended in order to demolish each building and forward a statement of costs to the Tax Collector so as to enable the filing of a lien should reimbursement for such costs from the private owner, not be forthcoming. 
(3)  Conduct inspections and enforce demolition ordinances; 
D.  Street sweeping functions: 
(1)  Sweep and clean designated City streets by use of mechanical street sweeping equipment in accordance with the current City schedule and practice; 
(2)  Remove and dispose of refuse from streets and City-owned parking areas. 
(3)  Snow plowing, salt spreading and snow removal. 
(4)  Inspect and enforce removal and disposal of refuse and snow/ice removal ordinances; 
E.  Solid Waste/Recycling Functions: 
(1)  Implement the existing Solid Waste, Recycling Program, concerning the collection and disposal of all materials generated within the City from any residential, commercial or residential property. 
(2)  Ensure compliance with applicable sections of the Jersey City Code and all state and county laws including but not limited to "The Solid Waste Management Act," N.J.S.A. 13:1E-1 et seq.; "The Recycling Enhancement Act," N.J.S.A. 13:1E-96.2 et seq.; and "New Jersey Statewide Mandatory Source Separation and Recycling Act." N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.32 et seq. 
(3)  Conduct inspections and enforce storage, collection and disposal of solid waste and recycling ordinances; 
Note— Former § 3-71.3. See editor's note, § 3-68.  
§§ 3-71—3-71.3. - Reserved.  
§ 3-71.4. - Division of Automobile Impounding. 
[Added 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. 15-104 ] 
A.  Creation of the Division of Automobile Impounding: Director in charge. There is hereby created within the Department of Public Works a Division of Automobile Impounding, the head of which shall be the Director of the Division of Automobile Impounding. 
B.  Division of Automobile Impounding: functions. Under the direction and supervision of the Director of the Department of Public Works, the Division of Automobile Impounding shall provide the following services: 
(1)  Oversee the towing of all vehicles, including abandoned vehicles, upon order of the Police (JCPD) and notify the Division of Motor Vehicles and the National Automobile Theft Bureau that possession was taken of the abandoned vehicle; 
(2)  Run data checks on vehicles and staff the on-site National Crime Index Communicator (NCIC) terminal for this purpose with civilian personnel. Such information includes the owner's name, address and other pertinent information needed by the Automobile Pound to properly notify the owner of record. JCPD shall also notify the National Insurance Crime Bureau (NICB) of all vehicles impounded by the JCPD; 
(3)  Release the vehicle upon presentation by the owner of a valid license, registration and insurance card to the JCPD; 
(4)  Retain copies of the Order of Impoundment for all vehicles impounded; 
(5)  Obtain motor vehicle background checks, prior to release of impounded vehicles and name, address and other pertinent information relating to all vehicles impounded. Such information is to be provided daily; 
(6)  Remove all visible personal property from impounded vehicles prior to being towed to the City Car Pound: 
(7)  Process the documentation necessary to allow a vehicle to be sold at auction; 
(8)  The Division of Automobile Impounding shall then send a letter by registered mail to the owner as identified by the data check as required by statute; 
(9)  As appropriate, the Division of Automobile Impounding shall make application for titles upon expiration of the statutory period. Each vehicle shall be classified, according to relevant standards and procedures set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:1 et seq. to be either: 
(a)  A junk title; or 
(b)  A renegotiable title. 
(10)   Prior to making this application, the Division of Automobile Impounding must notify the JCPD Scofflaw/Auto Squad Commander, in writing, that all statutory requirements have been met relating to the list of vehicles to be auctioned; 
(11)   The Division of Automobile Impounding shall cooperate with forfeiture claims; 
(12)   Conduct auctions in accordance with State Law; 
(13)   Collect fees generated by the impoundment, storage or auction or sale of vehicles: 
(a)  Any fees collected for the impoundment or storage of vehicles may be retained by the DPW to offset the costs of providing towing services and other related operation cost; 
(b)  Provide the Municipal Council with an annual financial statement prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, regarding all fees and income collected; 
(c)  Fees shall follow the uniform schedule of fees for involuntary tows as set forth in the Jersey City Municipal Code. 
(14)   Allow the JCPD to use four unclaimed vehicles per month as undercover cars.  
§ 3-71.5. - Division of Demolition. 
[Added 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. 15-104 ] 
A.  Creation of the Division of Demolition: Director in charge. There is hereby created within the Department of Public Works a Division of Demolition, the head of which shall be the Director of the Division of Demolition. 
B.  Division of Demolition: functions. Under the direction and supervision of the Director of the Department of Public Works, the Division of Demolition shall: 
(1)  Demolish buildings and structures as requested by the City's Construction Code Official and/or the Municipal Engineer: 
(2)  Maintain accurate records concerning the cost of labor and materials expended in order to demolish each building and forward a statement of costs to the Tax Collector so as to enable the filing of a lien should reimbursement for such costs from the private owner, not be forthcoming.  
§ 3-71.6. - Division of Solid Waste/Recycling. 
[Added 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. 15-104 ] 
A.  Creation of the Division of Solid Waste Recycling: Director in charge. There is hereby created within the Department of Public Works a Division of Solid Waste Recycling, the head of which shall be the Director of the Division of Solid Waste/Recycling. 
B.  Division of Solid Waste Recycling: functions. Under the direction and supervision of the Director of the Department of Public Works, the Division of Solid Waste/Recycling shall: 
(1)  Implement the existing Solid Waste Recycling Program, a copy of which is on file in the office of the City Clerk, concerning the collection and disposal of all materials generated within the City from any residential, commercial or municipal property.  
§ 3-71.7. - Division of Graffiti Removal. 
[Added 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. 15-104 ] 
A.  Creation of the Division of Graffiti Removal: Director in charge. There is hereby created within the Department of Public Works a Division of Graffiti Removal, the head of which shall be the Director of the Division of Graffiti Removal. 
B.  Division of Graffiti Removal: functions. Under the direction and supervision of the Director of the Department of Public Works, the Division of Graffiti Removal shall: 
(1)  Remove graffiti from municipal, commercial and residential dwellings.  
§ 3-71.8. - Division of Sanitation. 
[Added 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. 15-104 ] 
A.  Creation of the Division of Sanitation: Director in charge. There is hereby created within the Department of Public Works a Division of Sanitation, the head of which shall be the Director of the Division of Sanitation. 
B.  Division of Sanitation: functions. Under the direction and supervision of the Director of the Department of Public Works. The Division of Sanitation shall: 
(1)  Plow snow, spread salt, and remove snow; 
(2)  Install public litter baskets and receptacles at locations to be designated by the City Business Administrator or his designee; 
(3)  Sweep and clean designated City streets by use of mechanical street sweeping equipment in accordance with the current City schedule and practice; 
(4)  Remove and dispose of refuse from public litter baskets and receptacles, and from City-owned lots and from within City-owned vacant buildings; 
(5)  Remove and dispose of refuse from streets and City-owned parking areas; 
(6)  Inspect and enforce sanitation ordinances and remove refuse from privately owned lots; 
(7)  Maintain accurate records concerning the cost of labor and materials it expends in order to remove refuse from each privately owned lot and forward a statement of costs to the Tax Collector so as to enable the City to file a lien and seek reimbursement for such costs from the private owners.  
ARTICLE X - Department of Housing, Economic Development and Commerce 
[Amended 10-27-1981 by Ord. No. MC-42; 7-22-1982 by Ord. No. MC-202; 9-27-1982 by Ord. No. MC-251; 4-12-1984 by Ord. No. MC-602; 6-13-1985 by Ord. No. MC-858; 9-26-1985 by Ord. No. MC-44; 9-26-1985 by Ord. No. C-421; 12-23-1985 by Ord. No. C-138; 1-9-1986 by Ord. No. C-142; 5-28-1987 by Ord. No. C-464; 12-23-1987 by Ord. No. C-644; 8-16-1989 by Ord. No. McC-3; 4-25-1990 by Ord. No. McC-127; 11-20-1990 by Ord. No. McC-221; 5-8-1991 by Ord. No. McC-307; 5-13-1992 by Ord. No. 92-048; 7-22-1992 by Ord. No. 92-066; 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050; 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
 
§ 3-72. - Department established; head. 
A.  There shall be a Department of Housing, Economic Development and Commerce, the head of which shall be the Director of Housing, Economic Development and Commerce. The Director shall be the city liaison with the Jersey City Housing Authority and Jersey City Redevelopment Agency and may serve as Chief Executive Officer of either or both agencies. 
B.  The Director of Housing, Economic Development and Commerce shall also act as Chief Planning and Zoning Officer of the city.  
§ 3-73. - Director of Housing, Economic Development and Commerce; functions. 
The Director of Housing, Economic Development and Commerce shall exercise the following functions formerly assigned to the Office of Planning: 
A.  Advise the Mayor, Municipal Council and city departments and agencies in matters relating to the physical, social and economic development or redevelopment of the city. 
B.  Assist the Director of the Department of Health and Human Services and the Business Administrator in coordinating the planning program with other city departments and agencies. 
C.  Assist in the preparation of the capital budget. 
D.  Serve as consultant to the Planning Board. 
E.  Coordinate special planning studies to be made by the Urban Research and Design Division — Division of City Planning or contractors, as authorized by the Municipal Council. 
F.  Review requests for variances made to the Board of Adjustment and provide that body and the Municipal Council with recommendations.  
§ 3-74. - Organization of Department. 
[Amended 11-7-01 by Ord. No. 01-121; 9-12-2018 by Ord. No. 18-097 ] 
Within the Department of Housing, Economic Development and Commerce, there shall be the following divisions, offices, bureaus, and boards: 
A.  Division of Economic Development. 
B.  Division of Construction Code Official. 
(1)  Bureau of Plumbing Subcode Official. 
(2)  Bureau of Electrical Subcode Official. 
(3)  Bureau of Building Subcode Official. 
C.  Division of Housing Preservation. 
(1)  Office of Housing Code Enforcement. 
(2)  Office of Landlord/Tenant Relations. 
(a)  Bureau of Rent Leveling. 
(b)  Rent Leveling Board. 
D.  Division of Community Development. 
[Amended 12-23-1997 by Ord. No. 97-090] 
E.  Division of City Planning. 
(1)  Urban Research and Design. 
(2)  Planning Board. 
F.  Division of the Zoning Officer. 
G.  Division of Commerce. 
[Amended 12-23-1997 by Ord. No. 97-090]  
§ 3-75. - Division of Construction Code Official. 
A.  Creation of the Division of Construction Code Official. 
(1)  There is hereby created within the Department of Housing, Economic Development and Commerce the Division of Construction Code Official, the head of which shall be the Superintendent of Building. 
(2)  The Superintendent of Building shall be the Construction Code Official pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-126. 
B.  Division of Construction Code Official; functions. Under the direction and supervision of the Director of Housing, Economic Development and Commerce, the Division of Construction Code Official shall 
[Amended 4-27-2005 by Ord. No. 05-045; 11-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-172 ]: 
(1)  Administer and enforce the State Uniform Construction Code and conduct the centralized issuance of permits and inspection services in accordance with N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq. 
(2)  Administer and supervise the condemnation of properties in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.3 et seq. 
(3)  Supply a list of all condemned properties slated for demolition to the Division of Engineering, Traffic and Transportation. 
(4)  Coordinate the demolition of condemned properties with the Division of Engineering, Traffic and Transportation, duly licensed according to law. 
(5)  Administer permits of street openings for the purposes of connecting residential dwellings to municipal sewer and water utilities in accordance with § 296-20 thru 296-51. 
Cross reference— Enforcing agency established, § 131-1.  
§ 3-76. - Division of Economic Development. 
A.  Creation of the Division of Economic Development; Director of Economic Development in charge. There is hereby created within the Department of Housing, Economic Development and Commerce the Division of Economic Development, the head of which shall be the Director of Economic Development. 
B.  Division of Economic Development; functions. Under the direction and supervision of the Director of Housing, Economic Development and Commerce, the Division of Economic Development shall: 
(1)  Design and implement campaigns to attract industrial, commercial and other economic development into the city. 
(2)  Undertake an inventory and the securing and promotion of sites whose development is to the economic benefit of the city. 
(3)  Assist prospective developers in securing financing for development projects. 
(4)  Arrange and coordinate city services necessary for specific economic development projects. 
(5)  Keep appropriate statistics and data to indicate trends in economic development and make evaluations and recommendations concerning the same. 
(6)  Review and make recommendations concerning economic development aspects of the Comprehensive Master Plan of the city. 
(7)  Coordinate the city's economic development efforts with those of other governmental bodies and agencies. 
(8)  Administer all federal, state, county and local aid programs pertaining to economic development in the city, except as otherwise provided by law. 
C.  Required wage, benefit and leave standards for building service workers on covered development projects. 
[Added 7-18-2012 by Ord. No. 12-090 ] 
(1)  Definitions. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, "covered developer" means any person receiving economic development financial assistance or a tax abatement pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq., or the Five-Year Exemption and Abatement Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:21-l et seq., in relation to a cover development project or a tax abated project, and includes any lessee or assignee of a covered developer or successor in interest of real property that qualifies as a covered development project. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section, "not-for-profit organization" means an entity that is either incorporated as a not-for-profit corporation under the laws of the state of its incorporation or exempt from federal income tax pursuant to subdivision (c)(3) of section five hundred of the United States internal revenue code. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, "City" shall include but not be limited to the Mayor, the Business Administrator, any City agency, not-for-profit organization, public benefit corporation, or other entity that provides or administers economic development benefits on behalf of the City. 
(d)  For the purposes of this section, "covered development project" means a project undertaken by the city for the purpose of improvement or development of real property, economic development job retention or growth, or other similar purposes where the project has received or is expected to receive financial assistance. 
(e)  For the purposes of this section, "economic development financial assistance" means assistance with an anticipated total value of at least one million dollars that is provided in whole or in part by the city to a business organization for the improvement or development of real property, economic development job retention and growth, or other similar purposes. Financial assistance includes, but is not limited to, cash payments or grants, bond financing, tax exemptions, tax increment financing, filing fee waivers, energy cost reductions, environmental remediation costs, write-downs in the market value of building, land, or leases, or the cost of capital improvements related to real property that under ordinary circumstances, the city would not pay for. Where assistance takes the form of leasing city property at below-market lease rates, the value of the assistance shall be determined based on the total difference between the lease rate and a fair market lease rate over the duration of the lease. Where assistance takes the form of loans or bond financing, the value of the assistance shall be determined based on the difference between the financing cost to a borrower and the cost to a similar borrower that does not receive financial assistance from a city economic development entity. For the purposes of this section, "economic development financial assistance" does not include Community Development Block Grants or Community Services Block Grants funded by the federal government, Urban Enterprise funding or Choice/HOME Program funds. 
(f)  For the purposes of this section, "Tax Abated Project" means a project that has a total construction cost that is equal to or exceeds twenty-five million dollars ($25,000,000.00) exclusive of any land acquisition costs, for which the City has granted a tax abatement pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq., or the Five-Year Exemption and Abatement Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1 et seq. However, any project that is being undertaken by a not-for-profit organization or which shall contain more than fifty percent (50%) affordable housing, shall also be excluded. 
(g)  For the purposes of this section, the "standard hourly rate of pay" shall be 150% of the federal minimum wage, or the hourly rate of pay for work performed within the city under the collective bargaining agreement covering the largest number of hourly non-supervisory employees employed within Hudson County in the relevant classification, provided the collective bargaining agreement covers no less than two hundred (200) employees in the classification, whichever is higher. 
(h)  For the purposes of this section, "standard benefits" shall be an hourly supplement furnished by a contractor to an employee in one of the following ways: 1) in the from of health benefits that cost the employer the entire required hourly supplemental amount to provide; 2) by providing a portion of the supplement in the form of health benefits and the balance in cash; or 3) by providing the entire supplement in cash. The required hourly supplemental rate shall be equal to the monetary value of the benefits provided by the collective bargaining agreement covering the largest number of hourly non-supervisory employees employed within Hudson County in the relevant classification, provided the collective bargaining agreement covers no less than two hundred (200) employees in the classification. If there is no such collective bargaining agreement, "standard benefits" shall be an additional 20% of the employee's hourly rate of pay provided as a supplement to cover health benefits. For the purposes of this section, "health benefits" shall not include workers compensation insurance, nor shall it include the value of any benefit for which an employee is eligible but for which no payment is actually made by a contractor to the employee or to any other party on the employee's behalf because the employee either does not actually utilize or does not elect to receive the benefit for any reason. 
(2)  Every covered developer shall be required to ensure that all janitors and unarmed security guards employed at Covered Development Projects and Tax Abated Projects, including any and all tenants or subtenants of the covered developer, shall be paid not less than the standard hourly rate of pay and benefits for their respective classifications and shall be provided with paid leave in accordance with the provisions of the Jersey City Municipal Code Section 3-51 G(1). Every contract signed by the City for Covered Development Projects and Tax Abated Projects with a business organization shall contain a provision stating the standard hourly rate of pay, the standard benefits and paid leave for janitors and unarmed security guards employed at the premises for which the economic development financial assistance is provided. Such contracts shall contain a stipulation that those workers shall be and/or have been paid not less than the standard hourly rate of pay, shall receive no less than the standard benefits and shall be provided with paid leave in accordance with the provisions of Jersey City Municipal Code Section 3-51 G(1). The obligation of a contractor to pay the standard benefits may be discharged by furnishing the standard benefits 1) in the form of health benefits that cost the employer at least $3.10 an hour to provide; 2) by providing a portion of the standard benefit in the form of health benefits and the balance in cash; or 3) by providing $3.10 an hour in cash over and above the standard hourly rate. This provision shall be included in any lease of the covered developer or its tenants and subtenants to insure that the provisions of this ordinance shall apply regardless of whether the janitors or unarmed security guards are directly or indirectly employed by the business organization receiving the economic development financial assistance. The contract shall provide for annual adjustments of the standard rate of pay and benefits during the term of the contract. 
(3)  For the purposes of this section, the annual adjustments of the hourly rate of pay and benefits shall be made in the following way. The annually adjusted hourly rate of pay shall be the previous hourly rate of pay increased by the annual percentage difference between the current New York Metropolitan Area Consumer Price Index (CPI) for all items for All Urban Consumers and the same CPI for same month of the previous year, or the hourly rate of pay for work performed within the city under the collective bargaining agreement covering the largest number of hourly non-supervisory employees employed within Hudson County in the relevant classification, provided the collective bargaining agreement covers no less than two hundred (200) employees in the classification, whichever is higher. The benefit rate shall be annually adjusted accordingly. 
(4)  Reporting. All contracts signed by the City for Covered Development Projects or Tax Abated Projects shall require the submission to the business administrator of an annual certification by the covered developer executed under penalty of perjury that all janitors and unarmed security guards employed at a city development project or a tax abated project by the covered developer or under contract or lease or sublease with the covered developer to perform janitorial or security services will be and/or have been paid the standard wage and provided with standard benefits and standard leave for the relevant classifications. Such certification shall include a record of the days and hours worked and the wages and benefits paid to each janitor or unarmed security guards employed at the city development project or under contract with the covered developer. Such certification shall be certified by the chief executive or chief financial officer of the covered developer, or the designee of any such person. A violation of any provision of the certification, or failure to provide such certification, shall constitute a violation of this section. 
(5)  Record keeping. Each covered developer shall maintain original payroll records for each janitor and unarmed security reflecting the days and hours worked, and the wages paid and benefits provided for such hours worked, and shall retain such records for at least six years after the janitorial or security work is performed. The covered developer may satisfy this requirement by obtaining copies of records from the employer or employers of such employees. Failure to maintain such records as required shall create a rebuttable presumption that the janitors or unarmed security guards were not paid the wages and benefits required under this section. Upon written request of the city, the covered developer shall provide a certified original payroll record within ten (10) days of the date of the request. 
(6)  Site access. Representatives of the city shall be permitted to have appropriate access to all covered development projects in order to monitor compliance. 
(7)  The requirements of this section shall apply for the term of the economic development financial assistance or tax abatement for ten years from the date that the financially assisted project is substantially complete which ordinarily means the date of the issuance of the first certificate of occupancy for the project or for the duration of any written agreement between the city and a covered developer providing for financial assistance, whichever is longer. 
(8)  Right of action for janitors and unarmed security guards. Violation of this provisions shall constitute a breach of the standard wage and benefit and paid leave provisions of the contract by the business organization receiving the economic development subsidy and such provisions shall be considered to be a contract for the benefit of the building service workers upon which such workers shall have the right to maintain action for the difference between the standard hourly rate of pay, benefits and paid leave and the rates of pay, benefits and paid leave actually received by them, and including attorney's fees. 
(9)  Penalties. In the event of a failure to comply with the provisions of this section, the covered developer shall be provided with a written notice of failure to comply allowing the covered developer ten (10) days to 'cure' the failure to comply. If the covered developer fails to timely cure, then in addition to any other remedies available at law or in equity including termination of the contract the City shall be permitted to seek the following remedies for the failure to comply with this ordinance: 
(a)  A material breach of any term a) an increase in the amount of the annual service charge of one percent (1%) of the estimated annual payment until the breach is cured; or b) a payment to the City of an amount equal to the greater of two percent (2%) of the annual value of the economic development subsidy or two-tenths of a percent (0.2%) of the total value of the economic development subsidy: 
(b)  A material breach of this section that continues for a period of six (6) months or more, shall allow the City to terminate the tax abatement or economic development subsidy. 
(10)   The Director of Economic Development shall maintain a list of business organizations that have received economic development assistance that shall include, where a written agreement between the city and a business organization providing for financial assistance is targeted to particular real property, the address of each such property. Such list shall be updated and published as often as is necessary to keep it current. The Director of Economic Development's failure to include a business organization on the list shall not excuse the business organization from its obligations under this section.  
§ 3-77. - (Reserved)  
§ 3-78. - Division of Housing Preservation. 
[Added 9-12-2018 by Ord. No. 18-097 ] 
A.  Creation of the Division of Housing Preservation; Director of Housing Preservation in charge. There is hereby created within the Department of Housing, Economic Development and Commerce the Division of Housing Preservation, the head of which shall be the Director of Housing Preservation. 
B.  Division of Housing Preservation; functions. Under the supervision of the Director of Housing Preservation, the Division of Housing Preservation shall administer the following: 
(1)  Through the Office of Housing Code Enforcement, administer and enforce the Property Maintenance Code Chapter 254 and ordinances which relate to housing and neighborhoods as may be assigned to it for administration. 
(2)  Through the Office of Landlord/Tenant Relations, administer, and enforce the Rent Control Ordinance Chapter 260; provide education, information and referrals to city residents in connection with Landlord/Tenant related issues; provide appropriate personnel to attend all meetings of the Rent Leveling Board; and assist the Rent Leveling Board in its duties. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18-097 , adopted September 12, 2018, amended the Code by repealing former § 3-78 and adding a new § 3-78. Former § 3-78 pertained to the Division of Tenant/Landlord Relations, and derived from the Ord. No. C-421, adopted September 26, 1985; Ord. No. C-464, adopted May 28, 1987; and Ord. No. McC-307, adopted May 8, 1991.  
§ 3-79. - Division of Community Development. 
[Amended 12-23-1997 by Ord. No. 97-090] 
A.  Creation of the Division of Community Development; Director of Community Development in charge. There is hereby created within the Department of Housing, Economic Development and Commerce, the Division of Community Development, the head of which shall be the Director of Community Development. 
B.  The functions of the Division of Community Development shall be as follows: 
(1)  To coordinate and administer local, state and federal funding applications and grant awards for affordable housing, social service and community development programs. 
(2)  To provide technical assistance and advice to developers and entities involved in the production of affordable housing and/or the creation of commercial, industrial and economic opportunities on a neighborhood basis. 
(3)  To encourage, provide and assist in the production and rehabilitation of residential housing for the primary benefit of low-, moderate- and middle-income families. 
(4)  To make recommendations to other municipal departments, divisions, bodies or agencies on implications for the production of affordable housing, the delivery of social services and redevelopment of neighborhoods. 
(5)  Assist other municipal departments, divisions and autonomous agencies in identifying and applying for new grant sources from the state and federal government. 
(6)  Review the suitability, conditions and requirements of grant opportunities and coordinate and monitor all stages of the grant process, including the execution, administration and closeout of all grants. 
(7)  Maintain files and official records pertaining to all city grants. 
(8)  Monitor compliance and enhance the terms and conditions of any grants upon attached city departments and subrecipients. 
(9)  Arrange for and participate in audits of all grants and subgrantee agreements. 
(10)   Maintain and distribute informational materials on the accomplishments and availability of grant programs.  
§ 3-80. - Division of City Planning. 
A.  Creation of the Division of City Planning; Director of City Planning in charge. Under the direction and supervision of the Director of Housing, Economic Development and Commerce, the Division of City Planning is established, the head of which shall be the Director of City Planning. 
B.  Division of City Planning; functions. The function of the Division of City Planning is to assist the Director of Housing, Economic Development and Commerce in carrying out his or her duties as Chief Planning Officer for the city. This will include research, data collection, preparation of policy analysis, grants research, grants applications, urban design, neighborhood planning and such other assignments within the discretion of the Director of Housing, Economic Development and Commerce functioning as the Chief Planning Officer. 
C.  Fees and charges. 
(1)  Photocopying fees and fees for documents on file in the Division of City Planning shall be as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges. 
(2)  Copies of Planning Board, Board of Adjustment or Historic District Commission agendas shall be available for no charge if picked up in person at the Division's offices. Copies requested to be mailed shall be available for a charge as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges, payable in advance, for any single agenda. Anyone wishing to be placed upon a yearly mailing list pursuant to N.J.S.A. 10:4-19 shall provide a prepayment as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges, for Planning Board agendas, Board of Adjustment agendas and Historic District Commission agendas. 
(3)  The cost of handling and postage shall be covered by the copying cost for the mailing of items weighing two ounces or less. Any additional postage costs for items over this limit shall be payable on a direct basis by the individual requesting such mailing. 
(4)  Any documents removed from the office of City Planning for copying elsewhere shall be available at a rate as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges, which fee must be deposited in advance. A minimum of two days' fee shall be charged.  
§ 3-81. - Division of the Zoning Officer. 
Under the direction and supervision of the Director of Housing, Economic Development and Commerce, the Division of the Zoning Officer shall administer Chapter 345, Zoning, of the City of Jersey City.  
§ 3-82. - (Reserved)[20] 
Footnotes: 
--- (20) --- 
Editor's Note: Former § 3-82, Division of Redevelopment, was repealed 12-23-1997 by Ord. No. 97-090. 
 
§ 3-82.1. - Division of Commerce. 
A.  Creation of the Division of Commerce; Director of the Division of Commerce in charge. There is hereby created within the Department of Housing, Economic Development and Commerce the Division of Commerce, the head of which shall be the Director of the Division of Commerce. 
B.  Division of Commerce; functions. The Division of Commerce shall: 
(1)  Administer the applicable licensing provisions of the Jersey City Code, except as otherwise provided for by general law, including the receiving of applications and payments for all licenses, provided that the Director of Housing, Economic Development and Commerce may direct specified applications or payments to be made to other departments or administrative units of the city as may best serve the public convenience, and the assigning of applications to the proper department or administrative unit for investigation and report, and upon approval, where necessary, of any application by the authorized department or administration unit, the Division shall issue the license to the applicant, provided that all other qualifications required of the applicant are met. 
(2)  Issue city licenses and collect such fees as approved by the Board of Alcoholic Beverage Control, under Chapter 84, Alcoholic Beverages, of the Jersey City Code and issue all licenses and collect all fees previously administered by the Treasurer or the Supervisor of Licenses. 
(3)  The Division of Commerce may, if so directed by the Director of Housing, Economic Development and Commerce or the Director of the Division Commerce, perform the investigation and issue the report referred to in Subsection B(1) of this section and may issue the approval referred to in Subsection B(1) of this section. 
(4)  Review applications for taxi driver hack licenses and bus driver hack licenses. 
(5)  Review applications for permits for the operation of taxicabs within the City of Jersey City in accordance with the Jersey City Code. 
(6)  Supervise the collection of franchise taxes payable to the City of Jersey City and keep daily and monthly reports. 
(7)  Administer the insurance requirements of the New Jersey Department of Insurance relating to taxicabs and buses. 
(8)  Conduct hearings on complaints against holders of taxicabs and bus licenses and forward any adverse ruling, including the revocation of taxicab and bus licenses, to the Director of Public Safety and the Director of Housing, Economic Development and Commerce. [ Amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] 
(9)  Perform all the functions authorized in Chapter 319, Towers and Towing, except that the Director of the Division of Commerce or the Director of Housing, Economic Development and Commerce may direct that certain enforcement activities or functions authorized by Chapter 332, Vehicles and Traffic, be undertaken by the Division of Commerce or by some other appropriate department or administrative unit. 
(10)   Review applications for public weighmasters. 
(11)   Enforce the applicable licensing provisions of the Jersey City Code, except as otherwise provided for by general law. Enforcement shall include the investigation of applications for licenses, when the Director of Housing, Economic Development and Commerce or the Director of the Division of Commerce shall assign such investigation and shall also review the conduct of regular investigations to ensure that the licensing provisions of the Jersey City Code are being complied with throughout the city. 
(12)   Have those powers and undertake those responsibilities established by N.J.S.A. 51:1-1 et seq., including but not limited to: 
(a)  The inspection, testing, adjusting and the sealing or condemnation of all commercial scales and measuring devices in use by wholesale and retail establishments dealing with the general public. 
(b)  The testing and sealing of gasoline pumps. 
(c)  The calibration of fuel tank trucks. 
(d)  The testing of liquid measures, oil meters, laundry scales, heavy-duty truck scales and all types of scales and measuring devices in general use. 
(e)  The investigation and reporting on applications for public weighmasters. 
(f)  The investigation of complaints of violations and presentation of evidence thereof in municipal courts. 
(g)  The issuance of solid fuel and live poultry licenses. 
(13)   Conduct mechanical inspections of taxicabs and buses and enforce all provisions of the New Jersey Statutes, regulations of the Public Utility Commission and ordinances of the City of Jersey City relating to taxicabs, buses and school buses. 
(14)   Undertake such enforcement activities as the Director of Housing, Economic Development and Commerce or the Director of Commerce shall direct, pursuant to Chapter 319, Towers and Towing.  
§ 3-82.2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18-097 , adopted September 12, 2018, amended the Code by repealing former § 3-82.2, which pertained to the Division of Housing Code Enforcement, and derived from Ord. No. 01-121, adopted November 7, 2001.  
§ 3-82.3. - Community Service Block Grant Board. 
[Added 3-10-2010 by Ord. No. 10-012] 
A.  Community Service Block Grant Board established. There is hereby established a Community Service Block Grant Board which shall be reconstituted and continued in the Department of Housing, Economic Development and Commerce. 
B.  Membership on the Administering Board shall consist of the following three members: 
(1)  Public Official: An elected or public official, member of the City Council, or their designee. 
(2)  Representative of low income individuals and families: The Jersey City Tenants Affairs Board shall be entitled to elect one representative. 
(3)  Private Representation: One member shall be selected who is representative of major groups and interests in the community served. 
C.  Appointment of Members. All members other than the representative of the Jersey City Tenants Affairs Board shall be appointed by the Mayor and all members shall serve for a term of two years which may be renewed once, but total service not to exceed six years, except public officials who shall serve the term of their elected public offices. 
D.  Administering Board. The Administering Board shall have the following powers: 
(1)  To organize itself adopt rules and procedures for its internal organization. 
(2)  To review and make recommendations to the Department of Housing, Economic Development and Commerce to federal, state and private agencies for social services. 
(3)  To review and make recommendations to the Department of Housing, Economic Development and Commerce and the Municipal Council upon existing social services programs under the auspices of the Department of Housing, Economic Development and Commerce. 
(4)  To participate in the development of programs designed to serve low income individuals and families. 
(5)  To advise the Municipal Council in social service policies and standards and program and administrative and financial policies. 
(6)  The Director of the Department of Housing, Economic Development and Commerce is authorized to assist the Administering Board in fulfilling its responsibilities.  
ARTICLE XI - Department of Public Safety[21] 

Footnotes: 
--- (21) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13-081, adopted September 11, 2013, amended the Code by repealing Art. XI, §§ 3-83—3-92, with the exception of § 3-85.1, and replacing it with a new Art. XI. Former Art. XI pertained to the Department of Police, and derived from Ord. No. S-345, adopted February 19, 1980; Ord. No. S-389, adopted April 22, 1980; Ord. No. MC-53, adopted October 27, 1981; Ord. No. MC-104, adopted January 14, 1982; Ord. No. MC-101, adopted February 11, 1982; Ord. No. MC-407, adopted May 12, 1983; Ord. No. MC-361, adopted September 22, 1983; Ord. No. MC-566, adopted February 23, 1984; Ord. No. MC-707, adopted September 26, 1984; Ord. No. MC-789, adopted February 14, 1985; Ord. No. C-50, adopted September 25, 1985; Ord. No. C-48, adopted November 27, 1985; Ord. No. C-663, adopted February 11, 1988; Ord. No. C-663A, adopted February 25, 1988; Ord. No. C-894, adopted February 23, 1989; Ord. No. McC-213, adopted October 10, 1990; Ord. No. McC-287, adopted February 27, 1991; Ord. No. 92-009, adopted March 11, 1992; Ord. No. 92-058, adopted June 10, 1992; Ord. No. 95-050, adopted June 14, 1995; Ord. No. 04-141, adopted November 23, 2004; and Ord. No. 04-146, adopted January 12, 2005. 
 
§ 3-83. - Department created; head; divisions. 
[Added 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] 
There is hereby established the Department of Public Safety, the head of which shall be the Director of Public Safety. The Department of Public Safety shall consist of the Division of Police, the Division of Fire and Emergency Services, and the Division of Communication and Technology.  
§ 3-84. - Director of Public Safety. 
[Added 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] 
A.  The Director of Public Safety shall be qualified by training and experience for the duties of the position and shall have the following qualifications, unless said qualifications are waived by affirmative vote of at least two-thirds of the entire Council: a minimum of ten (10) years experience as a member of a police department, fire department or other law enforcement agency, five years of which shall have been in a supervisory and administrative capacity. 
B.  The Director of Public Safety shall be responsible for the administration, regulation and discipline of the Division of Police, Division of Fire, Division of Communications and Technology, and Division of Parking Enforcement. [Amended 11-12-2014 by Ord. No. 14-017 ] 
C.  The Director of the Department of Public Safety can appoint an Assistant Director and assign such person duties as desired. The person appointed as Assistant Director of Public Safety shall be qualified by training and experience for the duties of the position. The person shall not be appointed unless he or she meets the following minimum qualifications, unless said qualifications are waived by affirmative vote of at least two-thirds of the entire Council: a minimum of ten (10) years experience as a member of a police department, fire department or other law enforcement agency, five years of which shall have been in a supervisory and administrative capacity. 
If the experience of the Director is as a member of a police department, then the experience of the Assistant Director shall be as a member of a fire department. If the experience of the Director is as a member of a fire department, then the experience of the Assistant Director shall be as a member of a police department. 
D.  The Director of Public Safety shall report to the Mayor with recommendations related to conditions of the Department and its improvements and needs. 
E.  The Director may employ special law-enforcement officers in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A: 14-146.8 et. seq., "Special Law Enforcement Act;" 
F.  The Director of Public Safety shall: 
(1)  Keep abreast of the public safety requirements of the City and formulate policies, plans and procedures to determine needs: 
(2)  Develop organization, manpower and resource recommendations and, upon approval of same, effect their implementation; 
(3)  Establish performance criteria for the Department as a whole as well as its individual members and conduct periodic evaluations to assure compliance with those criteria; 
(4)  Establish and maintain relations with school, civil and private organizations to assure a full understanding of the public safety effort; 
(5)  Conduct public relations and public information programs on behalf of the Department in order to maintain the required relationship between the department and the citizens of the City of Jersey City; 
(6)  Promote a close liaison with the various agencies of the City of Jersey City, and to attend meetings of the City Council to better coordinate the functioning of the Division of Police. Division of Fire, and Division of Communications and Technology with the work of all municipal agencies. 
(7)  Regularly review the ordinances of the City of Jersey City dealing with public safety.  
SUB-ARTICLE I - Division of Police 
 
§ 3-85. - Creation of the Division of Police; Police Chief in charge. 
[Added 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] 
There shall be a Division of Police, the head of which shall be the Chief of Police. 
A.  Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:69A-60.7. the Mayor may appoint a Chief of Police who shall have served as a superior police officer and possess at least five years' administrative and supervisory police experience. 
B.  Under the direction of the Director of Public Safety, the Chief of Police shall: 
(1)  Administer and enforce rules and regulations and special emergency directives for the disposition and discipline of the force and its officers and personnel. 
(2)  Have, exercise. and discharge the functions, powers and duties of the division. 
(3)  Prescribe the duties and assignments of all subordinates and other personnel. 
(4)  Delegate such authority as necessary for the efficient operation of the division. 
(5)  Report at least monthly to the Director of Public Safety in such form as shall be prescribed by the Director on the operation of the division during the preceding month, and make such other reports as may be requested.  
§ 3-85.1 - Off-duty employment.[22] 
[Amended 1-26-2011 by Ord. No. 11-011; 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ; 12-18-2013 by Ord. No. 13-141 ] 
A.  Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
(1)  "Alcohol Beverage Control premise" means one which is licensed by the Alcohol Beverage Control Board. 
(2)  "Director of Public Safety" means the Director of Public Safety or his or her designee. 
(3)  "City Owned Facility" means any property owned by the City of Jersey City rented by individuals or entities for the purpose of a privately held function. 
(4)  "Large Commercial Establishment" means a commercial establishment such as a store, bank or financial institution of four thousand (4,000) square feet or more or one (1) which is part of a franchise, chain or multi-store complex. 
(5)  "Construction Sites": 
(a)  "City Projects" means any construction project performed by a vendor pursuant to a contract with the City of Jersey City for a public project in City-owned or leased buildings or on City-owned or leased properties. 
(b)  "Private Contractor Projects" means: 
(i)  Any construction project other than a City Project as defined above; and 
(ii)  Construction projects for an owner occupied class 2 residential property (one (1) to four (4) units). 
(6)  "Employer" or "prospective employer" means a prospective employer of off-duty officers. 
(7)  "Event requiring major or unusual crowd control" means: 
(a)  An event where five thousand (5,000) people or more expected to attend, such as an athletic event; and 
(b)  Any event where alcohol will be served; and 
(c)  Any event which in the opinion of the Director Public Safety will produce an unusual amount of vehicular or pedestrian traffic. 
(8)  "Film Production Sites" include, but are not limited to, movie sets, television productions, and photography. 
(9)  "Holidays" are defined only as New Years Eve, New Years Day, Good Friday, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, the day following Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Eve and Christmas Day, and only those dates officially observed. 
(10)   "Person" means any individual, corporation, partnership or organization unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
(11)   "Superior Officer" means Sergeant, Lieutenant, or Captain. 
(12)   "Tax Exempt Organization" means a non-profit organization as defined by state or federal law. 
(13)   "Crossing Guards" means City personnel who regulate and direct the movement of pedestrians through traffic. 
(14)   "Off-Duty Personnel" shall mean Police Officers and Guards if applicable, Crossing Guards. 
(15)   "Office of Off-Duty Employment" means the office responsible for coordinating off-duty assignments and billing of off-duty police work. 
(16)   "Off-Duty Employment Intake Manager" means the civilian employee of the Public Safety Department who manages off-duty personnel requests and coordinates the number of off-duty personnel assigned to each work site, the Off-Duty Employment Intake Management reports to the Director of Public Safety. 
(17)   "Off-Duty Billing Coordinator" means the civilian employee of the Public Safety Department who administers the Off-Duty Trust Account. The Off-Duty Billing Coordinator reports to the Off-Duty Intake Manager and submits a report on the Off-Duty Trust Account to the Director of Public Safety and the Fiscal Officer every ninety (90) days. 
B.  Purpose. For the convenience of those persons who utilize the services of off-duty personnel of the Jersey City Police Department, and to authorize the outside employment of Police Officers and Crossing Guards while off-duty, the City of Jersey City hereby establishes this policy. With regard to Police Officers only, this policy complies with Attorney General Formal Opinion 1977-No. 23. In limited situations involving pedestrian safety, Crossing Guards may be substituted for Police Officers at the discretion of the Off-Duty Employment Intake Manager. 
(1)  Off-duty personnel, at their option, shall be permitted to accept employment from private employers, who are separate and independent from the City of Jersey City, only during off-duty hours and at such time as will not interfere with the efficient performance of regularly scheduled or emergency duty of the City; provided, however, that no off-duty personnel may work within a premises licensed by the Alcohol Beverage Board, including, but not limited to, bars, taverns, nightclubs that serve alcoholic beverages, liquor stores, or restaurants with liquor licenses. Off-duty personnel are not permitted on the "licensed premise" itself, which is the area licensed for alcohol consumption, retail sale or storage; provided further that no off-duty personnel may accept off-duty employment under this ordinance by any governmental agency of the City of Jersey City other than the Jersey City Housing Authority. 
(2)  Prospective employers of off-duty personnel shall: 1) obtain the prior written approval of the Off-Duty Employment Intake Manager, which approval shall be granted if, in the opinion of the Off-Duty Employment Intake Manager, under the authority of the Director of Public Safety, such employment is necessary and would not be inconsistent with the efficient functioning and good reputation of the Police Department and would not unreasonably endanger or threaten the safety of the off-duty personnel who are to perform the work. 
(3)  Upon approval by the Off-Duty Employment Intake Manager, the amount estimated to pay for the off-duty employment shall be deposited in the trust account established under subsection C. 
(4)  No off-duty personnel shall be paid directly by any employer for requested services, nor provide services for more hours than specified in the request for services. 
(5)  The Director of Public Safety is empowered to promulgate regulations and policies to effectuate this section. 
C.  Trust account established. [Amended 9-10-2014 by Ord. No. 14-092 ] 
(1)  To assure the timely payment of wages to off-duty personnel who perform off-duty work, and to meet the requirements of the Fair Labor Standards Act, the City of Jersey City has established a trust account known as the "Off-Duty Employment Trust Account." This trust account is dedicated for the receipt of fees collected for the payment for off-duty employment. The "Off-Duty Employment Trust Account" shall be administered by the Off-Duty Billing Coordinator who shall make a written report to the Director of Public Safety and the Fiscal Officer every ninety (90) days regarding said account. Payments to off-duty personnel shall be on a biweekly basis with all appropriate deductions. All payments must be remitted directly to the City of Jersey City for said account. Deposits shall be in the form of certified check, bank check, money order, business check, credit card or electronic payment at the discretion of the Fiscal Officer. 
(2)  Hour estimate: 
(a)  Hours Known: A prospective employer of off-duty personnel shall estimate the number of hours and days required. The estimate shall be approved in writing by the Off-Duty Employment Intake Manager and an amount sufficient to cover the rates of compensation and administrative fees set forth in subsection D for the total estimated hours of service shall be deposited into the Trust Account. 
(b)  Hours Unknown or In Excess of Ten (10) Days: In any instance where the number of hours cannot be reasonably estimated or is anticipated to be in excess of ten (10) days, a prospective employer shall deposit an amount sufficient to cover the rate of compensation and administrative fees set forth in subsection D for the equivalent of ten (10) days prior to the commencement of any services. Any unused portion of the deposit shall be returned or credited against the final amount owed. 
(3)  Before posting any request for services of off-duty personnel, the Off-Duty Employment Intake Manager shall verify that the balance in the trust account of the prospective employer is sufficient to cover the compensation and fees for the number of hours specified in the request. The Off-Duty Employment Intake Manager shall not post a request for services unless all fees and compensation required in the manner described above have been deposited in the trust account. 
(4)  Depletion of Funds in a Trust Account for any Individual Person or Entity: In the event the funds in any individual or entity's trust account should become depleted, services of off-duty personnel shall cease, and requests for further or future services shall not be posted until additional funds have been deposited in the trust account in the manner prescribed above. In the event of an unforeseen emergency situation that would require off-duty personnel to remain beyond the time for which funds have been posted, the Off-Duty Employment Intake Manager may waive the requirement for posting additional funds after the first ten (10) hours for any employer exhibiting a previous satisfactory payment history. However, payment for the additional hours shall be made within forty-eight (48) hours. 
(5)  A prospective employer shall be responsible for ensuring that sufficient funds remain in the trust account in order to avoid any interruption of services. In the event of a project which requires services over an extended period the Off-Duty Billing Coordinator may require advance payment equal to twenty-five (25) percent of the projected extended time period with additional twenty-five (25) percent advances as a project continues. 
(6)  Exemption. Public utility companies under the jurisdiction of, and regulated by, the New Jersey Board of Public Utilities and the Jersey City Housing Authority are exempt from the provisions set forth in this section requiring advance payment to the trust account; providing, however, that there are no amounts previously due that are outstanding for a period in excess of fifteen (15) days. Any such delinquent balances shall require advance payment of the amount outstanding prior to any off-duty personnel engaging in any further off-duty assignments. 
D.  Requests for services. 
[Amended 11-24-2015 by Ord. No. 15-152 ] 
(1)  Requests for the services of off-duty personnel for a period of one week or longer shall be forwarded to the Off-Duty Employment Intake Manager at least ten (10) days before such services are required. The Off-Duty Employment Intake Manager will compile a list of available Police Officers and/or Crossing Guards to perform the requested services. 
(2)  Requests for the services of off-duty personnel for a period of less than one (1) week shall be forwarded to the Off-Duty Employment Intake Manager as soon as practicable, but in no event less than twenty-four (24) hours before such services are required, except in emergency situations. 
(3)  In emergency situations, requests for services shall be made, as necessary, to the Off-Duty Employment Intake Manager who shall make every effort to accommodate such request in a reasonable manner in his or her discretion. If the emergency is imminent, the Director of Public Safety shall also have the ability to deploy off-duty personnel on an emergent basis. Any off-duty personnel, when so employed by private employers shall be compensated at the rates set forth in subsection D, hereafter. All payments in emergency situations shall be made within forty-eight (48) hours. Completed claim forms are to be provided to the Police Officer at the time the services are rendered and the Police Officer shall deliver same to the Off-Duty Employment Intake Manager. 
(4)  In the event an Off-Duty Police Officer or Crossing Guard is unavailable to perform an assignment, the Off-Duty Employment Intake Manager will notify the next available Police Officer(s) or Crossing Guard(s) on the off-duty assignment list of the availability of the assignment until the assignment is filled. A Police Officer need not accept an off-duty assignment that does not guarantee a minimum of four (4) hours of off-duty employment. However, a Police Officer, at his or her discretion, may accept an off-duty assignment that provides less than four (4) hours of off-duty employment. 
(5)  Off-duty supervisors will be assigned to supervise the deployed off-duty officers in accordance with the policy established by the Public Safety Director after ensuring sufficient funds are available. An off-duty superior officer's command is not limited to any one (1) specific project. The supervisor will be responsible for all off-duty police officers designated to his or her command irrespective of where those off-duty personnel are assigned. The cost of the off-duty supervisor shall come from the administrative fees paid by the employers. 
(6)  In special circumstances the Off-Duty Employment Intake Manager, may, in consultation with the Director of Public Safety, assign a supervisor to oversee a specific off-duty assignment if the Off-Duty Employment Intake Manager believes it is necessary to ensure the health, safety and welfare of the public. 
E.  Rates of compensation; administrative fees; payment for services. 
(1)  Rates of compensation for the services of off-duty personnel are established as follows: 
COMPENSATION FOR POLICE OFFICERS 
Construction Sites 	Commercial Establishments 	Tax Exempt Org 
CITY PROJECTS 
$35.00/hour 
SAT TIME & A HALF SUN-HOLIDAYS DOUBLE TIME AFTER 4 PM - Additional 
$10.00/hour 
  
PRIVATE CONTRACTORS 
As Defined in A5(b)(i) 
SAT TIME & A HALF SUN-HOLIDAYS DOUBLE TIME AFTER 4 PM - Additional $10.00/hour 
$50.00/hour 
  
PRIVATE CONTRACTORS 
As Defined in A5(b)(ii) 
$35.00/hour 	Banks or Financial Institutions 
$40.00/hour 
  
Other Commercial Establishments: 
OVER 4,000 SQ FT. 
$40.00/hour 
  
Other Commercial Establishments 
UNDER 4,000 SQ Ft. 
$25.00 	$35.00/hour 
 
Large Events Under 5,000 People 	Large Events Over 5,000 People 	Film Production Sites 
(Except City-Owned Facility Events) 
$50.00/Hour 
With alcohol present $55.00/hour 	$65.00 	$55.00/Hour 
 
Outside an Alcoholic Beverage Control Licensed Premise 		City Owned Facility 
$55.00/Hour 		$55.00/hour 
 
Compensation for Crossing Guards: For pedestrian safety $10.00/hour. 
*  Employers are not charged directly for Superior Officers assigned pursuant to this ordinance, or any regulations or directives promulgated in furtherance of this ordinance. Superior Officers will receive compensation directly from the City at a rate of $10.00 per hour higher than the highest paid off-duty Police Officer under his or her immediate supervision in a given off-duty assignment. 
***UNLESS STATED IN THE ABOVE TABLE, NO NIGHT, WEEKEND OR HOLIDAY DIFFERENTIAL*** 
(2)  Any off-duty assignments over eight (8) hours shall be paid at a time and a half rate beginning with the ninth hour. 
(3)  Fee for police vehicle and fuel per hour or part thereof: $10.00. The necessity for a police vehicle at a particular site will be at the determination of the Off-Duty Employment Intake Manager. 
F.  Administrative Costs. An additional fee of $12.00 per Police Officer/Crossing Guard per hour is hereby established to cover administrative costs, overhead and out-of-pocket expenses of the City. This additional fee shall not be charged to a nonprofit organization for an event in a City-owned building nor to the Jersey City Housing Authority. The aforesaid rates shall be reviewed every three (3) years commencing January 1, 2014. 
[Amended 11-24-2015 by Ord. No. 15-152 ] 
The Off-Duty Employment Intake Manager or the Director of Public Safety may adjust or waive the administrative fees in cases in which the fee here described would result in undue hardship, be prohibitive or would otherwise undermine the interest of public safety. 
G.  Cancellation. If a prospective employer fails to notify the Off-Duty Employment Intake Manager at least twelve (12) hours before the commencement of services that those services are no longer needed, and the off-duty Police Officer(s) or Crossing Guard(s) arrive for the assignment, the prospective employer shall compensate the Police Officer(s) or Crossing Guards for four (4) hours, and those off-duty Police Officer(s) or Crossing Guard(s) will be moved to another off-duty job, if available. 
H.  Public Emergency. The Director of Public Safety, Chief of Police, or ranking Chief of Patrol shall have the authority to order any off-duty personnel engaged in off-duty assignments to respond to an emergency. The Director of Public Safety may terminate an assignment whenever said assignment creates an unacceptable risk to the off-duty Police Officer or Crossing Guard or to the citizens of the City. If an off-duty assignment is cancelled or terminated by the Director of Public Safety, the employer shall not be responsible for any compensation or fees until the Police Officer or Crossing Guard returns to the assignment. 
Footnotes: 
--- (22) --- 
Note— Please see Traffic Barricade Manual, page 30, on file in the Office of the City Clerk and the Division of Engineering, Traffic and Transportation. 
 
§ 3-86. - Solicitations restricted. 
[Added 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] 
No member of the Department of Public Safety, Division of Police shall solicit or accept anything of value as consideration for or in connection with the discharge of his or her official duties. No such member shall solicit the sale of tickets in connection with any fund-raising campaign or request contributions directly or indirectly for the same or solicit anything of value for the benefit of himself or herself or other members of the Department of Public Safety, Division of Police or any other group or organization without written permission of the Director.  
§ 3-87. - Special law enforcement officers. 
[Added 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] 
A.  The Director of Public Safety shall have the power to appoint special law-enforcement officers in accordance with the provisions of the Special Law Enforcement Officers Act, N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.8 et seq. The compensation of such officers shall be determined by Executive Order of the Mayor of the City of Jersey City.  
§ 3-87.1. - Registry of private outdoor video surveillance cameras. 
[Added 6-29-2016 by Ord. No. 16-102 ] 
A.  Purpose. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 and 40:48-1.6 et seq., the City has established a voluntary registry of private outdoor video surveillance cameras under the direction of the Jersey City Police. The purpose is to aid local law enforcement in investigating criminal activity that occurred within the vicinity of the camera's location in a timely, efficient and effective manner. 
B.  Definitions. 
Private outdoor video surveillance camera or camera—A device installed outside a residence or business, which, for security purposes, captures footage of an area outside the residence or business. 
Registrant—A person who owns a residence or business within the City of Jersey City who registers a private outdoor video surveillance camera with the Jersey City Police pursuant to this Section. 
C.  Registration. 
1.  A person who owns a residence or business within the City of Jersey City may register a private outdoor video surveillance camera(s) with the Jersey City Police on a registry form approved by the Chief of Police. Registration of a private outdoor video surveillance camera with the Jersey City Police is not required by this Section and does not constitute a waiver of any rights granted under the Constitutions of the United States or the State of New Jersey. 
2.  The following information shall be included in the private outdoor video surveillance camera registry and obtained on registry forms approved by the Chief of Police: (1) the name of the person who owns the camera(s); (2) the most recent contact information, including the street address and telephone number of the person who owns the camera(s); (3) the street address of the residence or business where the camera(s) is/are installed; (4) the number of cameras located at the residence or business; (5) the outdoor areas recorded by the camera(s); (6) the means by which the camera's footage is saved or stored, and the duration of time for which the footage is saved or stored; and (7) any additional information deemed necessary by the Chief of Police as set forth on the registry form. 
D.  Regulations. 
1.  Information stored in the Jersey City Police private outdoor video surveillance camera registry and obtained on the registry forms pursuant to this Section shall be available for the exclusive use by law enforcement officials to investigate criminal activity within the vicinity of the camera's location(s). Information stored in the registry or contained on the registry forms shall not be considered a public record pursuant to N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq., N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5 et al., or common law record concerning access to public records. Further, said information shall not be discoverable as a public record by any person, entity, or governmental agency, except upon the issuance of a subpoena by a grand jury or a court order in a criminal matter. 
2.  The Jersey City Police, as well as any State, county, or municipal law enforcement agency, may contact a person whose information appears in the City's private outdoor video surveillance camera registry established pursuant to this Section in order to request access to any camera's footage which may assist in an investigation of criminal activity that occurred within the vicinity of camera's location(s). A registrant shall not be required to submit the camera's footage to the Jersey City Police or any other law enforcement agency, unless otherwise required by law. 
3.  No fee shall be charged for the registration, of a private outdoor video surveillance camera(s) with the Jersey City Police. A registrant may remove or change information contained in the registry by contacting the Chief of Police in writing. 
4  The Jersey City Police shall verify and update registry information with registrants as deemed necessary by the Chief of Police.  
SUB-ARTICLE II - Division of Fire and Emergency Services 
 
§ 3-88. - Creation of the Division of Fire and Emergency Services. 
[Added 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] 
There shall be a Division of Fire and Emergency Services, the head of which shall be the Fire Chief. Within the Division of Fire and Emergency Services, there shall be the Bureaus of Fire Operations and Fire Prevention. 
A.  The Bureau of Fire Operations shall perform the following functions: 
(1)  Provide fire-fighting service for the extinguishment of fires and the necessary and incidental protection of life and property throughout the city and upon vessels in any waters within the city or upon any dock, wharf, pier, warehouse or other structure bordering upon or adjacent to such waters and provide for the local enforcement of the Uniform Fire Safety Act. N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq., as authorized in accordance with N.J.S.A. 52:27D-202. 
(2)  Subject to the approval of the Director of Public Safety, make, administer and enforce regulations for the control, disposition and discipline of the Division of Fire and Emergency Services, its officers and employees and for the establishment and maintenance of fire stations and the disposition, use and care of its equipment and apparatus. 
(3)  Direct or cause any vessel moored to or anchored near any dock or pier or in any waters within the city to be removed to and secured at such place as shall be designated by the Director whenever any such vessel shall be a fire or in danger of igniting or may be by reason of its conditions or the nature of its cargo a menace to life or property. 
(4)  Designate the location of fire alarm, telegraph and signal stations in the city and operate, repair and maintain a fire alarm and signal system. 
(5)  Investigate the cause, circumstances and origin of fires and report to the police and to the County Prosecutor every case of suspicion of arson. 
(6)  Have power to inspect and test any automatic or other fire alarm system or fire extinguishing equipment. 
(7)  Be authorized to enter upon, without fear or hindrance, all premises, grounds, structures, buildings, vessels and passages, whenever necessary, in the performance of his or her duties. 
(8)  Operate a training program to maintain and improve the fire-fighting efficiency of the members of the Department. 
(9)  Maintain a Bureau of Fire Prevention and administer the Uniform Fire Code, except as therein otherwise provided. 
(10)   All regulations previously issued by the Fire Chief shall remain in effect until repealed by the Director. 
(11)   The Director shall file copies of all regulations with the City Clerk. The failure to file any regulation shall not affect its validity. 
B.  Bureau of Fire Prevention shall perform the following functions [Amended 9-23-2014 by Ord. No. 14-117 ] : 
The Uniform Fire Safety Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq. The Bureau of Fire Prevention shall conduct periodic inspections of Life Hazard Use Occupancies required by the Uniform Fire Code on behalf of the Commissioner of the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs. 
(1)  There shall be a Fire Prevention Bureau within the Department of Public Safety, the head of which shall be designated as the Fire Official. The Fire Prevention Bureau shall be the local enforcing agency for the Uniform Fire Safety Act. N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq., as authorized by the Act. 
(2)  The Fire Prevention Bureau shall conduct periodic inspections of Life Hazard Use Occupancies required by the Uniform Fire Code on behalf of the Commissioner of the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs. 
(3)  Local Enforcement: Pursuant to Section 1 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act (P.L. 1983 c. 383), the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code (N.J.A.C. 5:70-1 et seq.) shall be locally enforced in the City. 
(4)  Agency Designation: The local enforcing agency shall be the Jersey City Division of Fire and Emergency Services through its Fire Prevention Bureau. Fire Prevention Bureau shall hereinafter be known as the local enforcing agency. 
(5)  Duties: The local enforcing agency shall: 
(a)  Enforce the Uniform Fire Code in all buildings, structures, and premises within the established boundaries of the City, other than one- and two-unit owner-occupied dwellings used exclusively for dwelling purposes and buildings, structures, and premises owned or operated by Federal Government Interstate Agencies or the State; 
(b)  Faithfully comply with all the pertinent requirements of the Uniform Fire Safety Act and the Uniform Fire Code. 
(6)  Organization: The Fire Prevention Bureau shall: 
(a)  Be under the direct supervision and control of a Fire Official, who shall report to the Director of Public Safety; 
(b)  Have paid Fire Inspectors. 
(7)  Appointment, Qualifications, Term of Office, Removal of the Fire Official, Inspectors and/or Legal Counsel: 
(a)  Fire Official shall be certified by the State, and appointed by this governing body from a list submitted by the Director of Public Safety; 
(b)  Inspectors and other employees of the enforcing agency shall be appointed by the governing body upon recommendation of the Fire Official. All life hazard use inspectors shall be certified by the State and shall comply with all pertinent Civil Service regulations: 
(c)  Legal Counsel: The governing body shall specifically appoint legal counsel to assist the agency in enforcing the Uniform Fire Code; 
(d)  Removal of office: The Fire Official shall be subject to removal by the governing body for just cause. Before removal from office, the Fire Official shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard by the governing body or a hearing officer designated by the same. 
(8)  Life Hazard Uses: The Fire Prevention Bureau shall carry out the periodic inspections of life hazard uses required by the Uniform Fire Code on behalf of the Commissioner of the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs. 
(9)  Arson Investigation: There is hereby established within the Department of Public Safety an Arson Investigation Unit. Under the supervision of the Fire Official, the Arson Investigation Unit shall conduct investigations of arson, suspicious fires, undetermined fires, and explosions within the City. 
(a)  Before any member of the Department of Public Safety may be assigned to the Arson Investigation Unit he/she shall have successfully completed a course of training approved by the Police Training Commission and an arson investigation training course approved by the New Jersey Department of Public Safety; 
(b)  Members of the Arson Investigation Unit shall have the same powers and authority as police officers within the City while engaged in the actual performance of investigation duties, specifically including the right to carry firearms pursuant to regulations promulgated by the Director of Public Safety of the City.  
§ 3-88.1. - Fire Prevention Code. 
[Added 9-23-2014 by Ord. No. 14-117 ] 
Adopt and enforce the State of New Jersey Uniform Fire Code.  
§ 3-88.2. - Non-life hazard use registration. 
[Added 9-23-2014 by Ord. No. 14-117 ] 
All premises not classified as "life hazard uses" pursuant to the Uniform Fire Code (with the exception of owner-occupied detached Use Group R-3 structures, used exclusively for dwelling purposes) shall be classified as "non-life hazard uses." Non-life hazard uses shall be registered and have an annual registration fee with the Jersey City Fire Prevention Bureau, which will conduct annual periodic inspections. The registration process will provide accountability for all types of businesses and stored contents as well as create a safer environment, for the public and will facilitate pre-fire planning by the Jersey City Division of Fire and Emergency Services. Non-life hazard use registration forms are available at the office of the Fire Official located at Memorial Fire Headquarters. All registration applications shall be recorded with the Fire Prevention Bureau and be paid annually. If a business is found operating without a registration or permit, an order to cease operation will be issued and enforced with penalties imposed in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.12, N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.12A, and N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.13. Outstanding penalties or fees shall be collected through the Jersey City Municipal Court with issuance of Court Summons appearance.  
§ 3-88.3. - Commercial/industrial registration fees. 
[Added 9-23-2014 by Ord. No. 14-117 ] 
All commercial/industrial locations not registered as life hazard use under the State of New Jersey Uniform Fire Code, shall be registered as a non-life hazard use with the Fire Prevention Bureau, and shall be inspected on an annual basis. The annual fee for this service will be fifty dollars ($50.00) and shall be paid by the business owner. 
Description 	Annual Fee 
Commercial/Industrial 	$50.00 
  
§ 3-88.4. - Fee chart. 
[Added 9-23-2014 by Ord. No. 14-117 ] 
Residential Multiple Dwelling: All Multiple Dwellings not registered as a life hazard use under the State of New Jersey Uniform Code, shall be registered as a non-life hazard use with the Fire Prevention Division and shall be inspected on an annual basis. The annual fee for this service will be as listed in the chart below and shall be paid by property owner: 
Number of Residential Units 	Annual Fee 
1—10 units 	$135.00 
11—20 units 	$225.00 
21—30 units 	$325.00 
31—40 units 	$425.00 
41 units and above 	$525.00 
 
Exceptions: one- or two-family homes - owner occupied.  
§ 3-88.5 - Non-life hazard use inspections. 
[Added 9-23-2014 by Ord. No. 14-117 ] 
Non-life hazard use inspections will be conducted by the company officer during the course of their tour of duty.  
§ 3-88.6. - Permits and fees. 
[Added 9-23-2014 by Ord. No. 14-117 ] 
A.  Type 1A permit - $25.00; 
Type 1 - $125.00; 
Type 2 - $250.00; 
Type 3 - $375.00; 
Type 4 - $500.00; 
Type 5 - $1,500.00. 
B.  Certificate of Smoke Detector and Carbon Monoxide Alarm Compliance (CSDCMAC) - (N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.3) - Fee: $75.00. 
C.  Property search fee: $40.00. 
D.  Fire incident report: Two (2) pages or less, $5.00; for additional pages over two (2), $2.00. 
E.  Fire investigation reports: Two (2) pages or less, $5.00; for additional pages over two (2), $2.00. 
F.  Fire code status inspection: $150.00. 
G.  Apparatus stand-by, per hour per piece of apparatus: $500.00; includes fire apparatus utilized for fireworks, helicopter operations (minimum two (2) apparatus), standpipe flow tests or any other operation deemed necessary by the Fire Official that requires Fire Division monitoring. It shall be the discretion of the Fire Official as to the number of apparatus required. 
H.  Inspector stand-by: Supervisor, $60.00 per hour: Inspector, $50.00 per hour. 
I.  Fire boat stand-by: $500.00 per hour. 
J.  The use of flammable gas cylinders in food vending carts or vehicles in any amount shall require a type 1A permit for a $25.00 fee.  
§ 3-88.7. - Technical amendments—Reserved. 
[Added 9-23-2014 by Ord. No. 14-117 ]  
§ 3-88.8. - Solicitations restricted. 
[Added 9-23-2014 by Ord. No. 14-117 ] 
No member of the Department of Public Safety shall solicit or accept anything of value as consideration for or in connection with the discharge of his or her official duties. No such member shall solicit the sale of tickets in connection with any fund-raising campaign or request contributions directly or indirectly for the same, or solicit anything of value for the benefit of himself or herself or other members of the Division of Fire and Emergency Services, or any other group or organization, without the written permission of the Director of the Division of Fire and Emergency Services.  
§ 3-88.9. - Rules and regulations. 
[Added 9-23-2014 by Ord. No. 14-117 ] 
A.  The 1937 Edition of the Rules, Regulations and Manual of Instructions, consisting of four hundred twelve (412) pages, is hereby adopted, ratified and promulgated as and for rules of the Division of Fire and Emergency Services. 
B.  All the other rules, regulations and general orders promulgated since 1937 by the Director of Public Safety and the Director of the Division of Fire and Emergency Services, and which have been transmitted to the City Clerk, who is to keep them on file, are hereby ratified, adopted and promulgated as the rules and regulations governing the Department of Public Safety and the Division of Fire and Emergency Services.  
§ 3-89. - Rules and regulations. 
[Added 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] 
A.  The 1937 Edition of the Rules, Regulations and Manual of Instructions consisting of four hundred twelve (412) pages is hereby adopted, ratified and promulgated as and for rules of the Department of Public Safety. 
B.  All the other rules, regulations and general orders promulgated since 1937 by the Chief or the Director of Public Safety which have been transmitted to the City Clerk, are hereby ratified, adopted and promulgated as the rules and regulations governing the Department of Public Safety.  
§ 3-90. - Division of Communications and Technology. 
[Added 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] 
A.  There is hereby created within the Department of Public Safety the Division of Communications and Technology, the head of which shall be the Director of Communications. 
B.  The Division of Communications and Technology shall include the following subdivisions: 
(1)  Centralized radio repair: and 
(2)  Centralized radio room.  
SUB-ARTICLE III - Division of Parking Enforcement 
 
§ 3-91. - Division of Parking Enforcement. 
[Added 10-28-2015 by Ord. No. 15-138 ] 
There shall be a Division of Parking Enforcement, the head of which shall be the Director of Parking Enforcement. 
A.  The Division of Parking Enforcement shall perform the following functions: 
(1)  Enforce all relevant parking regulations and operate all parking programs and facilities as set forth in Chapter 332 (Vehicles and Traffic) of the Municipal Code, including Article VII (Metered Parking), and Article VIII (Permit Parking), which were previously authorized to be enforced by the Jersey City Parking Authority on behalf of the City. 
(2)  Issue summonses for violations of any provision of applicable state law, municipal ordinance or regulation as to the parking of vehicles within the City. 
(3)  Serve and execute all process with respect to any such violation issuing out of the Jersey City Municipal Court. 
(4)  Cause any vehicle parked, stored or abandoned in violation of any provision of said law, ordinance or regulation to be towed away from the scene of such violation, or booted at the scene, and collect from the owner of such vehicle the costs of the towing and subsequent storage of said vehicle before surrendering said vehicle to such owner, or removal of said boot. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-138 , adopted October 28, 2015, amended the Code by repealing former § 3-91 and adding a new § 3-91. Former § 3-91 pertained to the Division of Parking Enforcement, and derived from Ord. No. 14-017 , adopted November 12, 2014.  
SUB-ARTICLE IV - Division of Municipal Emergency Management and Homeland Security 
 
§ 3-92. - Division of Municipal Emergency Management and Homeland Security. 
[Added 10-28-2015 by Ord. No. 15-138 ] 
A.  Within the Department of the Public Safety there shall be a Division of Municipal Emergency Management and Homeland Security, the head of which shall be the Municipal Emergency Management Homeland Security Coordinator/Director. 
B.  The Municipal Emergency Management Homeland Security Coordinator/Director shall serve for a term of three years. 
C.  The Municipal Emergency Management Homeland Security Coordinator/Director shall be responsible for the planning, coordinating, response and recovery from all facets of natural and manmade disasters and the conduct of Emergency Management/Homeland Security operations within the City of Jersey City and shall be a member and shall serve as chairman of the Local Emergency Planning Council (LEPC). 
D.  The Municipal Emergency Management Homeland Security Coordinator/Director may appoint one or more Deputy Municipal Emergency Management Homeland Security Coordinators/Directors with the approval of the Mayor.  
§§ 3-93—3-98. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII - Department of Health and Human Services[23] 

Footnotes: 
--- (23) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13-081, adopted September 11, 2013, amended the Code by repealing former Art. XII, §§ 3-93—3-99, and renumbering subsequent Arts. XIII—XVIII as new Arts. XII—XVII. Former Art. XII pertained to the Department of Fire and Emergency Services; and derived from Ord. No. C-50, adopted September 25, 1985; Ord. No. C-963, adopted June 8, 1989; Ord. No. 97-060, adopted September 24, 1997; Ord. No. 01-132, adopted December 12, 2001; Ord. No. 03-093, adopted July 16, 2003; and Ord. No. 09-030, adopted March 25, 2009. 
 
§ 3-99. - Department created; head. 
[Amended 8-19-1992 by Ord. No. 92-106; 12-14-2016 by Ord. No. 16-188 ] 
There shall be a Department of Health and Human Services, the head of which shall be the Director of Health and Human Services; provided, however, that in accordance with N.J.S.A. 26:3-19, the licensed health officer shall be the general agent of the City of Jersey City for the enforcement of health ordinances and the sanitary laws of the State.  
§ 3-100. - Organization of Department. 
[Amended 6-28-1982 by Ord. No. MC-195; 12-11-1986 by Ord. No. C-298; 2-11-1992 by Ord. No. MC-414; 8-19-1992 by Ord. No. 92-106; 7-28-1993 by Ord. No. 93-073; 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050; 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052; 11-7-01 by Ord. No. 01-121; 2-13-02 by Ord. No. 02-008; 06-28-2006 by Ord. No. 06-080; 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ; 12-14-2016 by Ord. No. 16-188 ; 4-11-2018 by Ord. No. 18-025 ] 
Within the Department of Health and Human Services there shall be the following divisions and offices: 
A.  Division of Environmental Health. 
B.  Division of Veterans Affairs. 
C.  Division of Senior Citizens Affairs 
[Added 2-10-2015 by Ord. No. 15-005 ] 
D.  Division of Disease Prevention. 
E.  Division of Community Health and Wellness. 
F.  Division of Food and Nutrition. 
G.  Division of Animal Care and Control. 
H.  Division of Injury Prevention. 
I.  Division of Immigrant Affairs.  
§ 3-101. - Adopt a Lot Program. 
[Added 7-15-2015 by Ord. No. 15-088 ] 
The City shall establish an Adopt A Lot Program under the direction of the Department of Health and Human Services. 
A.  Any non-profit corporation and association desiring to participate in the program shall complete and submit an application, in writing or electronically, to the Director of Health and Human Services. The application shall be in the form on file with the City Clerk. 
B.  Upon completion of the required application forms, the Director of Health and Human Services shall recommend approval of the application to the Municipal Council, which shall, by ordinance, approve a lease between the City and the approved applicant. 
C.  Consistent with N.J.S.A. 40A:12-15, in no event shall any lease be entered into for, with, or on behalf, of any commercial, business, trade, manufacturing, wholesaling, retailing, or other profit-making enterprise, nor shall any lessee use the City-owned property for any sectarian, denominational or religious purpose. Under no circumstances will any lessee be permitted to grow fruits and vegetables or any other edible products on the leased land, either for sale or for personal consumption. City-owned land leased under this provision shall be used for gardening only and for no other purpose whatsoever without the express written approval of the Business Administrator. 
D.  The lease term shall be for one (1) year and consideration for each lease shall be one dollar ($1.00) a year. 
E.  The City reserves the right to terminate the lease at its convenience without cause by providing ninety (90) days prior notice.  
§ 3-102. - Repealed. 
Editor's note— Former § 3-101, Community Action Agency, and § 3-102, Division of Youth Services, were repealed Ord. No. 97-052, adopted August 13, 1997.  
§ 3-103. - Division of Veterans Affairs; functions. 
[Added 4-11-2018 by Ord. No. 18-025 ] 
There is hereby created within the Department of Health and Human Services the Division of Veterans Affairs, the head of which shall be the Director of Veterans Affairs. Under the supervision of the Director of Health and Human Services and the Director of Veterans Affairs, the Division of Veterans Affairs shall: 
A.  Develop forward-thinking opportunities and partnerships to improve the quality of life of veterans, military personnel, and both groups' respective families, by collaborating across both private and public sectors in at least the following areas: 
1.  Coordinate and oversee implementation of citywide policy and community relationships to facilitate entrepreneurship, small business ownership, job skills training, and sustainable employment among veterans, military personnel, and both groups' respective families. 
2.  Monitor status of veteran homelessness and hunger, engaging with existing City services and community organizations to facilitate home ownership, affordable housing, transitional shelter, and nutrition opportunities for veterans, military personnel, and both groups' respective families. 
3.  Organize opportunities for civic engagement, community dialogues, public forums, and local volunteerism which celebrate and strengthen connections between communities and veterans, military personnel, and both groups' respective families. 
B.  Develop capacities for total health and wellness in veterans, military personnel, and both groups' respective families, by providing assistance and supervision in at least the following areas: 
1.  Guide and educate veterans, military personnel, and both groups' respective families on how best to inform themselves about and apply for any benefits, services, preference rights, or tax exempt statuses for which military service provides eligibility under federal, state, and local laws. 
2.  Devise and execute programs that anticipate, assess, and address the comprehensive needs of veterans, military personnel, and both groups' respective families. 
3.  Propose and evaluate studies of issues reported to impact veterans, military personnel, and both groups' respective families, and act as the City's liaison to agencies and organizations involved in veterans affairs. 
C.  Develop interdepartmental competencies and relationships to best care for veterans, military personnel, and both groups' respective families, and all departments and agencies of the City of Jersey City shall cooperate with the Division of Veterans Affairs in at least the following areas: 
1.  Train City personnel on mental health, career advancement disruption, and other topics relevant to veterans, military personnel, and both groups' respective families due to the nature of military service. 
2.  Identify and track metrics involving employment by and use of City resources as relates to veterans, military personnel, and both groups' respective families. 
3.  Cultivate opportunities within City initiatives for engagement and participation of veterans, military personnel, arid both groups' respective families, and devise resources to assist in determining how military educational or technical accreditation, qualifications, or work experience could responsibly serve to meet civilian employment requirements. 
Editor's note— Former § 3-103, Division of Senior Citizen Affairs, was repealed by Ord. No. 02-008, adopted February 13, 2002. Subsequently, Ord. No. 18-025 , adopted April 11, 2018, added a new § 3-103.  
§§ 3-104, 3-104.1. - Repealed. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13-081, adopted September 11, 2013, amended the Code by repealing former §§ 3-104 and 3-104.1 in their entirety. Former § 3-104 pertained to the Division of Cultural Affairs, and derived from Ord. No. 01-121, adopted November 7, 2001; Ord. No. 02-008, adopted February 13, 2002; and Ord. No. 06-080, adopted June 28, 2006. Former § 3-104.1 pertained to the Office of Veteran's Affairs, and derived from Ord. No. 02-008, adopted February 13, 2002; and Ord. No. 06-080, adopted June 28, 2006.  
§ 3-104.2. - Repealed.  
§ 3-105. - Division of Environmental Health; functions. 
[Amended 7-18-2007 by Ord. No. 07-129; 12-14-2016 by Ord. No. 16-188 ] 
(1)  Under the supervision and direction of the Director of Health and Human Services and the Director of Inspections, the Division of Environmental Health shall: 
(a)  Administer the state laws and provisions of this Code which confer functions, powers and duties upon a board or department of health or a local health officer. 
(b)  Enforce the state laws and the provisions of the Jersey City Code for the prevention and control of disease and perform the related inspections essential thereto, including any provisions herein and in state laws relating to industrial hygiene and to air pollution. 
(c)  Prepare and supply statistical and educational material for purposes of internal administration and reporting or for public education. 
(d)  Administer a public health nursing service and a parochial school health program. 
(e)  Reserved. 
(f)  Arrange for the following services, to be performed either in-house or by outside contractor: 
[1]  For bacteriological and chemical analysis of milk, food and water; 
[2]  For the diagnosis and control of communicable diseases; and 
[3]  For research requirements of other city departments. 
(g)  Establish and implement a sterile syringe access program in the form and manner consistent with state law and in accordance with the Blood Borne Disease Harm Reduction Act. 
(h)  Administer the lead testing notification program for all licensed Day Care Center operators established under Section 182-35 of the Jersey City Code and licensed by the State of New Jersey pursuant to N.J.S.A. 30:5B-3. 
[Added 4-23-2008 by Ord. No. 08-047] 
(i)  Supervise the administration of various health service programs for senior citizens. 
[Added 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] 
(2)  All departments and agencies of the City of Jersey City shall cooperate with the Division of Environmental Health and provide the Division with any requested information necessary to administer state laws and provisions of this code and to carry out the functions and duties of the Division. 
[Added 9-22-1988 by Ord. No. C-823] 
(3)  Within the Division of Environmental Health, there shall be a Bureau of Licensing, the head of which shall be the Director of Licensing. The Bureau of Licensing shall issue all licenses administered by the Department of Health and Human Services, 
(4)  Within the Division of Environmental Health, there shall be a Bureau of Healthy Homes, which shall be responsible for: 
(a)  Consolidating existing lead prevention and rodent control programs; 
(b)  Developing and implementing a strategic plan for the City to reduce or eliminate housing-related health hazards and to promote housing that is healthy, safe, affordable, and accessible; 
(c)  Monitoring for lead exposure and providing case management and environmental investigations of lead poisoned children; 
(d)  Building a consortium of strategic partners to address unsafe and/or unhealthy housing conditions; 
(e)  Assuring that follow up care and interventions are provided for vulnerable populations; 
(f)  Establishing surveillance system to include not only blood lead levels, but also environmental tests results and selected healthy homes; 
(g)  Training existing registered environmental health specialists in lead inspection techniques as well as Healthy Homes principles. 
(5)  Within the Division of Environmental Health, there shall be a Bureau of Inspections, which shall be responsible for all inspections required by the Department of Health and Human Services. 
Cross reference— Animals, Ch. 90.  
§ 3-106. - Division of Injury Prevention. 
[Added 4-11-2018 by Ord. No. 18-025 ] 
There is hereby created within the Department of Health and Human Services the Division of Injury Prevention, the head of which shall be the Director of Injury Prevention. Under the supervision of the Director of Health and Human Services and the Director of Injury Prevention, the Division of Injury Prevention shall: 
A.  Investigate and disseminate information concerning the epidemiology, causes and prevention of serious bodily injuries and injury-related deaths, including those with intentional and unintentional causes: 
B.  Develop, implement, promote, and evaluate strategies, programs and methods which reduce: 
1.  The prevalence and incidence of serious bodily injuries and injury-related deaths; and 
2.  The traumatic stress caused by such injuries; 
C.  Facilitate communication and cooperation among people and organizations with the ability to reduce: 
1.  The prevalence and incidence of serious bodily injuries and injury-related deaths; and 
2.  Treat the traumatic stress caused by such incidents. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-188 , adopted December 14, 2016, amended the Code by repealing former § 3-106 in its entirety. Former § 3-106 pertained to the Division of Clinical Services, and derived from Ord. No. 97-052, adopted August 13, 1997. Subsequently, Ord. No. 18-025 , adopted April 11, 2018, added a new § 3-106.  
§ 3-107. - Division of Senior Citizens Affairs. 
[Added 2-10-2015 by Ord. No. 15-005 ] 
A.  Creation of the Division of Senior Citizens Affairs. There is hereby created within the Department of Health and Human Services the Division of Senior Citizens Affairs. 
B.  Functions. 
(1)  Under the supervision and direction of the Director of Health and Human Services, the Division of Senior Citizens Affairs shall: 
(a)  Supervise the administration of various social, recreational, educational, and transportation for the City's senior citizens. 
(b)  Organize and operate senior citizen centers and the multipurpose services in relation thereto. 
(c)  Propose and evaluate studies of senior citizen problems and programs and acting as city liaison with community groups involved in senior citizen affairs.  
§ 3-107.1. - Division of Disease Prevention. 
[Added 12-14-2016 by Ord. No. 16-188 ] 
These is hereby created within the Department of Health and Human Services the Division of Disease Prevention, the head of which shall be the Director of Disease Prevention. Under the supervision of the Director of Health and Human Services, the Division of Disease Prevention shall be responsible for the administration of the all child health programs and the Preventive Medicine Clinic which shall administer programs for the prevention of sexually transmitted diseases (STD).  
§ 3-107.2. - Division of Community Health and Wellness. 
[Added 12-14-2016 by Ord. No. 16-188 ] 
There is hereby created within the Department of Health and Human Services the Division of Community Health and Wellness, the head of which shall be the Director of Community Health and Wellness. The Division of Community Health and Wellness shall have responsibility for the administration of the Affordable Care Act and the Right to Know Law and shall develop and administer programs to provide health education and personalized health improvement programs.  
§ 3-107.3. - Division of Food and Nutrition. 
[Added 12-14-2016 by Ord. No. 16-188 ] 
There is hereby created within the Department of Health and Human Services the Division of Food and Nutrition, the head of which shall be the Director of Food and Nutrition. The Division of Food and Nutrition shall provide education and training related to food preparation and administer the Women's Infants and Children (WIC) program, the Meals on Wheels program, the Senior Lunch Program and shall supervise all farmer's markets authorized by the City.  
§ 3-107.4. - Division of Animal Care and Control. 
[Added 12-14-2016 by Ord. No. 16-188 ] 
There is hereby created within the Department of Health and Human Services the Division of Animal Care and Control. The Division of Animal Care and Control shall provide a variety of services related to the well-being of animals and residents who come in contact with them, including: 
(a)  State-mandated animal control services, including picking up stray and abandoned animals, rabies prevention, responding to animal bites and attacks, and oversight of dangerous dogs; 
(b)  Responding to animal nuisance complaints; 
(c)  Investigating reports of animal cruelty or neglect; 
(d)  Educating residents on pet care and other animal issues; and ordinance enforcement.  
§ 3-107.5. - Division of Immigrant Affairs. 
[Added 4-11-2018 by Ord. No. 18-025 ] 
There is hereby created within the Department of Health and Human Services the Division of Immigrant Affairs, the head of which shall be the Director of Immigrant Affairs. Under the supervision of the Director of Health and Human Services and the Director of Immigrant Affairs, the Division of Immigrant Affairs shall: 
A.  Develop forward-thinking opportunities and partnerships to improve inclusion and integration of immigrants, refugees, new Americans, and their respective families into Jersey City communities, by collaborating across both private and public sectors in at least the following areas: 
1.  Coordinate and oversee implementation of citywide policy and community skills training, and sustainable employment among immigrants, refugees, Americans, and their respective families. 
2.  Monitor status of immigrant housing and refugee resettlement needs, engaging with existing City services, refugee resettlement agencies and partners, and other community organizations to facilitate home ownership, affordable housing, transitional shelter, and nutrition opportunities for immigrants, refugees, new Americans, and their respective families. 
3.  Organize opportunities for civic engagement, community dialogues, public forums, and local volunteerism which celebrate and strengthen connections between communities and immigrants, refugees, new Americans, and their respective families. 
B.  Develop capacities for total health and wellness in immigrants, refugees, new Americans, and their respective families, by providing assistance and supervision in at least the following areas: 
1.  Guide and educate immigrants, refugees, New Americans, and their respective families on how best to inform themselves about and apply for any benefits or services for which their respective citizenship or immigration statuses might make them eligible under federal, state, and local laws. 
2.  Devise and execute programs that anticipate, assess, and address the comprehensive needs of immigrants, refugees, new Americans, and their respective families, and facilitate provision of language and literacy classes, citizenship preparation classes, U visa certification, and similar services. 
3.  Propose and evaluate studies of issues reported to impact immigrants, refugees, New Americans, and their respective families, and act as the City's liaison to refugee resettlement agencies and partners, immigrant advocacy organizations, and other agencies and organizations involved in immigrant affairs. 
C.  Develop interdepartmental competencies and relationships to best care for immigrants, refugees, new Americans, and their respective families, and all departments and agencies of the City of Jersey City shall cooperate with the Division of Immigrant Affairs in at least the following areas: 
1.  Train City personnel on differences between types of immigration statuses, cultural competencies and cross-cultural communication, trauma informed care, and other topics relevant to immigrants, refugees, new Americans, and their respective families. 
2.  Identify and track metrics involving employment by and use of City resources as relates to immigrants, refugees, new Americans, and their respective families, maintaining data on the diversity of languages available in City resources and services, interdepartmental training on City policies regarding non-discrimination on the basis of immigration status or national origin, interdepartmental training on City policies regarding assistance and transparency in immigration enforcement operations, and similar services. 
3.  Cultivate opportunities within City initiatives for engagement and participation of immigrants, refugees, new Americans, and their respective families, and devise resources to assist in determining how foreign educational or technical accreditation, qualifications, or work experience could responsibly serve to meet domestic employment requirements in local private and public sectors.  
ARTICLE XII - Department of Health and Human Services 
 
§ 3-107.6. - Community Chaplain. 
[Added 9-12-2018 by Ord. No. 18-096 ] 
This position is created in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-141. The position will be a volunteer position and under the supervision of the Director of Health and Human Services. However, all Community Chaplain tasks will be at the direction of the Chief of Police or his designee.  
§ 3-107.6.1. - Qualifications. 
[Added 9-12-2018 by Ord. No. 18-096 ] 
Any person appointed as a Community Chaplain shall be a clergyman or clergywoman in good standing in the religious body from which he/she is selected. He or she shall be trained in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Jersey City Police Department and N.J.S.A. 40A:14-141.  
§ 3-107.6.2. - Rank and salary. 
[Added 9-12-2018 by Ord. No. 18-096 ] 
Any person appointed as Community Chaplain shall serve in that capacity without rank or salary or any benefits.  
§ 3-107.6.3. - Term of office. 
[Added 9-12-2018 by Ord. No. 18-096 ] 
A person appointed as Community Chaplain shall serve for a period of one year from date of appointment. Upon the expiration of one year, he/she shall continue to serve until reappointed or notified that he/she will not be reappointed.  
§ 3-107.6.4. - Appointment. 
[Added 9-12-2018 by Ord. No. 18-096 ] 
The Mayor shall appoint Chaplains in accordance with this chapter.  
§ 3-108. - Repealed. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 97-052, adopted August 13, 1997, amended the Code by repealing former § 3-108 in its entirety. Former § 3-108 pertained to the Jersey City Office of Employment and Training, and derived from Ord. No. 93-073, adopted July 28, 1993.  
§ 3-109. - Repealed. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13-081, adopted September 11, 2013, amended the Code by repealing former § 3-109 in its entirety. Former § 3-109 pertained to the Division of Senior Citizen Affairs, and derived from Ord. No. 02-008, adopted February 13, 2002; and Ord. No. 06-080, adopted June 28, 2006.  
ARTICLE XIII - (Reserved)[24] 

Footnotes: 
--- (24) --- 
Editor's note— Former Article XIV, consisting of §§ 3-110 through 3-113, was repealed by Ord. No. 01-121, adopted November 7, 2001. Subsequently, Art. XIV was renumbered by Ord. No. 13-081 , adopted September 11, 2013. See editor's note at Art. XII. 
 
§§ 3-110—3-113. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIV - Department of Law[25] 
[Amended 10-27-1981 by Ord. MC-52; 1-13-1983 by Ord. No. MC-307; 6-28-1984 by Ord. No. MC-654; 2-13-1986 by Ord. No. C-161; 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] 

Footnotes: 
--- (25) --- 
Editor's note— Former Art. XV. See editor's note, Art. XII. 
 
§ 3-114. - Department established; Corporation Counsel. 
There shall be a Department of Law, the head of which shall be the Corporation Counsel. The salary of the Corporation Counsel shall be fixed by ordinance. Legal fees and costs for which the Corporation Counsel shall be liable as the attorney for the city shall be borne by the city.  
§ 3-115. - Powers and duties of Corporation Counsel. 
[Amended 11-7-01 by Ord. No. 01-121] 
A.  The Corporation Counsel shall be the chief law officer of the city and the attorney of record in all proceedings in which the city or any of its officers or employees, by reason of their official duties, is a party. The corporation counsel shall provide legal advice and assistance to all city officials on matters relating to official duties. He or she shall supervise the preparation of contracts, deeds and other legal documents and of ordinances and resolutions referred to the law department for preparation. [26] 
B.  No deed shall be conveyed or contract executed in behalf of the city unless the Corporation Counsel shall have endorsed his or her approval in writing upon the document. 
C.  Upon leaving office the Corporation Counsel shall forthwith deliver to his or her successor all documents in his or her custody pertaining to city business and all documents belonging to the city. He or she shall also consent in writing to the substitution of his or her successor as attorney in all pending legal proceedings. 
D.  Administer and investigate personal injury, employment and civil rights claims filed against the City or any of its officers or employers arising out of their employment with the City. 
Footnotes: 
--- (26) --- 
Editor's note— See also Ch. 27, Defense and Indemnification, § 27-3, Corporation Counsel's duty to defend city employees. 
 
§ 3-116. - Settlement of proceedings; special counsel; accounting for debts collected. 
[Amended 9-12-1990 by Ord. No. McC-151; 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050] 
A.  The Corporation Counsel may, with the consent of the Council, compromise, settle and adjust any action, proceeding or other legal matter in which the city or any officer or employee is a party, or adjust any claim or causes of action in favor of or against the city or any officer or employee or accept an offer of judgment in favor of the city, provided that: 
(1)  A liability claim with a value of up to $1,000 can be settled by the Risk Manager with the approval of the Insurance Fund Commission. 
(2)  A liability claim with a value of $1,001 to $7,500 can be settled only by the Corporation Counsel or First Assistant Corporation Counsel with the approval of the Insurance Fund Commission. 
(3)  This subsection shall not limit the discretion of the Corporation Counsel in conducting the trial of any legal proceeding nor deprive him or her of the powers or relieve him or her of the duties exercised by counsel representing private clients. 
B.  The Corporation Counsel may with the approval of the Council and within available appropriations appoint special counsel to: 
(1)  Represent the city or any officer or employee in any legal proceeding; or 
(2)  Assist the Corporation Counsel with any matter pertaining to his or her official duties. 
C.  The Corporation Counsel shall account to the Business Administrator for all debts collected in behalf of the city. He or she shall furnish a duplicate copy of the accounting to the Director of the department in which the claim originated. The accounting shall include the nature of the debt, the name of the debtor and the date of collection. 
[Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052]  
§ 3-117. - Appointments and compensation. 
[Amended 9-13-1989 by Ord. No. McC-7] 
A.  The Corporation Counsel may appoint a First Assistant Corporation Counsel, three Supervisory Assistants Corporation Counsel, a private secretary and such other Assistants Corporation Counsel and legal assistants as are authorized by ordinance. All appointees shall serve at the pleasure of the Corporation Counsel in accordance with terms and conditions of employment established by the Corporation Counsel. 
B.  No appointee of the Corporation Counsel may receive any fee or compensation for the performance of official duties other than his or her salary.  
§ 3-118. - Powers and duties of personnel. 
[Amended 9-13-1989 by Ord. No. McC-7] 
A.  Appointees of the Corporation Counsel shall perform such duties as are assigned to them by the Corporation Counsel. 
B.  The Corporation Counsel shall select a First Assistant Corporation Counsel to act in his or her behalf during his or her absence or disability. The Assistant so selected shall possess all the powers and perform all the duties of the Corporation Counsel. If the office of Corporation Counsel becomes vacant for any reason, the First Assistant shall act as Corporation Counsel until the appointment and qualification of a Corporation Counsel. 
C.  In addition to regularly assigned duties, the First Assistant, the Supervisory Assistants and Assistants Corporation Counsel shall perform such other duties of the Corporation Counsel as he or she shall empower them to exercise by written authority filed in the Law Department. 
D.  Upon leaving office appointees of the Corporation Counsel shall forthwith deliver to the Corporation Counsel all documents pertaining to the business of the City. [27] 
Footnotes: 
--- (27) --- 
Editor's Note: Former Secs. 2-220.8 and 2-220.9, added 11-27-1985 by Ord. No. C-48, which immediately followed this section and created the Division of Consumer Protection, were deleted 9-13-1989 by Ord. No. McC-7. 
 
§ 3-119. - Repealed.  
§ 3-119.1. - Office of Municipal Prosecutor. 
[Added 11-7-01 by Ord. No. 01-121] 
A.  There is hereby created within the Department of Law the Office of Municipal Prosecutor, the head of which shall be the Chief Municipal Prosecutor, who shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Municipal Council, for a term of one year from the date of his or her appointment, or until the appointment of a successor, as provided for in N.J.S.A. 2B:25-4. The Chief Municipal Prosecutor shall supervise and have authority over all Assistant Corporation Counsels assigned by the Corporation Counsel to the Municipal Court. The Chief Municipal Prosecutor and his or her subordinates shall represent the State, the County, or the City in the prosecution of all offenses within the statutory jurisdiction of the City of Jersey City Municipal Courts as defined by law, including municipal ordinance violations pertaining to zoning, land or property use regulation, property maintenance, building or construction, in accordance with and subject to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 2B:25-1 through 2B:25-12. 
B.  The authority of the Corporation Counsel over the Office of Municipal Prosecutor shall only extend to budgetary, personnel, and purchasing matters and shall not extend to the prosecutorial functions exercised by the Office of Municipal Prosecutor.  
ARTICLE XV - Department of Recreation[28] 
[Amended 1-24-1990 by Ord. No. McC-98; 9-8-1993 by Ord. No. 93-097; 9-14-1994 by Ord. No. 94-087; 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] 

Footnotes: 
--- (28) --- 
Editor's note— Former Art. XVI. See editor's note, Art. XII. 
 
§ 3-120. - Department created; organization. 
[Amended 11-7-01 by Ord. No. 01-121] 
A.  There shall be a Department of Recreation, the head of which shall be the Director of Recreation. The Department shall be responsible for all recreational and leisure activities provided by the City of Jersey City. [29] 
B.  The Director of the Department of Recreation shall: 
(1)  Determine the use of all recreational facilities owned and operated by the City of Jersey City; 
(2)  Be responsible for the concept, planning, development and implementation of recreational programs, activities and events; 
(3)  Promote and advertise recreation programs, activities and events and shall direct and oversee their implementation; 
(4)  Regularly interact with neighborhood organizations, churches, schools, nonprofit agencies and other interested groups and companies to promote recreational and leisure activities within the City. 
Footnotes: 
--- (29) --- 
Editor's Note: See also Ch. 25, Cultural Arts Commission. 
 
§ 3-121. - (Reserved)[30] 
Footnotes: 
--- (30) --- 
Editor's note— Former § 3-121 was reserved 11-7-01 by Ord. No. 01-121. 
 
§ 3-122. - (Reserved)[31] 
Footnotes: 
--- (31) --- 
Editor's note— Former § 3-122 was reserved 11-7-01 by Ord. No. 01-121. 
 
ARTICLE XVI - Agencies and Commissions[32] 

Footnotes: 
--- (32) --- 
Editor's note— Former Art. XVII. See editor's note, Art. XII. 
 
§ 3-123. - Administration of unassigned agencies and commissions. 
The administrative functions, powers and duties of agencies and commissions of the city government not allocated and assigned by this Code shall be subject to the supervision of the Mayor, except as otherwise specifically required by law, and for this purpose such agencies and commissions are allocated and assigned to the Office of the Mayor.  
§ 3-124. - Appointment of members; absences. 
A.  All appointments to the agencies and commissions shall be by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council except as otherwise provided by the particular statute or ordinance pertinent to the particular agency or commission. 
B.  Except where the explicit terms of any enabling legislation provide otherwise, any member of any board, agency, commission, authority or entity who misses three consecutive meetings or five meetings within any twelve-month period shall be removed from office upon notice and hearing before the Council or in accordance with the procedures contained in the legislation establishing such board, agency, commission, authority or entity. 
[Added 3-28-1990 by Ord. No. McC-111] 
C.  Every board, agency, commission, authority or entity to which members are appointed by the Mayor shall amend its rules, regulations or bylaws to conform to this section. 
[Added 3-28-1990 by Ord. No. McC-111]  
§ 3-125. - Appointment procedure. 
A.  Whenever any statute or ordinance requires an appointment to be made to any agency, board or commission by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Council, such appointments shall be made as follows: When the appointment is to be made because of the expiration of the term of the officer, or when a vacancy occurs for any reason, then the Mayor shall make such successor appointment within 30 days of the expiration of the term, or the date on which the vacancy occurs, as the case may be. Said appointment shall be made by written communication from the Mayor, addressed to the Council and delivered to the City Clerk. This procedure shall be complied with if the written communication making the appointment is delivered no later than the 30th day following the expiration of the term, or the date of the vacancy, as the case may be. The fact that the Municipal Council does not act upon the appointment within the 30 days shall not invalidate the appointment made by the Mayor. 
B.  In the event that the Mayor fails to make the appointment within the 30 days as provided in Subsection A, then the Council shall make the appointment.  
§ 3-126. - Boards, agencies, committees and commissions. 
[Amended 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050] 
The boards, agencies, committees and commissions of the city shall be as required by law or as the Council shall create. [33] 
Footnotes: 
--- (33) --- 
Editor's Note: See the Table of Contents listing for Part I of this Code for various boards and commissions. 
 
ARTICLE XVII - Fire Safety Manager[34] 

Footnotes: 
--- (34) --- 
Editor's note— Former Art. XVIII. See editor's note, Art. XII. 
 
§ 3-127. - Application. 
[Added 6-27-2001 by Ord. No. 01-088 ; amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] 
This article shall apply to all buildings or structures more than six (6) stories above grade or more than 75 feet above the lowest level accessible to Department of Public Safety apparatus. This includes buildings or structures of lesser height which are not accessible to Department of Public Safety apparatus because of setbacks or restricted approaches.  
§ 3-128. - General. 
[Added 6-27-2001 by Ord. No. 01-088 ; amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ; 9-23-2014 by Ord. No. 14-118 ] 
A.  It is the objective of this regulation to provide training, proper education and licensing through a continuing program for all high-rise occupants and management, to assure prompt reporting of fire, to assure the immediate response to fire alarms and the immediate initiation of fire safety procedures to safeguard life and property and contain any fire situations or other emergency situations until the arrival of the Division of Fire and Emergency Services. 
B.  It shall be the responsibility of the owner/manager or other person having charge of a high-rise building to comply with these regulations. 
C.  It shall be the responsibility of the building management to provide a Fire Safety Manager to perform these duties. In a large high-rise building, the owners of the building should strive to isolate the individual chosen for the Fire Safety Manager's job from other responsibilities. In buildings where there are multiple companies, it is the responsibility of the Fire Safety Manager of the building to coordinate fire safety between the various companies. 
D.  In addition to the above duties the Fire Safety Manager shall keep current with pertinent laws and advancements in the fire safety field. 
E.  Any person discovering fire, heat or smoke shall immediately report such condition to the Department of Public Safety unless he has personal knowledge that such a report has been made. No person shall make, issue, post or maintain any regulation or order, written or verbal, that would require any person to take any unnecessary delaying action prior to reporting such condition to the Department of Public Safety. 
F.  Everyone associated with high-rise structures must recognize that once the construction of the building is completed and the structure occupied, the Fire Safety Manager is the key to future fire safety. His/her talents should be directed toward the prevention of fire by necessary inspections which will definitely cut down on some of the hazards that breed fire and evacuation procedures which will effectively reduce injuries during an emergency. If an accidental fire starts, he/she will have all the defenses ready to combat it by carrying out his/her duties and provide a safe means of evacuation for all buildings occupants. 
G.  In order to maintain proficiency and stay abreast of high rise safety, the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall conduct three (3) continuing education instruction seminars annually.  
§ 3-129. - Definitions. 
[Added 6-27-2001 by Ord. No. 01-088 ; amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] 
Fire Command Station: The central control station which shall contain where applicable the public address system panel; the Department of Public Safety communications panel; fire detection and alarm system annunciator panels; status indicators and control for air handling systems; and status indicators and a telephone for Department of Public Safety use with controlled access to the public telephone system. 
Fire Drill and Evacuation: The method and practice of a systematic, safe and orderly evacuation of an area or building by and of its occupants in case of fire or other emergency in the least possible time; also the use of such available fire appliances (including sounding of alarms) as may have been provided for the controlling or extinguishing of fire and safeguarding of human life. 
Fire Official A person certified by the Commissioner of the Department of Community Affairs and appointed to direct the enforcement of the Uniform Fire Code of the State of New Jersey by the appointing authority in the City of Jersey City. 
High-Rise Building: Any building or structure having occupied floors located more than six (6) stories above grade or more than 75 feet above the lowest level accessible to Department of Public Safety apparatus. This includes buildings or structures of lesser height which are not accessible to Department of Public Safety apparatus because of setbacks or restricted approaches. 
Owner: A person who owns, purports to own, manages, rents, leases, or exercises control over a building, structure or premises. 
Use Group "A": Includes theaters and other buildings used primarily for theatrical or operatic performances and exhibitions, places of public assembly, amusement, entertainment or recreation, churches, grandstands, bleachers, coliseums, stadiums, tents or similar structures. 
Use Group "B": Includes buildings used for the transaction of business, for the rendering of professional services, or for other services that involve stocks of goods, wares or merchandise in limited quantities for use incidental to office uses or simple purposes. 
Use Group "I": Includes buildings housing individuals who, because of age, mental instability, physical limitations, security or other reasons, must live in a supervised environment. 
Use Group "M": Includes buildings used for display and sales purposes involving stocks of goods, wares or merchandise incidental to such purposes and accessible to the public. 
Use Group "R-1": Includes all hotels, motels and similar buildings arranged for shelter and sleeping accommodations and in which the occupants are primarily transient in nature, making use of the facility for a period of less than 30 days. 
Use Group "R-2": Includes all multiple family dwellings having more than two dwelling units and shall also include all dormitories, rooming houses and group rentals where the occupants are living independently of each other and similar buildings arranged for shelter and sleeping accommodations in which the occupants are not transient in nature.  
§ 3-130. - Overview. 
[Added 6-27-2001 by Ord. No. 01-088 ; amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] 
A.  Fire Safety Plan. 
(1)  A fire safety plan for fire drills and evacuation procedures in accordance with the requirements of the Fire Official shall be submitted to the Department of Public Safety and the approval of Fire Official shall be obtained. The applicable parts of the fire safety plan shall be distributed to the tenants of the building and to the building service employees. Tenant with employees shall distribute to their employees applicable parts of the fire safety plan. All occupants of the building shall participate and cooperate in carrying out the provisions of the fire safety plan. Where the owner of the building is an occupant, he/she shall comply with those provisions of the sections applicable to tenants. 
(2)  The Fire Safety Plan shall include the location where tenants who evacuate the building must stage for accountability purposes. 
B.  Fire Safety Manager, Deputy Fire Safety Manager, and Building Evacuation Supervisor. 
(1)  Fire Safety Manager and Deputy Fire Safety Manager. 
(a)  In high-rises of Use Group B, R-1 and R-2, one employee shall be designated as "Fire Safety Manager" and one or more employees as "Deputy Fire Safety Managers." Such employees shall have knowledge of a building's fire protection plan and each shall have a Certificate of Fitness, in accordance with the requirements of the Fire Official and listed in this ordinance, qualifying him/her to conduct fire drills, evacuations and related activities such as organizing, training and supervising a fire brigade, and designating and training Fire Wardens and Deputy Fire Wardens. In the absence of a Fire Safety Manager when a Fire Safety Manager is required to be on-duty in the building, the Deputy Fire Safety Manager shall act as Fire Safety Manager. 
(b)  During normal working or business hours, there shall be on the premises at least one person on-duty in the building designated as "Fire Safety Manager" with a required Certificate of Fitness. During fire emergencies, the primary responsibility of the Fire Safety Manager shall be the supervision and staffing of a fire command station and the direction and execution of the evacuation as provided in the fire safety plan. Such activities shall be subject to Department of Public Safety control. Normal working or business hours shall be considered from 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., Monday thru Friday, excluding holidays. 
(2)  Building Evacuation Supervisor. At all other times when there are occupants in the building and there is no Fire Safety Manager on-duty in the building, there shall be at least one employee on-duty on the premises who shall be designated as "Building Evacuation Supervisor." He/she shall be capable of directing the evacuation of the occupants as provided for in the Fire Safety Plan. During fire emergencies, the primary responsibility of the Building Evacuation Supervisor shall be the staffing of a fire command station and the direction and execution of the evacuation as provided in the Fire Safety Plan. His/her training and related activities shall be under the direction of the Fire Safety Manager in accordance with the requirements of the Fire Official and the Fire Safety Plan. Such activities shall be subject to Department of Public Safety control. 
(3)  Fire Warden and Deputy Fire Warden. 
(a)  The tenant or tenants on each floor shall, upon request of the owner or person-in-charge of the building, make responsible and dependable employees available for designation by the Fire Safety Manager as Fire Warden and Deputy Fire Wardens. 
[1]  In high-rises of Use Group B and R-l, there shall be a minimum of one (1) Fire Warden and one (1) Deputy Fire Warden for each floor. In cases of multiple tenants on a floor, there shall be a Deputy Fire Warden for each tenant. In addition, any tenancy with more than 7,500 square feet of occupiable space shall have a Deputy Warden for each 7,500 square feet or part thereof. 
[2]  In high-rises of Use Group R-2, there shall be a minimum of one (1) Fire Warden and one (1) Deputy Fire Warden for each floor. 
C.  Fire Brigade. 
(1)  A fire brigade consisting of qualified building employees shall be selected, organized, trained and supervised by the Fire Safety Manager. 
(2)  The Brigade shall be trained in the proper use of portable fire extinguishers and other manual fire suppression equipment. 
D.  Fire Drills. Fire drills shall be conducted, in accordance with the Fire Safety Plan, at least once every three months for existing buildings during the first two years after the effective date of this ordinance, or for new buildings, at least once every three months during the first two years after the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. Thereafter, fire drills shall be conducted at least once every six months. The occupants of the building, other than building employees, shall not be required to leave the floor or use the exits during the drill. A written record of such drills shall be kept on the premises for a three-year period and shall be readily available for inspection by the Department of Public Safety. 
E.  The tenant or tenants of each floor, upon request of the owner or the person-in-charge of the building, shall make responsible and dependable employees available for designation and training by the Fire Safety Manager as fire wardens and deputy fire wardens. Designated fire wardens and deputy fire wardens shall carry out their responsibilities as contained in the fire safety plan. 
F.  In buildings where compliance would cause practical difficulty or undue hardship, the Fire Official may modify the requirements of this ordinance and accept alternatives fulfilling the intent of these requirements consistent with public safety.  
§ 3-131. - Responsibilities. 
[Added 6-27-2001 by Ord. No. 01-088 ; amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] 
A.  The owner shall [Amended 9-23-2014 by Ord. No. 14-118 ] : 
(1)  Be responsible for providing for fire safety and conduct fire drills in accordance with these rules. 
(2)  Insure for the development and updating of a written Fire Safety Plan providing for fire drills and evacuation procedures in accordance with these rules. 
(3)  Designate an employee as Fire Safety Manager. This person must hold a Certificate of Fitness qualifying him/her to perform the appropriate duties of Fire Safety Manager during normal working or business hours. 
(4)  Designate one or more employees as Deputy Fire Safety Manager(s). This/these individual(s) must hold a Certificate of Fitness qualifying him/her to perform the duties of the Fire Safety Manager and may perform in the capacity as Acting Fire Manager in his/her absence. 
(5)  Insure that during normal working or business hours, there shall be at least one person on-duty in the building as Fire Safety Manager holding a Certificate of Fitness. He/she shall be qualified to conduct fire drills, evacuations and related activities such as organizing, training and supervising a fire brigade, During fire emergencies, the primary responsibility of the Fire Safety Manager shall be the supervision and staffing of a Fire Command Station and the direction and execution of the evacuation as provided in the Fire Safety Plan. Such activities shall be subject to Department of Public Safety control. Normal working or business hours shall be considered from 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., Monday thru Friday, excluding holidays. 
(6)  Ensure that at all other times when there is no Fire Safety Manager on-duty in the building, there shall be at least one person on-duty in the building as Building Evacuation Supervisor. He/she shall be capable of directing the evacuation of the occupants as provided for in the Fire Safety Plan. During fire emergencies, the primary responsibility of the Building's Evacuation Supervisor shall be the staffing of a Fire Command Station and the direction and execution of the evacuation as provided in the Fire Safety Plan. His/her training and related activities shall be under the direction of the Fire Safety Manager in accordance with the requirements of these Rules and the Fire Safety Plan. Such activities be subject to Department of Public Safety control. 
B.  The Fire Safety Manager shall [Amended 9-23-2014 by Ord. No. 14-118 ] : 
(1)  Establish, monitor, and update a written Fire Safety Plan providing for fire drill and evacuation procedure in accordance with these rules. 
(2)  Select qualified building service employees for a Fire Brigade and organize, train and supervise such Fire Brigade (Limited to fire extinguishers). 
(3)  Be responsible for the availability and state of readiness of the Fire Brigade. 
(4)  Conduct fire and evacuation drills. 
(5)  Be responsible for the designation of a Fire Warden for each floor and sufficient Fire Wardens for each tenancy in accordance with these rules. 
(6)  Be responsible for the training and activities of the building evacuation supervisor. 
(7)  Be responsible for a daily check for the availability of the Fire Warden and Deputy Fire Wardens and see that up-to-date organizational charts identifying the Wardens are posted. 
(8)  Notify the owner or other person having charge of the building when any designated individual is neglecting his/her responsibilities contained in the Fire Safety Plan. The owner or other person in charge of the building shall bring the matter to attention of the firm employing the individual. If the firm fails to correct the condition, the Department of Public Safety shall be notified by the owner or person in charge of the building. 
(9)  In event of a fire, shall report to the Fire Command Station to: 
(a)  Ensure that the Department of Public Safety has been notified of any fire or fire alarm. 
(b)  Supervise and coordinate staffing of the Fire Command Station. It is essential that the Fire Safety Manager remain in the lobby at the Fire Command Station. 
(c)  Direct evacuation procedures as provided in the Fire Safety Plan. 
(d)  Provide reports of conditions on the fire floor to members of the Department of Public Safety upon their arrival. 
(e)  Advise the Department of Public Safety personnel (Incident Commander) in the operation of the Fire Command Station. 
(10)   Identify any condition that will constitute a fire safety violation. Once identified, the Fire Safety Manager will immediately take steps to correct the violation. If the violation or condition cannot be corrected by the Fire Safety Manager he/she is obligated to notify the Fire Prevention Bureau for Enforcement. 
The Fire Prevention Bureau 
Phone Number (201) 547-4255 
fireprevention@njjcps.org 
(11)   Fire Safety Managers shall attend one (1) continuing education seminar conducted by the Division of Fire and Emergency Services, on an annual basis. The Fee for this service will be one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(12)   Failure to carry out the duties as enumerated in this section may result in the revocation of a Fire Safety Manager's certification. 
(13)   A Fire Safety Manager's certification may be revoked at the discretion of the Fire Official for just cause. 
C.  The Deputy Fire Safety Manager shall: 
(1)  Act as Fire Safety Manager, assuming his/her duties and responsibilities in the absence of the Fire Safety Manager during normal working or business hours. 
D.  The fire wardens and deputy fire wardens shall: 
(1)  Be familiar with the Fire Safety Plan, the location of exits and the location and operation of any available fire alarm system. 
(2)  In the event of a fire alarm: 
(a)  Ascertain location of the fire. 
(b)  Direct the evacuation of the floor in accordance with directions received and the following guidelines: 
[1]  If the elevators servicing his floor also service the fire floor, they shall not be used. However, elevators may be used if there is more than one bank of elevators, and he is informed from the Fire Command Station that one bank is unaffected by the fire. 
[2]  If elevators do not service the fire floor and their shafts have no openings on the fire floor, they may be used, unless otherwise directed. 
[3]  Elevators staffed by trained building personnel or firemen may also be used. 
[4]  In the absence of a serviceable elevator the Fire Warden shall select the safest stairway to use for evacuation on the basis of the location of the fire and any information received from the Fire Command Station. The Fire Warden shall check the environment in the stair prior to entry for evacuation. If it is affected by smoke, an alternate stair shall be selected and the Fire Command Station notified. 
[5]  The Fire Warden shall keep the Fire Command Station informed of the means being employed for evacuation by the occupants of his/her floor. 
[6]  The most critical areas for immediate evacuation are the fire floor and the floors immediately above. Evacuation from the other floors shall be instituted when instruction from the Fire Command Station or conditions indicates such action. Evacuation should be via uncontaminated stairs. He/she shall try to avoid stairs being used by the Department of Public Safety. If this is not possible, he/she shall try to attract the attention of the Department of Public Safety personnel before such personnel open the door to the fire floor. 
[7]  Evacuation to two or more levels below the fire floor is generally adequate. He/she shall keep the Fire Command Station informed regarding his/her location. 
[8]  Fire Wardens and their Deputies shall see that all occupants are notified of the fire, and that they proceed immediately to execute the Fire Safety Plan. 
[9]  The Fire Warden on the fire floor shall, as soon as practicable, notify the Fire Command Station of the particulars. 
[10]   Fire Wardens on the floor above the fire shall, after executing the Fire Safety Plan, notify the Command Station of the means being used for evacuation and any other particulars. 
E.  The Building Evacuation Supervisor shall: 
(1)  Be responsible to the Fire Safety Manager for matters relating to fire safety. 
(2)  Be capable of directing the evacuation of the occupants as provided by in the Fire Safety Plan. 
(3)  During fire emergencies, staff the Fire Command Station and be responsible for the direction and execution of the evacuation as provided for in the Fire Safety Plan. 
(4)  Accept the mantle of the Fire Safety Manager's responsibilities when he/she is on-duty and become the key to the building's fire defense. No prudent owner of a high-rise building is going to place in charge an individual who is not capable of handling the evacuation of a scattered maintenance crew and perhaps a tenant's nighttime working force. 
(5)  The building evacuation supervisor has to know the Fire Safety Plan and the duties of the Fire Safety Manager. He/she must be able to operate under emergency conditions. The person has to be intelligent and quick witted. 
F.  The Fire Brigade shall: 
(1)  On the receipt of an alarm for fire: 
(a)  Report to the fire floor and the floor below the fire to assist in evacuation and provide information to the Fire Command Station. 
(b)  Attempt to control the fire until arrival of the Department of Public Safety, if the fire is small and conditions do not pose a personal threat. 
(c)  Leave one member on the floor below the fire to direct the Department of Public Safety to the fire location and to inform them of conditions. 
(d)  On arrival of the Department of Public Safety the fire brigade shall report to the Fire Command Station for additional instructions.  
§ 3-132. - Requirements. 
[Added 6-27-2001 by Ord. No. 01-088 ; amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] 
A.  Fire Safety Plan. 
(1)  The Fire Safety Plan shall include but not be limited to the requirements of these Rules. 
(2)  Within ninety days after the adoption and publication of this Ordinance, the owner or other person having charge of an existing high-rise, shall submit their Fire Safety Plan to the Fire Official for approval. If such Fire Safety Plan is disapproved by the Fire Official, an amended or new Fire Safety Plan shall be resubmitted to the Fire Official within thirty (30) days after notice of such disapproval. 
(3)  The owner or other person having charge of a hereafter erected high-rise building of Use Group B, R-l and R-2, shall submit a Fire Safety Plan to the Fire Official prior to issuance of a temporary or permanent "Certificate of Occupancy." The words "CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY REQUESTED" shall be printed or typed on the top page of the Fire Safety Plan. No "Certificate of Occupancy" or "Temporary Certificate of Occupancy" shall be issued by the Building Department without approval of a Fire Safety Plan by the Fire Official. 
(4)  The applicable parts of the approved Fire Safety Plan shall be distributed to all tenants of the building by the building management when the Fire Safety Plan has been approved by the Fire Official. 
(a)  The applicable parts of the approved Fire Safety Plan shall then be distributed by the tenants to all their employees and by the building management to all their building employees. 
(5)  All occupants of the building shall participate and cooperate in carrying out the provisions of the Fire Safety Plan. 
(6)  The plan shall include but not be limited to: 
(a)  Location of nearest exits and alarms. 
(b)  Procedures to be followed when a smoke or fire alarm sounds. 
(c)  Procedures to be followed in the event of smoke or fire. 
(7)  A copy of the plan shall be readily available at all times within the building. The plan must be located at the Fire Command Center. 
(8)  An evacuation plan shall be conspicuously posted on every floor for the building occupant's use. 
(a)  Exception: In Use Group R-l, the evacuation plan shall be posted on the inside of each guest room door, other than a door opening directly to the outside at grade level. 
(9)  Where the owner of the building is also an occupant of the building he shall be responsible for the observance of this Ordinance and the Fire Safety Plan in the same manner as a tenant. 
(10)   In the event there are changes from conditions existing at the time the Fire Safety Plan for the building was approved and the changes are such so as to require changes, an amended Fire Safety Plan shall be submitted to the Fire Official within 30 days of the changes for approval. 
B.  Fire Command Station 
(1)  The Fire Command Station shall be established in the lobby of the building on the entrance floor. Such command station shall be adequately illuminated. 
(2)  The Fire Command Station shall be provided with floor plan of the building and other pertinent information relative to the service equipment of the building. 
(3)  A copy of the Fire Safety Plan shall be at the Fire Command Station. 
(4)  A listing of all handicapped tenants and/or residents shall be at the Command Fire Station. 
(5)  The Fire Command Center shall maintain a comprehensive log which shall include: 
(a)  The name and signature of the Fire Safety Manager or the Building Evacuation Supervisor on-duty along with the date of arrival and departure. 
(b)  A description of each incident occurring, including the date, time, location and action taken. An incident shall include, but not be limited to, fire, alarm, alarm activation, trouble signal, fire protection equipment malfunction, and any unrecorded communication pertaining to fire or life safety which is made to or from the Fire Command Center. 
(c)  This log shall be readily available for Department of Public Safety inspection. 
(6)  Every 10 th floor, (i.e., the 10 th floor, the 20 th floor, the 30 th , etc.), a small room shall be designated and marked "Department of Public Safety Equipment" and shall contain four (4) lengths of 2½" hose and one smooth bore nozzle, one axe and one pike pool, to be utilized by the Department of Public Safety in emergency situations and be supplied by the building owner. 
C.  Communications and Fire Alarm. 
(1)  A means of communication and fire alarm for use during fire emergencies shall be provided and maintained by the owner or person in charge of the building. 
(2)  All occupants of the building shall participate in fire drills. However, tenants of the building, other than building service employees, are not required to leave through the exits during the drill. 
(a)  A written record of such drills shall be kept on the premises for a three-year period and shall be readily available for Department of Public Safety inspection. 
D.  Signs. 
(1)  Signs at elevator landings. A sign shall be posted and maintained in a conspicuous place on every floor at the elevator landing, indicating that in case of a fire, occupants shall use the stairs unless otherwise instructed. The sign shall contain a diagram showing the location of the stairs, except that such diagram may be omitted provided that signs containing such diagram are posted in conspicuous places on the respective floor. 
(2)  Floor numbering signs. A sign shall be posted and maintained within each star enclosure on every floor indicating the initial floor, the number of the floor and the terminus of the stairway. 
(3)  Stair and elevator identification signs. Each stair and each bank of elevators shall be identified by an alphabetical letter. A sign indicating the letter of identification shall be posted and maintained at each elevator landing and on the side of the stair door from which egress is to be made. 
(4)  Stair reentry signs. A sign shall be posted and maintained on each floor within each stair on the occupancy side of each stair door, where applicable, indicating whether reentry is provided into the building and the floor where such reentry is provided  
§ 3-133. - Certificate of fitness. 
[Added 6-27-2001 by Ord. No. 01-088 ; amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ; 9-23-2014 by Ord. No. 14-118 ] 
A.  Capabilities. The Fire Safety Manager shall have the following capabilities: 
(1)  Ability to conduct fire evacuation drills, evacuations and related duties such as organizing, training and supervising a fire brigade. 
(2)  Ability to supervise and staff a fire command station for implementation and direction of evacuation procedures in building under his/her control in accordance with the provisions of Department of Public Safety Rules and the Fire Safety Plan. 
(3)  Ability to develop and implement a fire prevention and protection program to uncover and correct hazards relative to exits and maintenance thereof. 
(4)  Show knowledge in fire extinguishing systems and appliances; fire doors in partitions, exit passageways and stairs; the posting of door, elevator and other informational signs; the storage and use of combustible or flammable materials. 
B.  Qualifications. The Fire Safety Manager shall have the following qualifications: 
(1)  Possess at least five (5) years experience in fire protection and/or fire prevention activity or five (5) years experience in a responsible position pertaining to operation of building service equipment as defined in the Building Code or a satisfactory combination or equivalent. 
(2)  Shall satisfactorily complete a course for Fire Safety Manager given by a school or other organization acceptable to the Department of Public Safety. The Department of Public Safety will issue a Certificate of Completion to the applicant after he/she has passed a written examination administered by the Department of Public Safety. The applicant shall possess such a Certificate of Completion when making an application for a Certificate of Fitness. 
(3)  Shall have the ability to pass an examination by a person or body designated by the Fire Official relative to the characteristics and occupancy of the building which is to be under the applicant's control and the duties connected with the service to be performed including, among others, the following: 
(a)  Certificate of Occupancy provisions. 
(b)  Height, area, construction and occupancy. 
(c)  Number, type and location of exits. 
(d)  Number type and location of areas of refuge, if any. 
(e)  Number, type, location and operation of elevators and escalators. 
(f)  Interior Fire Alarms, Special Alarms and/or Communication Systems. 
(g)  Standpipe system components and operation. 
(h)  Sprinkler system components and operation. 
(i)  Special extinguishing system components and operation. 
(j)  Number of persons normally employed in building. 
(k)  Number of persons normally visiting the building. 
(l)  Plan for fire evacuation drills and evacuation. 
(m)  Table of organization for drill plan and for fire brigade. 
(n)  Operation of service equipment such as power, light, heat, cooling, ventilation, air- conditioning, refuse disposal, firefighting. transportation, or similar facility. 
(o)  Alterations and repair operations and the protective and preventive measures necessary to safeguard such operations, with priority attention to torch operations and the introduction, storage and use of flammable commodities. 
(p)  Special occupancies in the building and the proper protection and maintenance thereof. 
C.  Procedures. A Certificate of Fitness requires two (2) levels of approval. The first is the general classroom qualification for Fire Safety Manager along with a Jersey City Fire Department Examination. The second level is the specific qualification for the particular building for which he/she is employed. The qualifications are as follows: 
(1)  Level One: This level is achieved when an applicant completes a "Fire Safety Manager's course" in an institution approved by the Jersey City Fire Official. The applicant must then pass an examination by the Jersey City Fire Official and receive his/her Certificate of Completion. Employment as Fire Safety Manager in a particular building is not necessary for a Certificate of Completion. 
(2)  Level Two: This level is achieved when the applicant successfully passes an examination given by the Fire Official in the field, pertaining to the service equipment and the Fire Safety Plan for the specific building for which he/she is Fire Safety Manager. 
(3)  The applicant with the first level approval may continue employment as Fire Safety Manager while awaiting the second level approval. 
(4)  If the holder of a first and second level approval terminates employment with the building in which he/she is employed, the second level approval for that specific building which he/she left is automatically revoked and a new second level approval is required for his/her new building. The holder of the Certificate of Fitness and the building owner/manager shall promptly notify the Fire Official of such change of building.  
§ 3-133.1. - Variations. 
[Added 9-23-2014 by Ord. No. 14-118 ] 
In buildings where compliance would cause practical difficulty or undue hardship, the Fire Official, at his discretion, may modify the requirements of these rules and accept alternatives fulfilling the intent of these requirements consistent with public safety. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-118 , adopted September 23, 2014, amended the Code by adding a new section to be numbered 3-134. In order to prevent duplication of section numbers, the new section has been numbered as § 3-133.1 at the discretion of the editor.  
§ 3-133.2. - Violations. 
[Added 9-23-2014 by Ord. No. 14-118 ] 
Any person who shall violate, or refuse, or neglect to comply with any provision of this Code shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by imprisonment not exceeding six (6) months, or both; and any such person shall, also, for each offense, be subject to the payment of a penalty in the sum of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) to be recovered in a civil action brought in the name of the Fire Official. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-118 , adopted September 23, 2014, amended the Code by adding a new section to be numbered 3-135. In order to prevent duplication of section numbers, the new section has been numbered as § 3-133.2 at the discretion of the editor.  
ARTICLE XVIII - Department of Human Resources 
 
§ 3-134. - Department of Human Resources; created; head; divisions. 
[Added 1-29-2014 by Ord. No. 14-008 ] 
There shall be a Department of Human Resources. the head of which shall be the Director of Human Resources. The Director shall, prior to his or her appointment, be qualified by training and experience in personnel management. In addition to the duties specified in this section, the Department of Human Resources shall be responsible for the proper and efficient administration of all human resources functions. In that capacity, the department shall oversee each division under this section, shall be responsible for the proper administration of employee records, and the administration of all federal, state, county and local public employment programs unless otherwise provided by law, and shall provide technical advice and service to other departments as needed.  
§ 3-135. - Organization of Department. 
[Added 1-29-2014 by Ord. No. 14-008 ] 
A.  Within the Department of Human Resources there shall be the following divisions and offices: 
(1)  Division of Workforce Management. 
(2)  Office of Affirmative Action. 
(3)  Division of Health Benefits. 
(4)  Division of Pension. 
(5)  Division of Payroll.  
§ 3-136. - Division of Workforce Management; duties. 
[Added 1-29-2014 by Ord. No. 14-008 ] 
A.  Creation of the Division of Workforce Management; Director of the Division of Workforce Management in charge; qualifications. Within the Department of Human Resources there shall be a Division of Workforce Management, the head of which shall be the Director of the Division of Workforce Management. The Director of the Division of Workforce Management shall, prior to his or her appointment, be qualified by training or experience in the administration of governmental or large corporate personnel management, which shall be under the direct supervision of the Director of the Department of Human Resources. 
In addition to the duties specified in the section, the Division of Workforce Management shall be responsible for employee records and the administration of all federal, state, county and local public employment programs, unless otherwise provided by law. 
The Division of Workforce Management shall have the following duties: 
(1)  Design programs for the recruitment, selection and development of employment. 
(2)  Maintain liaison with state authorities engaged in enforcing personnel laws and regulations (Civil Service Department). 
(3)  Establish and maintain contact with City officials and Department Directors. 
(4)  Participate actively in developing employment opportunities and operating policies. 
(5)  Coordinate recruitment announcements to optimize awareness of employment opportunities. 
(6)  Recommend review of job structures, employee evaluations, training and experience qualifications to improve entry and promotional opportunities. 
(7)  Keep abreast of developments and legislation regarding personnel policy and practices and ensure enforcement. 
(8)  Prepare and implement a comprehensive Personnel Policy and Procedure Manual. 
(9)  Oversee the offices created hereunder and perform such other duties as may be assigned from time to time.  
§ 3-137. - Office of Affirmative Action; duties. 
[Added 1-29-2014 by Ord. No. 14-008 ] 
A.  Creation of Affirmative Action Compliance Office; duties. Within the Division of Workforce Management there shall be an Affirmative Action Office that, under the Division Director, shall perform the following duties: 
(1)  Establish an affirmative action liaison in each department. 
(2)  Coordinate and establish affirmative action goals in each department. 
(3)  Evaluate and prepare the City's Affirmative Action Plan. 
(4)  Investigate and resolve complaints of discrimination from employees and applicants using state regulations concerning employment with the City. 
(5)  Maintain liaison with federal and state authorities engaged in the enforcement of equal employment opportunity laws and regulations. 
(6)  Maintain statistical data on the composition of the work force in compliance with the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and other mandated legislation, i.e., Equal Pay Act of 1963, Age Discrimination Act of 1978, Vietnam Veterans and Handicapped Acts. 
(7)  Coordinate activities with the Workforce Management Division concerning employment, training and development programs which will tend to equalize employment opportunities for women and minorities. 
(8)  Maintain a working liaison with equal employment opportunity program representatives of federal and state agencies to ensure compliance with the law. 
(9)  Prepare clear, technically sound, accurate and detailed reports containing findings, conclusions and recommendations.  
§ 3-138. - Division of Health Benefits; duties. 
[Added 1-29-2014 by Ord. No. 14-008 ] 
A.  Creation of the Division of Health Benefits; Supervisor in charge; qualifications. There shall be created within the Department of Human Resources a Division of Health Benefits, the head of which shall be the Supervisor of the Division of Health Benefits. The Supervisor of the Division of Health Benefits shall, prior to his or her appointment, be qualified by training or experience in the administration of governmental or large corporate health benefits plans, which shall be under the direct supervision of the Director of the Department of Human Resources and which shall have the following duties: 
(1)  Design programs for the selection and development of health benefits plan. 
(2)  Maintain liaison with state authorities engaged in enforcing health benefits laws and regulations (Civil Service Department). 
(3)  Establish and maintain contact with City officials and Department Directors. 
(4)  Participate actively in developing operating policies. 
(5)  Coordinate announcements to optimize awareness of health benefits. 
(6)  Coordinate the implementation of an active employee medical health benefits plan and a retiree medical and health benefits plan. 
(7)  Keep abreast of developments and legislation regarding health benefits policy and practices and ensure enforcement. 
(8)  Prepare and implement a comprehensive Health Benefits Policy and Procedure Manual. 
(9)  Perform such other duties as may be assigned from time to time.  
§ 3-139. - Division of Pension; duties. 
[Added 1-29-2014 by Ord. No. 14-008 ] 
A.  Creation of the Division of Pension; Supervisor in charge; qualifications. There is hereby created within the Department of Human Resources a Division of Pension, the head of which shall be the Supervisor of the Division of Pension. The Supervisor of the Division of Pension shall, prior to his or her appointment, be qualified by training or experience in the administration of governmental or large corporate employee pension plans, which shall be under the direct supervision of the Director of the Department of Human Resources and which shall have the following duties: 
(1)  Administer operations for all municipal employees. 
(2)  Supervise the administration, but not the investment, of all pension funds of the city and retirements with respect thereto, including the Police and Fire Departments. 
(3)  Application and execution of pension payments to retired employees, in accordance with the Noncontribution Pension Act, N.J.S.A. 43:8B-1 et seq., and all other pension programs within his or her jurisdiction, in addition to assisting and advising applicants in filing retirement applications. 
(4)  Review retirement applications and personnel action forms prior to making recommendations to their respective Directors and pension supervisors as to the pension category in which the individual shall be placed. 
(5)  Compile semimonthly pension payrolls for the municipal employees' pension fund and other statutory pension payments except for the police and fire fighter's pensions which shall be the responsibility of the Police and Fire Departments' fiscal officers. 
(6)  Be the liaison between the City and the Public Employees' Retirement System (PERS) and the various pension funds, and compile data for enrollment into PERS in cases complying with established rules of that fund. 
(7)  Establish acceptable and workable records of all pension assessment collections with the approval of the Division of Accounts and Control; accept all moneys deducted from salaries of municipal employees who are members of all pension funds and deposit the same; and prepare monthly financial reports and transmittals to the New Jersey PERS, together with a quarterly financial report. 
(8)  Arrange for physical examinations in accordance with the various pension acts; receive medical reports from physicians; and in certain cases establish and maintain a record for the purpose of reducing pension payments in certain cases where social security integration is part of their pension. 
(9)  Prepare annual budgets for the semimonthly pension payments to all pensioners whose names are carried on the rolls of the City; prepare salary budget and budget for the office supplies for proper maintenance of the Division of Pension, together with all duties pertinent to the enrollment and retirement of all employees of the City with exception of uniform police and firemen. 
(10)   Advise and make recommendations for retirements and act as the certifying agent for the Social Security Administration. 
B.  The Pension Commission of the Employees' Retirement System of the City is continued within the Department of Administration and shall be constituted and have the functions, powers and duties as provided by law ( N.J.S.A. 43:13-22.50 et seq.).  
§ 3-140. - Division of Payroll; duties. 
[Added 1-29-2014 by Ord. No. 14-008 ] 
A.  Creation of the Division of Payroll; Supervisor in charge; qualifications. There is hereby created within the Department of Human Resources a Division of Payroll, the head of which shall be the Supervisor of the Division of Payroll. The Supervisor of the Division of Payroll shall, prior to his or her appointment, be qualified by training or experience in the administration of governmental or large corporate payroll operations, which shall be under the direct supervision of the Director of the Department of Human Resources and which shall have the following duties: 
(1)  Administer payroll operations for all municipal employees. 
(2)  Administer a centralized timekeeping system for City employees. 
(3)  Provide for the use and installation of a central payroll system.  
Chapter 4 - PAID SICK TIME 
 
§ 4-1. - Definitions. 
[Added 9-25-2013 by Ord. No. 13-097 ; amended 10-28-2015 by Ord. No. 15-145 ] 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
CALENDAR YEAR — A regular and consecutive twelve-month period, as determined by an employer. 
CONSTRUCTION UNION — means an organization that represents, for purposes of collective bargaining, employees involved in the performance of construction, reconstruction, demolition, alteration, custom fabrication, or repair work and who are enrolled or have graduated from a registered apprenticeship program. 
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Health and Human Services. 
EMPLOYEE(S) — Employee(s) as defined in N.J.S.A. 34:11-56a1(h) including part-time and temporary employees, who works in Jersey City for at least eighty (80) hours in a calendar year. Employee(s) for purposes of this chapter includes any individual engaged in work activity that would be considered "employment" under the federal Fair Labor Standards Act, 29 U.S.C. § 201 et seq., and any applicable U.S. Department of Labor Guidelines, but does not include any person employed by any governmental entity or instrumentality of the State of New Jersey or any political subdivision thereof, including any New Jersey school district or Board of Education, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, or any subdivisions of Rutgers University, or any person who is a member of a construction union and is covered by a collective bargaining agreement negotiated by that union. 
EMPLOYER — Any entity as defined by N.J.S.A. 34:11-56a1(g) except that Employer does not include the United States government or any federal agency, entity or instrumentality of the federal government, the State of New Jersey, including the legislature, the judiciary or any agency, entity or instrumentality of the State of New Jersey, any political subdivision of the State of New Jersey, including any school district or Board of Education, or Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, or any subdivisions of Rutgers University. 
FAMILY MEMBER: 
(1)  A biological, adopted or foster child, stepchild or legal ward, a child of a domestic partner, a child of a civil union partner, or a child to whom the employee stands in loco parentis; 
(2)  A biological, foster, stepparent or adoptive parent or legal guardian of an employee or an employee's spouse, domestic partner or civil union partner or a person who stood in loco parentis when the employee was a minor child; 
(3)  A person to whom the employee is legally married under the laws of New Jersey or any other state or with whom the employee has entered into a civil union; 
(4)  A grandparent or spouse, civil union partner or domestic partner of a grandparent; 
(5)  A grandchild; 
(6)  A sibling; or 
(7)  A domestic partner of an employee as defined in N.J.S.A. 26:8A-3 et seq. 
HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONAL — Any person licensed under Federal or New Jersey law to provide medical or emergency services, including but not limited to doctors, nurses and emergency room personnel. 
PAID SICK TIME — Time that is compensated at the same hourly rate and with the same benefits, including health care benefits, as the employee normally earns during hours worked and is provided by an employer to an employee for the purposes described in Subsections 4-3.A(1)—(11) of this chapter, but in no case shall the hourly wage be less than that provided under N.J.S.A. 34:11-56a. 
REGISTERED APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAM — means an apprenticeship program that is registered with and approved by the United States Department of Labor and which meets not less than two (2) of the following requirements: (A) has active, employed, registered apprentices; (B) has graduated apprentices to journey worker status during a majority of the years that the program has been in operation; or (C) has graduated apprentices to journey worker status during three (3) of the immediately preceding five (5) years, provides each trainee with combined classroom and on-the-job training under the direct and close supervision of a highly skilled worker in an occupation recognized as an apprenticeable trade and meets the program performance standards of enrollment and graduation under 29 C.F.R. Part 29, section 29.63.1. 
RETALIATION — The denial of any right guaranteed under this chapter and any threat, discipline, discharge, suspension, demotion, reduction of hours, or any other adverse action against an employee for the exercise of any right guaranteed herein.  
§ 4-2. - Purpose. 
[Added 9-25-2013 by Ord. No. 13-097 ] 
Purposes of this chapter are: 
(1)  To diminish public and private health care costs and promote preventive health services in Jersey City by enabling workers to seek early and routine medical care for themselves and their family members; 
(2)  To protect the public's health in Jersey City by reducing the spread of contagious diseases; 
(3)  To promote the economic security and stability of workers and their families; 
(4)  To protect employees in Jersey City from losing their jobs or facing workplace discipline while they use paid sick time to care for themselves or their families; 
(5)  To safeguard the public welfare, health, safety and prosperity of the people of Jersey City; and 
(6)  To accomplish the purposes described in paragraphs (1)—(5) in a manner that is feasible for employers.  
§ 4-3. - Application. 
[Added 9-25-2013 by Ord. No. 13-097 ; amended 10-28-2015 by Ord. No. 15-145 ] 
This chapter requires all those employed within the City of Jersey City to accrue either paid or unpaid sick time from their employer as mandated by this chapter utilizing the formula applied herein. 
Individuals who work for employers who employ ten (10) or more employees shall accrue compensated sick time up to a maximum of forty (40) hours per year. 
Individuals who work for employers who employ less than ten (10) employees shall accrue compensated sick time up to a maximum of twenty-four (24) hours per year. In addition, once such individuals have accrued twenty-four (24) hours of compensated sick time, they shall accrue unpaid sick time up to a maximum of sixteen (16) hours per year. 
Taking of sick time, whether compensated or not shall not be the basis of an adverse employment action. 
A.  Accrual of Paid Sick Time. 
(1)  Employees shall accrue a minimum of one (1) hour of paid or unpaid sick time for every thirty (30) hours worked subject to the limits set forth below in A(2) and A(3). 
(2)  Employers who employ ten (10) or more employees for compensation are not required to provide more than forty (40) hours of paid sick time in a calendar year. In determining the number of employees performing work for an employer, all employees performing work for compensation on a full-time, part-time, or temporary basis shall be counted, provided that where the number of employees who work for an employer for compensation fluctuates, the number of employees may be determined for the current calendar year based upon the average number of employees who worked for compensation during the preceding calendar year. 
Employers who employ less than ten (10) employees for compensation are not required to provide more than twenty-four (24) hours of paid sick time in a calendar year except for employees who are child care workers, home health care workers and food service workers. For child care workers, health care workers and food service workers, employers are required to provide up to forty (40) hours of paid sick time, so long as the hours are accrued in a calendar year as set forth elsewhere in this Section. 
In determining the number of employees performing work for an employer, all employees performing work for compensation, whether on a full-time, part-time, or temporary basis shall be counted, provided that where the number of employees who work for an employer for compensation fluctuates, the number of employees may be determined for the current calendar year based upon the average number of employees who worked for compensation during the preceding calendar year. 
(3)  Employees who are exempt from overtime requirements under 29 U.S.C. § 201 et seq. of the Federal Fair Labor Standards Act are assumed to work forty (40) hours in each work week for purposes of paid sick time accrual unless their normal work week is less than forty (40) hours, in which case paid sick time accrues based upon that normal work week. 
(4)  Paid sick time as provided in this section begins to accrue at the commencement of employment. 
(5)  Employees begin to accrue paid sick time on the first day of employment. Employees are entitled to use accrued paid sick time beginning on the ninetieth calendar day of their employment. After the ninetieth calendar day of employment, employees may use paid sick time as it is accrued. 
(6)  Paid sick time is carried over to the following calendar year except that no employer is required to carry over more than forty (40) hours of paid sick time from one (1) calendar year to the next and nothing in this section entitles an employee to use more than forty (40) hours of paid sick time in a calendar year. 
(7)  Any employer with a paid leave policy, such as a paid time off policy, that provides an amount of paid leave sufficient to meet the total annual accrual requirements of this section that may be used for the same purposes and under the same conditions as paid sick time under this chapter is not required to provide additional paid sick time. 
(8)  Nothing in this section shall be construed as requiring financial or other reimbursement to an employee from an employer upon the employee's termination, resignation, retirement, or other separation from employment for accrued paid sick time that has not been used. 
(9)  If an employee is transferred to a separate division, entity, or location, but remains employed by the same employer, the employee is entitled to all paid sick time accrued at the prior division, entity, or location and is entitled to use all paid sick time as provided in this section. If there is a separation from employment and the employee is rehired within six (6) months of separation, previously accrued paid sick time that had not been used shall be reinstated. Further, the employee is entitled to use accrued paid sick time and accrue additional paid sick time at the re-commencement of employment. 
(10)   When a different employer succeeds or takes the place of an existing employer, all employees of the original employer who remain employed by the successor employer are entitled to all paid sick time accrued when employed by the original employer and are entitled to use all paid sick leave previously accrued. 
(11)   At its discretion, an employer may loan sick time to an employee in advance of accrual by such employee. 
(12)   The requirements of this Chapter shall not apply to employees covered by a collective bargaining agreement (CBA) to the extent that such requirements are expressly waived in the collective bargaining agreement in clear and unambiguous terms. With respect to employees covered by a collective bargaining agreement in effect at the time of the effective date of this Chapter, no provision of this Chapter shall apply until the expiration of the collective bargaining agreement; however, if the terms of an expired collective bargaining agreement provide paid sick leave that is more generous than provided by this Chapter, those terms of the expired collective bargaining agreement shall govern. 
B.  Use of Sick Time. 
(1)  Sick time shall be provided to an employee by an employer for: 
a.  An employee's mental or physical illness, injury, or health condition; an employee's need for medical diagnosis, care, or treatment of a mental or physical illness, injury, or health condition; an employee's need for preventive medical care; 
b.  Care of a family member with a mental or physical illness, injury, or health condition; care of a family member who needs medical diagnosis, care, or treatment of a mental or physical illness, injury, or health condition; care of a family member who needs preventive medical care; and 
c.  Closure of the employee's place of business by order of a public official due to a public health emergency or an employee's need to care for a child whose school or place of care has been closed by order of a public official due to a public health emergency, or care for a family member when it has been determined by the health authorities having jurisdiction or by a health care provider that the family member's presence in the community would jeopardize the health of others because of the family member's exposure to a communicable disease, whether or not the family member has actually contracted the communicable disease. 
(2)  Sick time shall be provided upon the oral request of an employee. 
(3)  An employee shall give an employer notice of the need to use sick time as soon as practicable. 
(4)  An employer may not require, as a condition of an employee's taking sick time, that the employee search for or find a replacement worker to cover the hours during which the employee is absent. 
(5)  Accrued sick time may be used in the smaller of hourly increments or the smallest increment that the employer's payroll system uses to account for absences or use of other time. 
(6)  For sick time of more than three (3) consecutive days, an employer may require reasonable documentation that the paid sick time has been used for a purpose covered by Section 4-2 of this chapter. Reasonable documentation includes: documentation signed by a heath care professional indicating that paid sick time is necessary. An employer may not require that the documentation explain the nature of the illness. 
(7)  Individuals who work for employers who employ less than ten (10) employees and who have accrued both compensated and unpaid sick time shall not be required by his or her employer to exhaust unpaid sick time before using compensated sick time.  
§ 4-4. - Exercise of rights protected; retaliation prohibited. 
[Added 9-25-2013 by Ord. No. 13-097 ] 
A.  No person shall interfere with, restrain, or deny the exercise of, or the attempt to exercise, any right protected under this chapter. 
B.  No person shall retaliate against an employee because the employee has exercised rights protected under this chapter. 
C.  The rights protected under this chapter include but are not limited to the right to request and use paid sick time pursuant to this chapter; the right to file a complaint or inform any person about any employer's alleged violation of this chapter; the right to cooperate with the Agency in its investigations of alleged violations of this chapter; the right to participate in any administrative or judicial action regarding an alleged violation of this chapter; and the right to inform any person of his or her potential rights under this chapter. 
D.  It is unlawful for an employer's absence control policy to count paid sick time taken under this chapter as an absence that may lead to or result in discipline, discharge, demotion, suspension, or any other adverse action. 
E.  Protections of this section apply to any person who mistakenly but in good faith alleges violations of this chapter. 
F.  There is a rebuttable presumption of unlawful retaliation under this section whenever an employer takes adverse action against a person within ninety (90) days of when that person: 
(1)  Files a complaint with the Agency or a court alleging a violation of any provision of this chapter; 
(2)  Informs any person about an employer's alleged violation of this chapter; 
(3)  Cooperates with the Agency or other persons in the investigation or prosecution of any alleged violation of this chapter; 
(4)  Opposes any policy, practice, or ordinance that is unlawful under this chapter; or 
(5)  Informs any person of his or her potential rights under this chapter.  
§ 4-5. - Notice and posting. 
[Added 9-25-2013 by Ord. No. 13-097 ] 
A.  All employers shall give individual written notice to each of their employees at the commencement of the employee's employment (or as soon as practicable if the employee is already employed on the effective date of this law) regarding employee's rights under this chapter. Such notice shall describe the right to paid sick time, the accrual rate and the amount of paid sick time, and the terms of its use guaranteed under this chapter; the right to be free from retaliation for requesting use of paid sick time; and the right to file a complaint or bring a civil action if paid sick time is denied by the employer or the employee is retaliated against for requesting or taking paid sick time. Such notice shall be in English and the primary language spoken by that employee provided that the Department has made available a translation of such notice into such language. 
B.  Employers shall also display a poster in a conspicuous and accessible place in each establishment where employees are employed containing notice of this chapter. The poster shall be in English and in any language that is the first language of at least ten percent (10%) of the employer's workforce provided that the Department has made available a translation of such notice into such language. 
C.  The Department shall create and make available to employers individual notices and posters. Notices and posters shall be provided in English, Spanish, Italian, Chinese, Polish, Portuguese, Tagalog, and any other languages selected by the Agency. 
D.  An employer who violates the notice and posting requirements of this section is subject to a civil fine in an amount not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each employee who was not given appropriate notice pursuant to this section and five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each establishment in which a poster was not displayed.  
§ 4-6. - Employer records. 
[Added 9-25-2013 by Ord. No. 13-097 ] 
Employers shall retain for three (3) years records documenting hours worked by employees and paid sick time taken by employees and shall allow the Department reasonable access to such records, to monitor compliance with the requirements of this chapter. An employer's failure to maintain or retain adequate records documenting hours worked by an employee and paid sick time taken by an employee create a rebuttable presumption that the employer has violated this chapter, absent clear and convincing evidence otherwise.  
§ 4-7. - Enforcement and regulations. 
[Added 9-25-2013 by Ord. No. 13-097 ] 
A.  The Department shall coordinate implementation and enforcement of this chapter and shall promulgate appropriate guidelines or regulations for such purposes. 
B.  The Department shall coordinate implementation and enforcement of this chapter, including, but not limited to: 
1.  establishing a system to receive complaints, in writing and by telephone, in English, Spanish, and any other language deemed appropriate by the Department regarding the employers non-compliance with this chapter; 
2.  investigate and resolve complaints received by the Department in a timely manner and keep complainants notified regarding the status of the investigation; 
3.  engage in pro-active enforcement of this chapter through the use of audits, on-site investigations, or other measures to ensure employer's compliance. Investigators from the Department shall be empowered to interview employees and former employees in private outside the presence of the employer, and the power to determine whether or not employers have complied with this chapter. The Department shall also have the power to inform residents of the City of their rights under this chapter. 
C.  The Department shall maintain confidential the identity of any complaining person unless disclosure of the identity is necessary for resolution of the investigation. The Department shall, to the extent practicable, notify a complaining person that the Department will be disclosing his or her identity prior to such a disclosure. 
D.  The Department shall establish a system for reviewing and adjudicating complaints by employees. Employers deemed by the Department to be in violation of this chapter shall be subject to the penalty prescribed in § 1-25 of the Municipal Code: the maximum penalty for violating this chapter shall be, in the discretion of the Court, a fine of up to two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) and/or a period of community service not exceeding ninety (90) days. This penalty shall apply to each individual infraction of this chapter. This section shall not affect any mandatory minimum penalty established by any section of the Code or ordinance. 
[Amended 10-28-2015 by Ord. No. 15-145 ] 
E.  Any person claiming to be aggrieved by the violation of this chapter may bring a cause of action in any court of competent jurisdiction. Submitting a complaint to the Department is neither a prerequisite nor a bar to bringing private action.  
§ 4-8. - Confidentiality and non-disclosure. 
[Added 9-25-2013 by Ord. No. 13-097 ] 
An employer may not require disclosure of details relating to an employee's or an employee's family member's medical condition as a condition of providing paid sick time under this chapter. If an employer possesses health information about an employee or employee's family member, such information shall be treated as confidential and not disclosed except to the affected employee or with the permission of the affected employee.  
§ 4-9. - Encouragement of more generous paid sick time policies; no effect on more generous policies. 
[Added 9-25-2013 by Ord. No. 13-097 ] 
A.  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to discourage or prohibit an employer from the adoption or retention of a paid sick time policy more generous than the one required herein. 
B.  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as diminishing the obligation of an employer to comply with any contract, collective bargaining agreement, employment benefit plan, or other agreement providing more generous paid sick time to an employee than required herein. 
C.  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as diminishing the rights of public employees regarding paid sick time or use of paid sick time as provided in the laws of the State of New Jersey pertaining to public employees.  
§ 4-10. - Severability. 
[Added 9-25-2013 by Ord. No. 13-097 ; amended 10-28-2015 by Ord. No. 15-145 ] 
If any provision of this chapter or application thereof to any person or circumstance is judged invalid, the invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this chapter that can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are declared severable. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-145 , adopted October 28, 2015, amended the Code by repealing former §§ 4-10 and 4-12 and renumbering former § 4-11 as a new § 4-10. Former § 4-10 pertained to research, and former § 4-12 pertained to an effective date. Both sections derived from Ord. No. 13-097 , adopted September 25, 2013.  
Chapter 5 - FILMING AND PHOTOGRAPHY PERMITS 
 
§ 5-1. - Purpose and intent. 
[Added 10-23-2013 by Ord. No. 13-116 ] 
A.  It is the purpose of this chapter to: 
(1)  Regulate the issuance of permits for commercial and educational filming activities within the City; 
(2)  Provide for fire, police and other appropriate departmental assistance from the City; and 
(3)  Establish insurance, time, location and other related protocols. 
B.  This chapter also intends to ensure that motion picture, television commercial and non-theatrical filming companies, as well as still photographers, are encouraged to use locations for filming activities with the City consistent with the City's duty to ensure the health and safety of persons and property. 
C.  This chapter is not intended to apply to purely private filming events, including, but not limited to, the filming or photographing of a wedding or private social function, or the filming by any public entity, such as the non-commercial ventures of local universities and City economic development authorities; neither is it intended to include the filming of news stories.  
§ 5-2. - Definitions. 
[Amended 9-12-2018 by Ord. No. 18-101 ] 
APPLICANT or APPLICANT OF PERMIT — Any person, organization, corporation, association or other entity applying for a film permit from the City of Jersey City. 
CITY — The City of Jersey City. 
FILM — As used in this Chapter, any film, including a movie, television program, commercial, still photography, video documentary, music video, internet video or other visual recording medium, used in whole or in part for sale, lease, or other commercial exchange, including the advertisement or promotion of any product, service or organization. A recurrent television or internet series is a film. A film which is not sold or leased in whole or part, or is not otherwise part of a commercial exchange, is a "non-profit film." 
FILM CREW MEMBERS — Shall include, but not be limited to: directors, actors, set or costume designers, camera crew members, lighting crew members, sound crew members, boom operators, pyrotechnics experts, stunt performers, extras, stage hands, security personnel, production or personal assistants, contractors and subcontractors, interns (whether or not paid) and agents. 
INTERMEDIATE FILM — Commercial still photo shoots, web series, independent films, short films that consist of either a filming crew size that is between ten and 19 people, a casting size that is between ten and 14 people, or the presence of nine or fewer production vehicles on city streets. 
MAJOR FILM — Major motion pictures, commercials, TV series, network, cable, streaming services (e.g. Netflix, Hulu, Amazon, etc.) that consist of either a filming crew size of 20 or more people, a casting size of 15 or more people, or the presence of greater than ten production vehicles on city streets. 
MINOR FILM — Commercial still photo shoots, web series, independent films, short films that consist of either a filming crew size that is between four and nine people, a casting size that is between four and nine people, or the presence of three or fewer production vehicles on city streets. 
NEWS MEDIA — As used in this chapter, filming for the purpose of spontaneous, unplanned television news reporting by journalists, reporters, photographers or camera operators. 
PRIVATE PROPERTY — As used in this chapter, any property not owned by the City of Jersey City, but rather is owned by or assessed to a private person or entity in which filming would not interfere with public right of way, access or safety. 
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Any public street, road, sidewalk, public park or playground, City-owned building or property or any other public place which is maintained and within the control of the City of Jersey City. 
STILL PHOTOGRAPH — Photographs or other visual impressions which are not films which are sold or leased or otherwise commercially exchanged and all activity related to the staging or shooting of such photographs or other visual impressions. 
STUDENT FILM — A not-for-profit film, filmed in eight (8) hours or less, made by currently-enrolled students under the sponsorship of an accredited school or institution of higher learning, who have evidenced such sponsorship with a letter written on school letterhead, signed by a school administrator, and who present a certificate of insurance.  
§ 5-3. - Filming/still photography permit. 
A.  Permit Requirement. No person or organization shall commence the making of a film, or permit filming or take still photographs (as defined in this Chapter) on public property without first having completed an application and obtained a film/photography permit from the Mayor's office. 
B.  No person shall commence the making of a film, commercial film or permit filming or take still photographs on private property without first having completed an application and obtained a film/photography permit from the City's Mayor's office if filming will interfere with the public's use of public property or rights of way on public property. 
Upon approval as provided for in this Chapter, a permit shall issue, and be at all times during filming available for display. 
C.  Time to Apply. Applicants shall, if practicable, apply for a permit at least 14 days before commencing filming. No application shall be accepted within seventy-two (72) hours before filming.  
§ 5-4. - Permit fees. 
A.  Permit Fees. Applicant shall pay a non-refundable fee, and other applicable fees in Chapter 160 (Fees and Charges). The imposition of fees pursuant to Chapter 160 shall not preclude the City from seeking payment or reimbursement for additional expenses incurred by the City. 
[Amended 9-12-2018 by Ord. No. 18-101 ] 
B.  Form of payment. Permit fees shall be paid in cashier's checks, postal money orders made out to the City of Jersey City or using the payment system on the City's website.  
§ 5-5. - Exceptions to permit requirements. 
A.  No permit shall be required for: 
[Amended 9-12-2018 by Ord. No. 18-101 ] 
(1)  Filming by news media as defined in this chapter. 
(2)  Filming for private social activities, including weddings, unless the filming or photographing of such events is sold, leased, rented or used for any commercial purposes, including reality television, in which case, a permit shall be obtained and all fees paid. 
(3)  Filming activities or still photography conducted for use in a criminal investigation or civil or criminal court proceeding, but not including films or photographs which are sold, leased or used for any commercial purpose. 
(4)  Filming or still photography conducted solely for private non-profit, personal or family use, including real estate sales purposes of selling an individual residence. 
(5)  Filming activities or still photography conducted by or for the City of Jersey City. 
(6)  Filming which requires no more than three crew members and no other equipment except two (2) cameras and two (2) tripods. 
(7)  A student film, provided that the makers and the school shall agree in writing that if the student film is ever released for commercial purposes, all permit costs and fees shall be due and payable as provided for in this Chapter. All fees other than the permit fee, set forth in Section 5-4, shall apply. 
(8)  Permit fees may be waived for non-profit organizations with a valid 501c3 status. 
B.  In the event that any of the above activities require the use of commercial vehicles, a permit shall be obtained notwithstanding the fact that no fee is imposed.  
§ 5-6. - Requirements for applicants. 
A.  Insurance. Insurance may be required in an amount and type to be determined by the City Office of Risk Management, which shall make such determination as befits the type of Film or Still Photography to be permitted and whether or not vehicles are proposed to be used. The applicant shall submit the Certificate of Insurance required by the City Office of Risk Management along with the permit application. The Certificate of Insurance shall include the City of Jersey City as an additional insured. 
B.  Indemnity. By making application for a permit under this chapter, the applicant, applicant, its officers, agents, contractors, servants, consultants, employees and affiliates agree to indemnify and hold harmless the City of Jersey City, its authorized agents, officers, representatives and employees from any and all losses, liability, expense, claim officers, representatives and employees from any and all losses, liability, expense, claim or damages including, without limitation, defense costs and reasonable legal fees resulting from any and all activities including any accident, loss, injury to or death of persons or damage to property which the City may incur arising out of or related to the filming and/or photography permitted under the permit, including but not limited to the City's issuance of a permit to film pursuant to this chapter. The applicant's liability under the permit shall continue after the expiration of the permit with respect to any loss, damage or acts occurring prior to the expiration of the permit. 
C.  Off-Duty Police. Off-duty police officers shall be required during filming if: 
(1)  Firearms, pyrotechnics or other hazardous materials are to be used; 
(2)  Any actors or crew-members are to be wearing costumes that resemble the uniforms of any type of public personnel; 
(3)  Any streets or lanes are to be closed; or 
(4)  The filming involves activities in which a police presence is necessary to protect the health, safety or welfare of the residents of Jersey City. 
D.  The City reserves the right, on a case-by-case basis, to require the approval of any City department or division, not listed above, for activities which such department or division oversees or regulates, or which in any way impinges upon its duties and obligations to the public.  
§ 5-7. - Granting of a permit; rules and regulations. 
A.  Permits shall not be transferrable. 
B.  A permit may be denied if: 
(1)  The Director of Public Works determines that closing a street will cause a substantial risk to public safety or interfere with street maintenance work, or a previously authorized excavation permit. 
(2)  The filming activity will substantially interfere with municipal functions or the scheduled maintenance of city buildings or grounds. 
(3)  The activity creates a substantial risk of injury to persons or damage to property. 
(4)  The applicant failed to complete the application after being requested to do so, or the information contained in the application is found to be false in any material detail. 
(5)  The activity violates federal, state, or local law including licensing or permit requirements. 
(6)  The applicant has failed to obtain or provide proof of insurance, as required in Subsection 5-6.A above. 
(7)  The applicant has failed to submit the appropriate application fee in the manner required in Subsections 5-4.A and 5-4.B above. 
(8)  Filming may violate any regulation in Subsection 5-7.B below. 
When the grounds for permit denial can be corrected by imposing reasonable conditions, the City may impose such conditions rather than denying the permit. 
C.  Regulations upon Receipt of Permit. 
[Amended 11-12-2014 by Ord. No. 14-017 ; 9-12-2018 by Ord. No. 18-101 ] 
(1)  The permit holder shall take all reasonable steps to minimize interference with the free passage of pedestrians and traffic over public lands and shall comply with all lawful directives issued by the Department of Public Safety with respect thereto. 
(2)  The permit holder shall conduct its activities in such a manner so as to minimize the inconvenience or discomfort to adjoining property owners attributable to such filming and shall, to the extent practicable, abate noise and park vehicles associated with such filming off the public streets. The permit holder shall avoid any interference with previously scheduled activities upon City property and, limit, to the extent possible, any interference with normal activities. 
(3)  Where a permit holder's activities, by reason of location or otherwise, affect any business(es), merchants or residents, the permit holder will give these parties at least three (3) days' notice prior to the film/photography shooting date(s). 
(4)  The permit holder shall make every effort to minimize the inconvenience caused by filming and shall provide a designee who will respond to residents' concerns and for ensuring the obtaining of off-duty Police assistance, the placing of "no parking" signs and other traffic control devices (under the direction of the Division of Parking Enforcement, but at the applicant's expense), providing advance notice to affected property owners/businesses and cleanup and restoration of all property, including streets, affected by the filming. 
(5)  All filming and/or photography must be completed by the time specified in the permit. Any extension to this time must be approved by the film liaison. 
(6)  The permit holder shall pay all fees, and obtain all permits and licenses required for its activity under local, state and federal law and pay any fees associated therewith. 
(7)  The permit holder shall abide by all governmental fire regulations. 
(8)  The permit holder shall disclose to the City and obtain permission for any: use of stunts, pyrotechnics, open flames, vehicle crashes or hazardous materials. 
(9)  The permit holder shall conceal police, fire and other official uniforms worn by actors, when the actors are not on camera. 
(10)   The applicant shall abide by City restrictions on the use of City logos, insignias, badges or decals as set forth in the information packet provided by the film liaison. 
(11)   The City shall receive credit on the project that shall read: "Thanks to the City of Jersey City." The credit shall have a blank space above and below the credit so that it stands apart from and not on a list of like credits. 
(12)   The permit holder shall provide the City with five (5) different publicity stills for each scene shot. The stills will be used by the City solely for promotional purposes, including, but not limited to encouraging tourism and film-making. The applicant shall give the City proper acknowledgment for any assistance provided in making feature, television, or commercial productions. 
(13)   The permit holder shall immediately report all accidents, injuries, health incidents or damage to property to the appropriate public authority.  
Chapter 6 - BUSINESS LICENSES OR PERMITS 
_____ 
ARTICLE I - Wage Theft Prevention 
 
§ 6-1. - Definitions. 
[Added 7-15-2015 by Ord. No. 15-095 ] 
In this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings stated in this section unless the context otherwise requires: 
A.  "License" shall mean any business license or permit issued by the municipality as authorized by N.J.S.A. 40:52-1. 
B.  "Wage Theft" shall mean having been found guilty, liable or responsible in any judicial or administrative proceeding for unpaid wages in violation of the New Jersey State Wage and Hour Law ( N.J.S.A. 34:11-56a et seq.), the New Jersey State Wage Payment Law ( N.J.S.A. 34:11-4.1 et seq.), the Hudson County Living Wage Ordinance (No. 363-6-2014, 364-6-2014, 365-6-2014 and P.L. 1977, C. 33.), N.J.S.A. 2C:40A-2, the Fair Labor Standards Act, 29 U.S.C. § 201 et seq., Section 3-76c of the Jersey City Municipal Code, or any other federal or state law related to the payment of wages or the collection of debt owed due to unpaid wages.  
§ 6-2. - Grounds for denial of license renewal. 
[Added 7-15-2015 by Ord. No. 15-095 ] 
Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, wage theft is understood to have such an effect on the public morals and welfare that no license shall be issued or renewed to an applicant, licensee, or business entity that has been found liable of a wage theft violation which has not been cured by compliance with the order or decision of the judicial, governmental, or administrative entity determining the same, within ninety (90) days of any final judgment, inclusive of any appeal.  
§ 6-3. - Grounds for denial of license transfer. 
[Added 7-15-2015 by Ord. No. 15-095 ] 
No license shall be transferred to or from an applicant, licensee, or business entity that has been found liable of violation which has not been cured by compliance with the order or decision of the judicial, governmental, or administrative entity determining the same.  
§ 6-4. - Application for license and renewal; investigation of applicants and licensees. 
[Added 7-15-2015 by Ord. No. 15-095 ] 
A.  At the time of its initial application and application for renewal of its license, each applicant shall certify under penalty of perjury whether applicant has been found guilty or liable of wage theft during the prior twenty-four (24) months; the dates, location, and nature of such wage theft; efforts by the applicant to cure such wage theft violation; and the ultimate disposition of any wage theft violations. The City shall maintain copies of the applications and certifications for the purpose of complying with this article. 
B.  If the City is made aware of adjudications of wage theft against applicants or existing licensees, whether at the time of an initial application for a license, an application for renewal of its license, or after the issuance of the license, the City Department or Division responsible for issuing the subject license shall (1) obtain a copy of any order or decision of the judicial, governmental, or administrative entity finding that a wage theft violation has occurred; (2) determine whether ninety (90) days of any final judgment, inclusive of any appeal, have elapsed; and (3) request that the licensee or applicant provide documentation of its having cured the wage theft violation or appealed from any final judgment. If the City Department or Division determines that the licensee or applicant has not cured the wage theft violation within thirty (30) days of the Department or Division's request for documentation, then its license shall be suspended or application denied until the licensee or applicant cures the wage theft violation and provides documentation of its having cured same. 
C.  Any information or reports of wage theft violation occurring in the City of Jersey City shall be routed by the Resident Response Center to the appropriate City Department or Division responsible for issuing the subject license.  
§ 6-5. - False statements. 
[Added 7-15-2015 by Ord. No. 15-095 ] 
If an applicant makes false statements, fails to report information as required in 8:32-4, or falsely certifies whether it has been found guilty or liable of wage theft in accordance with Section 6-4, the City may seek revocation of any previously issued license or deny the application for a license or renewal.  
§ 6-6. - Annual review. 
[Added 7-15-2015 by Ord. No. 15-095 ] 
Each year as a matter of due diligence, the Resident Response Center shall submit an Open Public Records Request to the New Jersey Department of Labor and Workforce Development Wage and Hour Division requesting for each licensee any wage claim forms filed against the licensee during the prior twenty-four (24) months, as well as any accompanying case files, judgments, or determinations. 
The Resident Response Center shall (1) obtain a copy of any Order or decision of the judicial governmental, or administrative entity finding that a wage theft violation has occurred; (2) determine whether ninety (90) days of any final judgment, inclusive of any appeal, have elapsed. If so, the name of each such licensee shall be forwarded to the appropriate City Department or Division responsible for issuing its license for disposition in accordance with Section 6-4.  
§ 6-7. - Repealer. 
[Added 7-15-2015 by Ord. No. 15-095 ] 
All ordinances and provisions thereof inconsistent or conflicting with the provisions of this article shall be repealed to the extent of such conflict or inconsistency.  
§ 6-8. - Severability. 
[Added 7-15-2015 by Ord. No. 15-095 ] 
If any paragraph or provision of this article shall be adjudicated invalid or unenforceable, such determination shall not, to the extent severable, affect any other paragraph or provision of this article, which shall otherwise remain in full force and effect.  
§ 6-9. - Effective date. 
[Added 7-15-2015 by Ord. No. 15-095 ] 
This article shall take effect on October 1, 2015.  
Chapter 7 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL, BOARD OF 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City 9-8-1981 as Sec. 2-227 of Ord. No. MC-14. Amendments noted where applicable.] 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 84. 
 
§ 7-1. - Board continued. 
The Board of Alcoholic Beverage Control, as heretofore established pursuant to law ( N.J.S.A. 33:1-5), is reconstituted and continued.  
Chapter 9 - ASSESSMENT COMMISSIONERS, BOARD OF 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City 6-26-1991 as Sec. 2-317.3 of Ord. McC-329. Amendments noted where applicable.] 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Administration of government — See Ch. 3. 	Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 296. 
Special improvement district — See Ch. 69. 	Water — See Ch. 337. 
 
 
§ 9-1. - Jurisdiction; membership. 
A Board of Assessment Commissioners shall be responsible for all assessments of local improvements in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:56-1 et seq. The Board shall consist of three (3) regular members and one (1) alternate member appointed by the Mayor. No member may be an officer or employee of the city.  
§ 9-2. - Terms; conflicts of interest; removal; qualifications.[Amended 1-12-2011 by Ord. No. 10-172] 
Members shall serve without compensation for a term of three (3) years from the date of appointment, except that of the first regular members appointed, one (1) member shall serve a term of one (1) year, one (1) a term of two (2) years and the third a term of three (3) years. Each member appointed thereafter shall serve three (3) years. The alternate member shall serve a term of three (3) years. A vacancy, occurring otherwise than by expiration of the term of a member or an alternate member, shall be filled by appointing a replacement member for the unexpired term only. No member shall participate in any matter in which he or she has, directly or indirectly, any personal or financial interest. Any member may, after a public hearing if requested, be removed by the Mayor for cause. Insofar as possible, members and alternate members shall be employed in real estate, accounting, law, engineering, finance or any other field pertinent to their responsibilities.  
§ 9-3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-172, adopted January 12, 2011, amended the Code by repealing former § 9-3 in its entirety. Former § 9-3 pertained to compensation and funding.  
§ 9-4. - Organization. 
The Board shall elect a chairperson who shall preside at meetings of the Board. The Chief Engineer shall designate a staff member to serve as secretary to the Board, and the Corporation Counsel an Assistant Corporation Counsel to serve as attorney to the Board.  
§ 9-5. - Rules and regulations. 
The Board shall establish rules and fix the time and place for holding its meetings. It shall take no action without the presence of a quorum. All action shall be taken by a majority vote of the members present. All meetings shall be held in accordance with the Open Public Meetings Act, N.J.S.A. 10:4-1 et seq.  
§ 9-6. - Hearings. 
A.  The Chairperson shall have the power to administer oaths of any witness called to testify at a hearing. The testimony of all witnesses relating to any matter before the Board shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the Chairperson. Interested parties may cross-examine witnesses, either through their attorney or directly, subject to the discretion of the Chairperson and to reasonable limitations as to the time and number of witnesses. 
B.  Technical rules of evidence shall not apply to a hearing, but the Board may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unnecessarily repetitious evidence.  
§ 9-7. - Records to be kept. 
The Board shall provide for verbatim recording or, in its discretion, minutes of all proceedings. Minutes shall be available for public inspection and copying during normal business hours. Verbatim transcripts shall be available at the expense of the person requesting the transcript. In furnishing a transcript, the Board shall not charge a fee in excess of the maximum permitted under N.J.S.A. 2A:11-15.  
§ 9-8. - Decisions. 
All decisions of the Board shall be in writing and shall include findings of fact and conclusions based solely upon relevant evidence submitted to the Board at any of its public meetings.  
§ 9-9. - Statement of improvement completion. 
Upon the completion of any local improvement, the Chief Engineer shall immediately notify the Board and certify a statement showing in detail the cost of the improvement, including the cost of advertising, financing and inspection and the engineering expense and the cost of any real estate or interest in real estate acquired for the improvement. This statement shall also show the proportion of the total cost of the improvement, if any, contributed by the municipality or the county or by any person. The total amount of the assessment levied upon the real estate benefited by the improvement shall not exceed the cost of the improvement less any payment or contribution. If the benefits assessed do not equal the cost less such contribution, the balance shall be paid by the city.  
§ 9-10. - Viewing of improvement; notice. 
After receiving notice of the completion of a local improvement, members of the Board shall examine the improvement and all lands and real estate in the vicinity of the improvement. After the viewing, the Board shall fix a time and place for hearing all persons interested. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be mailed to the owners of all real estate affected, directed to their last known post office address, and shall be published at least once in a newspaper circulating in the municipality at least ten (10) days before the hearing. Failure to mail any notice shall not invalidate any proceeding or assessment.  
§ 9-11. - Criteria for decisions. 
The Board shall give all interested parties or parties affected by an improvement ample opportunity to be heard upon the subject of the assessment. The Board's decision shall be based upon an equitable assessment of the burdens conferred upon any real estate as a result of an improvement, giving due regard to the rights and interest of all parties concerned, as well as to the value of the real estate.  
Chapter 10 - SHADE TREE COMMISSION[1] 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City 6-22-2005, Ord. No. 05-075 Amendments noted where applicable.] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Trees, ch. 321. 
 
§ 10-1. - Establishment of an advisory shade tree commission; personnel; appointment. 
There is hereby established an advisory body which will be known as the Shade Tree Commission of Jersey City. The Commission shall consist of five members appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council, who shall be residents of the City of Jersey City and shall serve without compensation.  
§ 10-2. - First commissioners; subsequent commissioners; terms. 
The first commissioners shall be appointed within sixty (60) days after the effective date of the ordinance establishing the commission, and their terms of office shall commence upon the day of the appointment and be for the respective periods of one, two, three, four and five years beginning on January 1 of the year following appointment. The term of each appointee shall be designated in the appointment. All subsequent appointments, except to fill vacancies, shall be for the full term of five years, to take effect on January 1.  
§ 10-3. - Organization of the advisory shade tree commission. 
The commission shall organize within thirty (30) days after the appointment of its total membership for the remainder of the calendar year, and thereafter annually by the election of one of its members as chairman and another as secretary. At the request of the commission, the Mayor may designate a member of his staff to serve as secretary to the commission.  
§ 10-4. - Functions of shade tree commission; Director of Public Works to cooperate 
A.  The Advisory Shade Tree Commission organized under this chapter shall advise the Mayor and Council upon the following matters: 
(1)  The planting and care of shade and ornamental trees and shrubbery planted in any public street, plaza or park, including the trimming spraying, care and protection of such trees and shrubbery; 
(2)  The use of the grounds surrounding such trees and shrubs so far as may be necessary for their proper growth, care and protection; 
(3)  The removal of any tree or shrub dangerous to public safety; 
(4)  The adoption of any ordinance or legislation necessary for the care and protection of trees, shrubs and park lands within the City; 
(5)  Consistent with applicable laws, the treatment or removal of any trees or shrubs on private property which may present a risk to trees and shrubbery under the care of the City or to public health in general. 
B.  The Director of Public Works shall delegate one of his or her staff to attend each meeting of the shade tree commission and shall provide the commission with informational copies of any work orders and any requests by residents for the planting, care, and removal of any shade trees. The Director shall also seek the advice of the shade tree commission prior to the planting of any shade trees and, except in emergencies, prior to the removal of any shade trees.  
Chapter 12 - AUTHORITIES, MUNICIPAL 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City as indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.] 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Advertising materials — See Ch. 81. 	Solid waste — See Ch. 287. 
Housing accommodations — See Ch. 188. 	Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 332. 
Sewers — See Ch. 281. 	Waterfront — See Ch. 340. 
 
_____ 
ARTICLE I - Housing Authority [Adopted 9-8-1981 as Sec. 2-257 of Ord. No. MC-14] 
 
§ 12-1. - Authority continued. 
The Housing Authority, as heretofore established pursuant to law ( N.J.S.A. 55:14A-4 et seq.), is continued.  
ARTICLE II - Reserved[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-104, adopted October 14, 2015, amended the Code by, in effect, repealing Art. II, § 12-2. Former Art. II pertained to the Incinerator Authority, and derived from Ord. No. MC-14, adopted September 8, 1981; Ord. No. 94-085, adopted September 14, 1994; Ord. No. 10-030, adopted March 10, 2010; Ord. No. 11-103, adopted August 31, 2011; and Ord. No. 13-084 , adopted August 22, 2013. 
 
§ 12-2. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III - Parking Authority[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-017 , adopted November 12, 2014, amended the Code by repealing former Art. III, §§ 12-3, 12-3.1, and 12-4. Former Art. III pertained to the Parking Authority, and derived from Ord. No. MC-14, adopted September 8, 1981; Ord. No. McC-19, adopted September 13, 1989; Ord. No. McC-57, adopted October 25, 1989; Ord. No. 95-050, adopted June 14, 1995; and Ord. No. 99-179, adopted December 15, 1999. 
 
§§ 12-3, 12-4. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV - Jersey City Municipal Utilities Authority [Adopted 9-8-1981 as Sec. 2-297 of Ord. No. MC-14; amended in its entirety 12-10-1997 by Ord. No. 97-086][3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Subsections C, D, E, and F of this ordinance provided as follows: 
C. The Mayor or Business Administrator is hereby authorized to implement the terms and conditions of this ordinance by licensing any real or personal property necessary for the implementation of this ordinance. 
D. All contracts and agreements which are presently in effect between the city and JCSA shall be assigned to the JCMUA. 
E. All contracts and agreements which are presently in effect between the city and United Water Resources, Inc., or its assigns shall be hereby assigned to the JCMUA. 
F. The following water purchase agreements shall be assigned to the JCMUA: 
 (i) The City of Jersey City and the Borough of West Caldwell dated January 1, 1976. 
 (ii) The City of Jersey City and the Morris County Municipal Utilities Authority dated December 3, 1996. 
 (iii) The City of Jersey City and the Hoboken Water Services, Inc., (an affiliate of the United Water Resources, Inc.) dated August 1, 1997. 
 (iv) The City of Jersey City and United Water New Jersey Inc., dated April 1, 1996. 
 (v) The City of Jersey City and the Montville Township Municipal Utilities Authority dated April 11, 1997. 
 
§ 12-5. - Authority established. 
The Jersey City Sewerage Authority is hereby reorganized as a public body corporate and politic to be known as the "Jersey City Municipal Utilities Authority" pursuant to law ( N.J.S.A. 40:14B-6).  
§ 12-6. - Members; no compensation. [Amended 3-10-2010 by Ord. No. 10-029; 8-31-2011 by Ord. No. 11-104; ] 
The Jersey City Municipal Utilities Authority shall consist of members of the Sewerage Authority holding office at the time of this reorganization, together with any successors in such membership appointed as if said Sewerage Authority had originally been created pursuant to the Municipal and County Utilities Authorities Law ( N.J.S.A. 40:14B-4). 
The Municipal Utilities Authority is established pursuant to Law N.J.S.A. 40B-1 et seq. 
Without exception, no board members, whether new, existing or reappointed, shall receive compensation of any kind for their services. Compensation includes, but is not limited to, salary, the use of a motor vehicle, or any medical, health, life, prescription, optical or dental insurance coverage. 
The Board is barred from providing any of its members with compensation of any kind for their services.  
§ 12-7. - Alternate members. 
There shall be two alternate members, designated as Alternate No. 1 and Alternate No. 2, who shall serve during the absence or disqualification of any regular member or members. In the absence or disqualification of one or more regular members, the alternate members shall serve in the following order: Alternate No. 1 shall serve before Alternate No. 2; Alternate No. 2 shall serve if Alternate No. 1 is unable to serve; Alternate Nos. 1 and 2 shall serve if two or more members are absent or disqualified from serving. The terms of alternate members shall be five years commencing on February 1 of the year of appointment; provided, however, that the initial term of Alternate No. 1 shall be four years and the initial term of Alternate No. 2 shall be five years. The terms of the first alternate members appointed shall commence on the day of their appointment and shall expire on the fourth or fifth January 31 next ensuing after the date of their appointments, as the case may be. Alternate members may participate in discussions of the proceedings but may not vote, except in the absence or disqualification of a regular member. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead of an alternate member.  
§ 12-7.1. - Franchise and service agreement; copy to be filed. 
A.  The franchise and service agreement hereinbefore referenced is hereby approved substantially in the form on file in the office of the Clerk of the city and incorporated by reference as if set forth at length herein. The appropriate officials of the city are hereby authorized and directed to execute such agreement upon compliance with all of the conditions set forth therein with such changes as deemed necessary, desirable or convenient to effect the transaction contemplated thereby with consent to such changes being evidenced by the execution of such agreement by the Mayor or his designee. 
B.  In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:14B-7, a copy of this article duly certified by the Municipal Clerk shall be filed in the Office of the Secretary of State of New Jersey.  
Chapter 14 - BOND ORDINANCES, PROVISIONS OF 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City 7-19-2000 by Ord. No. 00-087. Amendments noted where applicable.] 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Bond ordinances — See Ch. A352. 
 
§ 14-1. - Provision to be contained in all bond ordinances and school bond ordinances. 
A.  Upon this chapter becoming effective, all subsequently enacted and effective bond ordinances of the city adopted pursuant to the provisions of the Local Bond Law of New Jersey [1] and school bond ordinances adopted pursuant to the provisions of Title 18A, Education, the New Jersey Statutes shall contain the following provision: 
"As of June 30 of the fifth fiscal year following the effective date of such bond ordinance [school bond ordinance], that portion of the appropriation made in such ordinance which is unfunded through the issuance of bond anticipation notes, school promissory notes, and serial bonds and for which no recognized encumbrances are properly recorded upon the financial records of the City shall cease to be effective and such portion of that appropriation shall be repealed, rescinded, and cancelled, provided, however, that in the event the Municipal Council shall adopt a resolution directing the continuation of all or a portion of such unfunded and/or unencumbered appropriation prior to the close of such fifth fiscal year that portion of the appropriation shall remain effective and in force. Such resolution must be delivered to the Municipal Council not less than thirty (30) days prior to consideration by the Municipal Council." 
B.  The Corporation Counsel of the city and all Special Counsel, including Bond Counsel, are hereby authorized and directed to include this provision in all subsequent bond ordinances and school bond ordinances presented to the Municipal Council for consideration. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:2-1 et seq. 
 
Chapter 17 - CITY PROPERTY, SALE OF 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City 10-3-1978 as Ord. No. S-133. Amendments noted where applicable.] 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Administrative Code — See Ch. 3. 	Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 131. 
 
 
§ 17-1. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
SALE TO A PERSON - A sale to a person directly or indirectly through a corporation or partnership in which the person has a direct or indirect interest.  
§ 17-2. - Conditions of sale for city-owned property. [Amended 12-5-1978 by Ord. No. S-166] 
The general conditions of every sale of city-owned property not needed for public use shall, in addition to other conditions, contain the following: 
A.  No sale shall be made to any prospective purchaser nor shall said prospective purchaser be permitted to bid who, prior to such sale, has purchased the property being sold or any other property from the city and has breached any of the conditions and terms of that purchase of property from the city. 
B.  No prospective purchaser who was the previous owner of the property to be sold shall be permitted to bid for said property if the property was acquired by the city by reason of the nonpayment of taxes or other municipal charges by such prospective purchaser. 
C.  No prospective purchaser shall be permitted to bid for any property to be sold by the city if that prospective purchaser is delinquent in the payment of taxes or other municipal charges on any other property which such person shall own in the city. 
D.  No sale shall be made to any person who owns any other property in the city, which property has been declared unfit for human habitation and/or which property is in violation of the Uniform Construction Code [1] and which violation has not been corrected at the time of the sale. 
E.  Affidavit required. 
(1)  The conditions of sale shall contain a requirement that all bidders, whether they be the actual prospective purchasers or agents of or representatives of the actual prospective purchasers, shall submit an affidavit, under oath, setting forth the following: 
(a)  That the actual prospective purchaser is not a person who has previously breached a contract for the purchase of property from the city. 
(b)  That the actual prospective purchaser is not the former owner from whom the city acquired the property to be sold by reason of the nonpayment of taxes or other municipal charges. 
(c)  That the actual prospective purchaser is not an owner of any other property in the city who is delinquent in the payment of taxes or other municipal charges on said other property. 
(d)  That the actual prospective purchaser is not the owner of any other property in the city which has been declared unfit for human habitation and/or which property is in violation of the Uniform Construction Code and which violation has not been corrected at the time of the sale. 
(e)  The address and block and lot numbers of all the properties that the prospective purchaser owns in the city. 
(f)  If the prospective purchaser is a corporation or partnership, that no person who falls within the categories in § 17-1 has a direct or indirect interest in such corporation or partnership. 
(2)  Such affidavits shall be submitted to the officer conducting the sale prior to the commencement of the public auction of the particular parcel in which the prospective bidder is interested. Failure to submit said affidavit shall disqualify a bidder from participating in the public auction. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's Note: See Ch. 131, Construction Codes, Uniform. 
 
§ 17-3. - Additional conditions of sale. [Amended 4-8-1992 by Ord. No. 92-033] 
A.  All conditions of sale of city-owned property not needed for public use shall contain a provision that no sale to the highest bidder shall be confirmed by the Municipal Council in the event that an investigation and/or inspection reveals that the purchaser is a person who falls within the categories listed in § 17-2 of this chapter. The conditions of sale shall also state that in the event that the sale is confirmed by the Municipal Council and after the sale has been confirmed by the Municipal Council it is discovered that the purchaser is a person who falls within the category set forth in § 17-2 of this chapter, then the purchaser is placed on notice that said confirmation of sale shall be rescinded by the Municipal Council. 
B.  When authorized by the City Council, the Office of Real Estate of the City of Jersey City shall include the following subordination clause in deeds transferring Title to lands not needed for public use sold by the city pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:12-13: 
The City of Jersey City's right of reversion is hereby subordinated to the mortgage of the buyer's lender specifically as follows: A transfer of title to such mortgagee pursuant to the mortgage will not be considered a condition activating the City of Jersey City's right of reversion. The express intent being that prior to reversion of title to the City of Jersey City, the mortgagee shall have the right to assume the obligations and duties of buyer set forth in this deed including the buyer's duty to make the required repairs within the number of days as set forth in the Council resolution authorizing the sale of property at public auction. The assumption of the duties and obligations of the buyer by the mortgagee shall not extend the time period for completion of repairs. The mortgagee's right to assume the duties and obligations of the buyer shall arise upon a default under the mortgage and/or upon a default under the terms and conditions of the City Council resolution authorizing the sale of the property at public auction.  
Chapter 19 - CLAIMS, PAYMENT OF[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
History— Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City November 27, 1985 as Sections 2-59, 2-60 and 2-61 of Ord. No. C-48. Amendments noted where applicable. 
Cross reference— Administration of government, Ch. 3. 
 
§ 19-1. - Method of payment; procedure. 
[Amended 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050; 4-24-2019 by Ord. No. 19-030 ] 
A.  Claims shall be paid in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:5-16. 
B.  Payments of claims may be made by use of Procurement Cards, by authorized individuals and subject to guidelines and procedures established in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:5-17 and N.J.A.C. 5:30-9A, as may be amended. 
Note— N.J.A.C. 50:30-9A sets forth standards the City must follow when using procurement cards for the payment of claims. N.J.A.C. 50:30-9A establishes minimum fiscal and operational controls that must be implemented prior to the use of procurement cards.  
§ 19-2. - Authorized signatures; city checks. 
A.  Checks issued by the city in payment of any claims, including claims for salaries, wages or other compensation for services, shall bear the signature of the Mayor or the Business Administrator and the Chief Financial Officer or of some officer or officers designated by them to act in their behalf for this purpose, signed mechanically or by hand. Such designation shall be in writing and filed in the office of the City Clerk. 
[Amended 3-25-1993 by Ord. No. 92-020; 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050; 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
B.  All checks drawn against the bond account of the City of Jersey City or the interest account of the City of Jersey City for the transfer of city funds between designated banks or depositories shall bear the signatures of both the Mayor and the City Treasurer. In the absence or incapacity of either the Mayor or City Treasurer, or both, such checks may be signed by persons designated by either official and may be signed either mechanically or by hand. Such designation shall be in writing and filed in the office of the City Clerk. 
Cross reference— Division of Accounts and Control, § 3-57.  
Chapter 21 - CONTRACTS AND INVESTMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
History— Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City: Art. I, May 4, 1971 as Sec. 1-23 of the 1971 Jersey City Code and as readopted September 19, 1978 by Ord. No. S-128. Amendments noted where applicable. 
 
ARTICLE I - Contracting Authority 
[Adopted 5-4-1971 as Sec. 1-23 of the 1971 Jersey City Code and as readopted 9-19-1978 by Ord. No. S-128] 
 
§ 21-1. - Required signatures. 
Unless as otherwise provided by law, all contracts and agreements on behalf of the City of Jersey City, as authorized by the Municipal Council, shall bear the signature of either the Mayor or Business Administrator as the contracting authority for the city. [2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— See also Ch. 3, Administrative Code, § 3-11G. 
 
§ 21-2. - Material changes to program or entity receiving a grant award from the City without prior notification to the City prohibited. 
[Added 9-9-2015 by Ord. No. 15-116 ] 
A.  Any entity or its affiliate that is awarded a grant by the City and is contemplating any change(s) which may materially alter the scope of the grant, including, but not limited to, a change in mission, size or location of the program or entity or affiliate of the entity receiving the grant, must notify the Business Administrator and City Clerk at least 180 days prior to any such change(s) taking place. 
B.  Failure to notify the Business Administrator of such change(s) may result in the suspension or cancellation of the subject grant. 
C.  All future grant agreements shall incorporate this section by reference.  
§ 21-3. - Hiring of freelance workers for services of $500 or more by persons regularly engaged in commercial or business activity requires written contract for services specifying date of payment; prohibition against coercive acts during course of services. 
[Added 6-13-2018 by Ord. No. 18-051 ] 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in any regular commercial or business activity in the City of Jersey City or for any person acting in behalf of such person to retain the services of a freelance worker, if the promised payment for such services is $500.00 or more, either at the time of retention or within the prior 120 days, without a written contract in compliance with subsection B of this section; nor shall any such person: 
1.  Fail or refuse to pay the agreed payment within 30 days after completion of the agreed services; 
2.  Demand as a condition of timely payment after work has begun that the freelance worker accept less payment than the amount of the agreed compensation; or 
3.  Deny or threaten to deny a work opportunity to, or discriminate against, a freelance worker, or take any other action that penalizes a freelance worker for, or is reasonably likely to deter a freelancer worker from, exercising or attempting to exercise any right guaranteed under this chapter, or from obtaining future work opportunity because the freelance worker has done so. 
It shall be a defense to any violation charged under this section that the freelance worker has not completed the agreed services unless the failure to complete the agreed services was caused by the hiring party's failure to cooperate in good faith with the freelance worker, provided, however, that timely payment for the value of completed services may not be withheld because of a disagreement over any additional payments claimed by the freelance worker. 
B.  The written contract shall include, at a minimum, the following information: 
1.  The name and mailing address of both the hiring party and the freelance worker; 
2.  An itemization of all services to be provided by the freelance worker, the value of the services to be provided pursuant to the contract and the rate and method of compensation; and 
3.  The date on which the hiring party must pay the contracted compensation or the mechanism by which such date will be determined. 
C.  For purpose of this law, a person regularly engages in commercial or business activity if he or she owns or operates any business or trade or commercial property within the city or holds himself or herself out as regularly engaging in any business or trade. The resident owner of residential real property with four or fewer units and no commercial unit is not considered to be engaged in commercial or business activity under this section. 
D.  As used herein "freelance worker" means any natural person or any organization composed of no more than one natural person, whether or not incorporated or employing a trade name, that is hired or retained as an independent contractor by a hiring party to provide services in exchange for compensation. This term does not include: 
1.  Any person who, pursuant to the contract at issue, is a sales representative as defined in N.J.S.A. Title 2A; 
2.  Any licensed attorney; and 
3.  Any person who is a licensed medical professional.  
Chapter 23 - COURT, MUNICIPAL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
History— Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City September 8, 1981 as Ch. 2, Art. XVII, Subarticle 10, of Ord. No. MC-14. Amendments noted where applicable. 
Cross reference— Office of the Public Defender, § 3-47; personnel policies, Ch. 53. 
 
§ 23-1. - Court established. 
[Amended 7-19-2000 by Ord. No. 00-080] 
There is hereby created and established in the City of Jersey City a Municipal Court which shall be known and designated as the "Municipal Court of Jersey City" pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1 et seq. As a part of that Court, there shall be a Municipal Housing Court pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2B:12-20.  
§ 23-2. - Number of Judges; terms. 
[Amended 10-27-1981 by Ord. No. MC-63; 1-12-1984 by Ord. No. MC-554; 2-9-1984 by Ord. No. MC-567; 9-12-1985 by Ord. No. C-10; 5-8-1986 by Ord. No. C-214; 9-8-1988 by Ord. No. C-801; 6-27-2018 by Ord. No. 18-067 ] 
A.  The Municipal Court of Jersey City shall consist of eleven Judges. Six of the Judges shall be full-time Judges, and five of the Judges shall be part-time Judges. One of the full-time Judges shall be designated the Chief Judge in accordance with § 23-8. 
[Amended 5-13-1998 by Ord. No. 98-051; 7-22-1998 by Ord. No. 98-083; 11-23-2010 by Ord. No. 10-142; 5-28-2014 by Ord. No. 14-051 ] 
B.  Each of the full-time Judges, the Chief Judge and the part-time Judges shall serve for a term of three years from the date of appointment and until a successor is appointed and qualified.  
§ 23-3. - Sessions. 
The Municipal Court shall be divided into two sessions. One session shall be known and designated as the "daytime session" and the other session shall be known and designated as the "evening session."  
§ 23-4. - Employment of full-time Judges restricted. 
[Amended 7-19-2000 by Ord. No. 00-080] 
The full-time Judges appointed pursuant to this chapter may engage in the practice of law except as prohibited by Court Rule 1:15-1(b) and any other gainful employment except as prohibited by the Code of Judicial Conduct during their respective terms of office as full-time Judges.  
§ 23-5. - Duties of full-time Judges. 
[Amended 10-27-1981 by Ord. No. MC-63] 
During their respective terms of offices all full-time Municipal Court Judges shall devote full-time to their judicial duties. Full-time judges shall be assigned to the daytime Municipal Court session. In addition thereto, full-time Judges shall also be assigned to the evening court session whenever a part-time Municipal Court Judge is absent or whenever it becomes otherwise necessary. In addition, at such time as the Assignment Judge for Hudson County Superior Court shall designate a full-time Judge to serve as a Judge of the Hudson County Central Judicial Processing Court, such Judge shall devote full-time to such Court.  
§ 23-6. - Duties of part-time Judges. 
[Amended 10-27-1981 by Ord. No. MC-63; 1-12-1984 by Ord. No. MC-554; 2-9-1984 by Ord. No. MC-567; 9-12-1985 by Ord. No. C-10] 
The part-time Judges may be assigned as needed to either day or evening court sessions by the Presiding Judge.  
§ 23-7. - Judges' salaries; vacation leaves and other benefits. 
[Amended 10-27-1981 by Ord. No. MC-63; 9-13-1989 by Ord. No. McC-12; 11-26-1996 by Ord. No. 96-118; 10-12-2005 by Ord. 05-142] 
A.  Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2B:12-7b, the annual salaries of the Judges of the Municipal Court shall be set as follows [Amended 1-23-2008 by Ord. No. 08-003; 9-10-2008 by Ord. No. 08-105] : 
Salary 	Title 
$45,000 	Judge of Municipal Court (part-time)* 
$100,000 	Judge of Municipal Court (full-time)** 
$110,000 	Judge of Municipal Court (designated Chief Judge) 
 
* Part-time means a minimum of twenty (20) hours or five sessions per week. 
** Full-time means a minimum of forty (40) hours or ten (10) sessions per week. 
B.  The vacation leave and other benefits for Judges of the Municipal Court shall be the same as those for other nonunion unclassified personnel and nonunion managerial personnel as provided for in Jersey City Code Chapter 53, §§ 53-38 through 53-49.  
§ 23-8. - Chief Judge. 
[Amended 10-27-1981 by Ord. No. MC-63; 7-19-2000 by Ord. No. 00-080] 
The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Municipal Council, shall designate one of the Judges of the Municipal Court as the Chief Judge of said Court. Said designation may be changed from time to time by the same coordinated actions of the Mayor and Municipal Council. The Chief Judge may designate a Judge to act in his or her behalf during his or her absence or disability.  
§ 23-9. - Appointment of Judges. 
All appointments of Judges of the Municipal Court shall be made by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Municipal Council. 
State Law reference— Additional municipal judges, N.J.S.A. 2B:12-5.  
§ 23-10. - Qualification of Judges; residency. 
[Amended 7-19-2000 by Ord. No. 00-080] 
All Municipal Court Judges shall be domiciled in the City of Jersey City at the time of their appointment and during their terms of office. In the event that a Municipal Court Judge shall move his or her domicile out of the city, his or her office shall be deemed to be vacant. All Municipal Court Judges shall be admitted to practice law in the State of New Jersey for at least five years at the time of their appointment.  
§ 23-11. - Municipal Court Justice Clinic. 
[Added 7-19-2000 by Ord. No. 00-080] 
The Municipal Court pursuant to Court Rule 1:21-3(b) may coordinate the establishment of a program authorizing the appearance by law students and graduates of law schools before the Court subject to the approval of the Supreme Court.  
§ 23-12. - Alternative dispute resolution. 
[Added 7-19-2000 by Ord. No. 00-080] 
The Municipal Court pursuant to Court Rule 7:8-1 and Court Rule 1:40-7 may establish a mediation program to resolve minor disputes and provide an alternative to prosecution for persons who might be harmed by the imposition of quasi-criminal sanctions as presently administered when an alternative can be expected to serve as a sufficient sanction to deter such conduct.  
Chapter 25 - CULTURAL ARTS COMMISSION 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City 9-8-1981 as Ch. 2, Art. XVII, Subarticle 19, of Ord. No. MC-14. Amendments noted where applicable.] 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Administration of government — See Ch. 3. 
 
§ 225-1. - Commission established; appointment; compensation; terms; vacancies. 
A Cultural Arts Commission, to consist of seven (7) members, is hereby established for the City of Jersey City. The members of the Cultural Arts Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Municipal Council, and shall be citizens and residents of Jersey City. All members shall serve without compensation. The members who are first appointed shall serve the following terms: two (2) for a term of one (1) year; two (2) for a term of two (2) years; one (1) for a term of three (3) years; one (1) for a term of four (4) years and one (1) for a term of five (5) years. Thereafter, members shall be appointed as aforesaid, for a term of five (5) years, except all vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term. [1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's Note: See also Art. XVII, Agencies and Commissions, of Ch. 3, Administration of Government. 
 
§ 225-2. - Chairman; officers. 
One (1) of said members shall be elected by the members of the Cultural Arts Commission as Chairman. The Commission may have such other officers as it deems necessary.  
§ 225-3. - Purpose. [Amended 12-8-1993 by Ord. No. 93-139; 3-13-02 by Ord. No. 02-022] 
The purpose of the Cultural Arts Commission shall be to support and make recommendations to the Director of Health and Human Services and/or his/her designee in conducting cultural programs such as, but not limited to, art exhibits, plays, concerts, dance recitals and other similar activities for the benefit of the residents of Jersey City.  
§ 225-4. - Powers of Commission. 
In pursuance of such purposes, the Cultural Arts Commission shall have all powers reasonable and necessary to carry out its purposes. Such powers shall include, but are not limited to, the power to solicit and receive gifts, bequests or grants of real or personal property.  
§ 225-5. - Use of funds. 
Funds received by the Cultural Arts Commission as gifts or bequests shall be deposited in a Jersey City trust account until their use is approved by the Municipal Council. Dedicated funds shall be spent for the purpose for which the funds were received, in accordance with the Local Budget Law ( N.J.S.A. 40A:4-1 et seq.).  
§ 225-6. - Meetings. 
The Cultural Arts Commission shall meet on or immediately after January 1 of each year for purposes of reorganization. The agenda at this meeting should include election of officers, appointment of committees, adoption of bylaws or rules of procedure, fixing date and place of meetings and such other business as shall properly come before the Commission at the annual reorganization meeting.  
§ 225-7. - Records; annual report. 
The Cultural Arts Commission shall keep records of its meetings, activities and finances and shall make an annual report to the Municipal Council.  
Chapter 27 - DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. Amendments noted where applicable.] 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Administration of government — See Ch. 3. 	Personnel policies — See Ch. 53. 
Ethics — See Ch. 33. 	
 
 
§ 227-1. - Purpose; prior practices superseded. 
It has been the practice of the City of Jersey City to defend lawsuits against employees which arise out of the good faith performance of official duties and to pay any judgment against an employee which he or she incurs in the good faith performance of official duties. The purpose of this chapter is to define clearly the circumstances under which the Corporation Counsel will defend lawsuits against employees and the terms on which the city will indemnify employees against any judgments arising out of official duties. The duty to defend and indemnify employees, as defined in this chapter, supersedes all prior customs and practices regarding the defense and indemnification of employees.  
§ 227-2. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
EMPLOYEE - Any officer or employee of the City of Jersey City, whether elected or appointed, except employees of the Department of Public Safety enTitled to a legal defense under N.J.S.A. 40A:14-28 and 40A:14-155. 
LEGAL ACTION or ACTION - Includes any civil action against an employee before any court or administrative body of competent jurisdiction, either state or federal, whether brought by way of complaint, cross-claim or counterclaim. The term "legal action" does not include criminal or quasi-criminal actions, whether brought by complaint or indictment.  
§ 227-3. - Corporation Counsel's duty to defend city employees.[1] 
Except as provided in § 27-4, the Corporation Counsel shall provide for the defense of any legal action against an employee arising out of an act or omission within the scope of employment, provided that the employee: 
A.  Requests a legal defense in writing. 
B.  Cooperates with the Corporation Counsel in his or her defense. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's Note: See also Ch. 3, Administrative Code, § 3-115. 
 
§ 227-4. - Grounds for refusal to provide defense. 
A.  The Corporation Counsel may refuse to provide for the defense of a legal action against an employee if he or she determines that: 
(1)  The act or omission was not within the scope of employment; 
(2)  The act or omission was one of fraud, actual malice or willful misconduct; 
(3)  Legal defense by the Corporation Counsel would create a conflict of interest between the city and the employee; 
(4)  The employee has failed to cooperate fully with the Corporation Counsel in his or her defense; 
(5)  The employee failed to request a legal defense; or 
(6)  The action was brought by the city against the employee. 
B.  Under circumstances where the factual predicate for a legal action against an employee cannot be ascertained with certainty, the Corporation Counsel may, in the exercise of his or her discretion, provide for the defense of a legal action against an employee under a reservation of rights. If the Corporation Counsel later determines that the employee is not entitled to a legal defense at the city's expense, he or she shall so notify the employee in writing.  
§ 227-5. - Methods of providing defense. 
A.  The Corporation Counsel may at his or her option provide for legal defense of an employee by: 
(1)  Assigning the defense to an attorney on his or her staff; 
(2)  Engaging an independent attorney selected by the Corporation Counsel; or 
(3)  Asserting the city's right to a defense under any appropriate insurance policy which requires the insurer to provide the defense. 
B.  No employee shall be reimbursed for the expenses of a legal defense unless the Corporation Counsel has agreed in writing to the amount of reimbursement before the employee incurs any expenses in his or her defense.  
§ 227-6. - Corporation Counsel to assume control of defense. 
Whenever the Corporation Counsel provides for the defense of an employee, he or she may assume exclusive control over the employee's defense, and the employee shall cooperate fully with the Corporation Counsel's defense.  
§ 227-7. - Indemnification of employee; punitive damages. 
A.  Whenever the Corporation Counsel is required to provide for the defense of any action against an employee, the city shall pay or reimburse the employee for: 
(1)  Any bona fide settlement of the action approved by the Corporation Counsel and the City Council. 
(2)  Any judgment against the employee. 
B.  Subject to Subsection C, in any legal action in which the defense of an employee is provided under a policy of liability insurance, the city shall indemnify the employee against any judgment or settlement to the extent not provided by such insurance. 
C.  Nothing in this section shall authorize the city to pay punitive or exemplary damages assessed against an employee or any damages resulting from the commission of a crime, actual malice, actual fraud or willful misconduct. [2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's Note: Former Section 2-223.4, which followed this section in the original legislation upon which this chapter is based (Ord. No. MC-303), and which authorized reimbursement of Council fees for civilian employees, was declared invalid by a ruling of the Superior Court of New Jersey. 
 
Chapter 31 - ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City 9-8-1981 as Ch. 2, Art. XVII, Subarticle 7.1, of Ord. No. MC-14. Amendments noted where applicable.] 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Planning Board — See Ch. 56. 	Water — See Ch. 337. 
Zoning Board of Adjustment — See Ch. 74. 	Zoning — See Ch. 345. 
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 299. 	
 
 
§ 31-1. - Commission created. 
There is hereby created, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 et seq., the Municipal Environmental Commission, to act and exercise the powers and functions as set forth herein.  
§ 31-2. - Membership; terms; alternates. [Amended 4-28-1988 by Ord. No. C-710; 1-26-2011 by Ord. No. 11-002] 
A.  The Municipal Environmental Commission shall consist of seven (7) members and two (2) alternates to be appointed by the Mayor, who shall designate one (1) of the members to serve as Chairperson and presiding officer. All members and alternates must be residents of the City of Jersey City. Best efforts shall be utilized to have each ward of the city represented by at least one (1) member. One (1) of the members shall also be a member of the Municipal Planning Board. Best efforts shall be utilized to appoint at least three (3) members who are professional environmental scientists, geologists, toxicologists, botanists or other environmental specialists. All members and alternates shall serve without compensation. 
B.  Each member of the Municipal Environmental Commission shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years. All appointments to fill vacancies that may occur shall be for the unexpired term of the vacating member.  
§ 31-3. - Removal.[1] 
The Mayor may remove any member of the Commission for cause, on written charges. Such written charges must be served upon the member, and after a hearing on the allegations the member shall be entitled to be heard in person or by counsel. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's Note: See also Ch. 3, Administrative Code, Art. XVII, Agencies and Commissions. 
 
§ 31-4. - Purpose; powers. [Amended 4-28-1988 by Ord. No. C-710; 1-26-2011 by Ord. No. 11-002] 
A.  The purposes of the Environmental Commission are to: 
(1)  Promote the protection and conservation of land, air, water and other natural resources within the territorial limits of the municipality. Such promotion shall consist of educating the public and advising city government about the best methods for protecting and conserving these resources. 
(2)  Assist the city in the proper development and use of these resources by coordinating the planning efforts of the various departments, agencies and agents who provide environmental services. 
(3)  Promote the protection of the public health by educating the public and advising city government about environmental health hazards. 
B.  The Environmental Commission shall: 
(1)  Conduct research into the use and possible use of open land areas of the municipality and: 
(a)  Have the power to coordinate the activities of unofficial bodies organized for similar purposes. 
(b)  Keep a Natural Resources Index of all open areas whether publicly or privately owned, including open marshlands, swamps and other wetlands, in order to obtain information on the proper use of such areas. 
(c)  Have the authority to recommend to the Planning Board plans and programs for the development and use of such areas for inclusion in the Municipal Master Plan. 
(2)  Have the power to advertise, prepare, print and distribute books, maps, charts, plans and pamphlets which it deems necessary for its purposes. 
(3)  Have the power to study and make recommendations concerning open space preservation, water resources management, air pollution control, solid waste management, noise control, environmental appearance, marine resources, protection of flora and fauna and any other environmental concerns which affect the enjoyment and health of the public. 
(4)  Refer matters to the proper city authorities whenever violations of environmental law come to its attention. 
(5)  Keep records of its meetings and activities and shall make an annual report to the governing body of the municipality. 
(6)  Coordinate and/or respond to volunteer neighborhood efforts to solve environmental problems. This includes convening at least every two (2) years a conference at which municipal officials and citizens shall discuss the status of environmental services and the means to improve them. 
(7)  Assist in the formulation of funding plans submitted to the Green Acres/Green Trust program of the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection. 
(8)  Delegate an Environmental Commissioner to be a permanent member of the Local Emergency Planning Council (per federal P.L. 99-499) and delegate other Commissioners to be members of other municipal environmental bodies as government creates from time to time.  
§ 31-5. - Clerical and technical assistance. 
A.  For the purposes of effectuating the goals of this chapter, the Environmental Commission shall have such clerical and technical assistance, materials, supplies and provisions for such other costs and expenses of the Commission as shall annually be budgeted by the Office of the Mayor and approved by the City Council. 
B.  The Commission may appoint such clerks and other employees as it may from time to time require and as shall be within the limits of funds appropriated to it.  
§ 31-6. - Cooperation with city departments and agencies. 
All city departments and agencies shall cooperate with the work of the Environmental Commission to the degree possible and permitted by law. [2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's Note: Former Sec. 2-256.6, entitled "Reorganization of Commission," which immediately followed this section, was repealed 4-28-1988 by Ord. No. C-710. 
 
§ 31-7. - Reserved for miscellaneous ordinances.  
Chapter 33 - ETHICS 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City: Art. I, 10-9-1986 as Ord. No. C-259-A; Art. II, 6-12-1991 as Ord. No. McC-330. Amendments noted where applicable.] 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Administration of government — See Ch. 3. 	Personnel policies — See Ch. 53. 
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 27. 	
  
ARTICLE I - Conflicts of Interest 
[Adopted 10-9-1986 as Ord. No. C-259-A] 
 
§ 33-1. - Action not to be compensated. 
No employee of the city, whether paid or unpaid, shall for a period of one (1) year after leaving employment receive compensation from any person, firm or entity in relation to any case, application, project or matter with which the employee was directly concerned or in which the employee directly participated or with respect to which the employee had access to special knowledge or information during the employee's employment with the City of Jersey City.  
§ 33-2. - Restricted activities. 
A former employee shall be barred for one (1) year from any activities in relation to any case, proceeding, application or other matter in behalf of any person, firm or entity which would be adverse to the interests of the city or of any city agency.  
§ 33-3. - Exceptions. 
A former employee may engage in private employment or activities which § 33-1 would otherwise prohibit if: 
A.  The head of the affected agency or department certifies in writing that the former employee's activities or employment will serve the interests of the city. 
B.  The Corporation Counsel finds that the employment or activities satisfy the requirements of this Article and gives written approval.  
ARTICLE II - Code of Ethics 
[Adopted 6-12-1991 as Ord. No. McC-330] 
 
§ 33-4. - Title. 
This Article shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Jersey City Code of Ethics."  
§ 33-5. - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this Article to provide a method of assuring that standards of ethical conduct and financial disclosure requirements for officers and employees shall be clear, consistent, uniform in their application and enforceable and to provide those officers or employees with advice and information concerning possible conflicts of interests which might arise in the conduct of their public duties.* 
* Editor's Note: This Article is enacted under the authority of the Local Government Ethics Law, L. 1991, c. 29 (N.J.S.A. 40A:9-22.1), and under the further authority granted to the City of Jersey City under the provisions of Title 40 and 40A of the New Jersey Statutes.  
§ 33-6. - Definitions. [Amended 2-11-2003 by Ord. No. 03-011; 5-18-2005 by Ord. 05-049] 
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
AGENCY — Any agency, board, governing body including the chief executive officer, office, commission or other instrumentality within the City of Jersey City and any independent local authority created by or appointed under the authority of the City of Jersey City which performs functions other than of a purely advisory nature. 
BOARD — The City of Jersey City Ethical Standards Board. 
BUSINESS ORGANIZATION - Any corporation, partnership, firm, enterprise, franchise, association, trust, sole proprietorship, union or other legal entity. 
CANDIDATE - Any candidate for elective office in the City of Jersey City. 
EMPLOYEE - Any person, whether compensated or not, whether part-time or full-time, employed by or serving on an agency who is not a local government officer, but shall not mean any employee of a school district. 
INTEREST - The ownership or control of more than ten percent (10%) of the profits, assets or stock of a business organization, but shall not include the control of assets in a nonunion profit entity or labor union. 
MEMBER OF IMMEDIATE FAMILY - The spouse or dependent child of an officer or employee residing in the same household. 
OFFICER - Any person, whether compensated or not, whether part-time or full-time: 
A.  Elected to any office of a government agency. 
B.  Serving on a local government agency which has the authority to enact ordinances, approve development applications or grant zoning variances. 
C.  Who is a member of an independent municipal, county or regional authority. 
D.  Who is a managerial executive or confidential employee of a local government agency, as defined in Section 3 of the New Jersey Employer-Employee Relations Act, P.L. 1941, c. 100 (N.J.S.A. 34:13A-3), but shall not mean any employee of a school district or member of a school board. 
E.  Any other person who is a managerial executive or confidential employee, as defined in Section 3 of the New Jersey Employer-Employee Relations Act (N.J.S.A. 34:13A-3) of the City of Jersey City or of an agency created under the authority of or appointed by the City of Jersey City. 
OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE - An officer or employee of the City of Jersey City under the authority of or appointed by the City of Jersey City.  
§ 33-7. - Ethical standards. 
Officers or employees under the jurisdiction of the Local Finance Board shall comply with the following provisions: 
A.  No officer or employee or member of his or her immediate family shall have an interest in a business organization or engage in any business, transaction or professional activity which is in substantial conflict with the proper discharge of his or her duties in the public interest. 
B.  No independent local authority shall for a period of one (1) year next subsequent to the termination of office of a member of that authority: 
(1)  Award any contract which is not publicly bid to a former member of that authority; 
(2)  Allow a former member of that authority to represent, appear for or negotiate on behalf of any other party before that authority; or 
(3)  Employ for compensation, except pursuant to open competitive examination in accordance with Title 11A of the New Jersey Statutes and the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, any former member of that authority. The restrictions contained in this subsection shall also apply to any business organization in which the former authority member holds an interest. 
C.  No officer or employee shall use or attempt to use his or her official position to secure unwarranted privileges or advantages for himself/herself or others. 
D.  No officer or employee shall act in his or her official capacity in any matter where he, a member of his or her immediate family or a business organization in which he or she has an interest has a direct or indirect financial or personal involvement that might reasonably be expected to impair his or her objectivity or independence of judgment. 
E.  No officer or employee shall undertake any employment or service, whether compensated or not, which might reasonably be expected to prejudice his or her independence of judgment in the exercise of his or her official duties. 
F.  No officer or employee, member of his or her immediate family or business organization in which he or she has an interest shall solicit or accept any gift, favor, loan, political contribution, service, promise of future employment or other thing of value based upon an understanding that the gift, favor, loan, contribution, service, promise or other thing of value was given or offered for the purpose of influencing him or her, directly or indirectly, in the discharge of his or her official duties. This provision shall not apply to the solicitation or acceptance of contributions to the campaign of an announced candidate for elective public office, if the officer has no knowledge or reason to believe that the campaign contribution, if accepted, was given with the intent to influence the officer in the discharge of his or her official duties. 
G.  No officer or employee shall use or allow to be used his or her public office or employment or any information, not generally available to the members of the public, which he or she receives or acquires in the course of and by reason of his or her office or employment for the purpose of securing financial gain for himself or herself, any member of his or her immediate family or any business organization with which he or she is associated. 
H.  No officer or employee or business organization in which he or she has an interest shall represent any person or party other than the city in connection with any cause, proceeding, application or other matter pending before any agency in the city. This provision shall not be deemed to prohibit one employee from representing another employee where the agency is the employer and the representation is within the context of official labor union or similar representational responsibilities. 
I.  No officer shall be deemed in conflict with these provisions if, by reason of his or her participation in the enactment of any ordinance, resolution or other matter required to be voted upon or which is subject to executive approval or veto, no material or monetary gain accrues to him or her as a member of any business, profession, occupation or group to any greater extent than any gain could reasonably be expected to accrue to any other member of such business, profession, occupation or group. 
J.  No elected officer shall be prohibited from making an inquiry for information on behalf of a constituent if no fee, reward or other thing of value is promised to, given to or accepted by the officer or a member of his or her immediate family, whether directly or indirectly, in return therefor. 
K.  Nothing shall prohibit any officer or employee or members of his or her immediate family from representing himself/herself or themselves in negotiations or proceedings concerning his/her or their own interests.  
§ 33-8. - Financial disclosure statements. 
A.  Officers and candidates shall annually file a financial disclosure statement. All financial disclosure statements shall include the following information which shall specify, where applicable, the name and address of each source and the officer's job title: 
(1)  Each source of income, earned or unearned, exceeding two thousand dollars ($2,000.) received by the officer or candidate or a member of his or her immediate family during the preceding calendar year. Individual client fees, customer receipts or commissions on transactions received through a business organization need not be separately reported as sources of income. If a publicly traded security is the source of income, the security need not be reported unless the local government officer or member of his or her immediate family has an interest in the business organization. 
(2)  Each source of fees and honorariums having an aggregate amount exceeding fifty dollars ($50.) from any single source for personal appearances, speeches or writings received by the local government officer or candidate or a member of his or her immediate family during the preceding calendar year. 
(3)  Each source of gifts, reimbursements or prepaid expenses having an aggregate value exceeding four hundred dollars ($400.) from any single source, excluding relatives, received by the local government officer or candidate or a member of his or her immediate family during the preceding calendar year. 
(4)  The name and address of all business organizations in which the local government officer or candidate or a member of his or her immediate family had an interest during the preceding calendar year. 
(5)  The address and brief description of all real property in the state in which the local government officer or candidate or a member of his or her immediate family held an interest during the preceding calendar year. 
B.  The Board shall prescribe a financial disclosure statement form for filing purposes. If a financial disclosure statement form has been promulgated by the New Jersey Local Finance Board, in accordance with the New Jersey Local Government Ethics Law,* then that form shall be used. The City Clerk shall make the forms available to officers and candidates and to employees required to file a financial disclosure statement. 
* Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:9-22.1 et seq. 
C.  The original statement shall be filed with the City Clerk within ninety (90) days after the effective date of the New Jersey Local Government Ethics Law. All subsequent statements shall be filed on or before April 30 of each year. Candidates shall file no later than sixty (60) days before the date of election. A copy of the statement shall be filed with the Board. 
D.  All financial disclosure statements filed shall be public records.  
§ 33-9. - Ethical Standards Board. [Added 5-18-2005 by Ord. 05-049] 
A.  There is hereby established the City of Jersey City Ethical Standards Board consisting of six members who are residents of the city, at least two of whom shall be public members. The members of the Board shall be appointed by the Mayor with advice and consent of the City Council. The members shall be chosen by virtue of their known and consistent reputation for integrity and their knowledge of local government affairs. No more than three members of the Board shall be of the same political party. 
B.  The members of the Board shall annually elect a chairperson from among the membership. 
C.  The members shall serve for a term of five years; except that of the members initially appointed, two of the public members shall be appointed to serve for a term of five years, one member shall be appointed to serve for a term of four years and the remaining members shall be appointed to serve for a term of three years. Each member shall serve until his or her successor has been appointed and qualified. Any vacancy occurring in the membership of the Board shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment for the unexpired term. 
D.  Members of the Board shall serve without compensation but shall be reimbursed for necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties under this Article. 
E.  All hearing required pursuant to this Article shall be conducted in conformity with rules and procedures established by the Board. Such rules and procedures shall be designated to assure that any officer or employee charged with a violation of any ethical provision is accorded due process of law.  
§ 33-10. - Facilities and staff. [Added 5-18-2005 by Ord. 05-049] 
A.  The Business Administrator shall provide the Board with the facilities needed for the conduct of its business and the preservation of its records and shall supply equipment and supplies as may be necessary and as may be provided for in the annual municipal budget. 
B.  All necessary expenses incurred by the Board and its members shall be paid, upon certification of the Chairperson of the Board, by the City Treasurer within the limits of funds appropriate in the annual budget or by emergency appropriations for those purposes. 
C.  The Board may request and receive assistance from city officers and employees, including the City Clerk and the Corporation Counsel, and may appoint employees, including independent counsel and clerical staff, as are necessary to carry out the provisions of this Article within the limits of funds appropriated by the City Council for those purposes in the annual budget.  
§ 33-11. - Code of ethics. [Amended 2-11-2003 by Ord. 03-011; 5-18-2005 by Ord. 05-049] 
The resolution promulgated by the former City of Jersey City Ethical Standards Board and approved by the Local Finance Board, that established a Code of Ethics for all officers and employees serving the city, shall remain in full force and effect and shall be enforced by the Board at its discretion. Officers and employees serving a city independent authority shall be deemed to be serving the city for purposes of this Article.  
§ 33-12. - Powers of Ethical Standards Board. 
The Board shall have the following powers: 
A.  To initiate, receive, hear and review complaints and hold hearings on violations of the Municipal Code of Ethics or financial disclosure requirements. 
B.  To issue subpoenas for the production of documents and the attendance of witnesses with respect to its investigation of any complaint or to the holding of a hearing. 
C.  To forward to the County Prosecutor or the Attorney General or other governmental body any information concerning violations of the Code of Ethics or financial disclosure requirements by officers or employees serving the city which may warrant the institution of other legal proceedings by the Attorney General. 
D.  To render advisory opinions to local officers or employees serving the city as to whether a given set of facts and circumstances would constitute a violation of any provision of the Code of Ethics or financial disclosure requirements. 
E.  To enforce the provisions of the Code of Ethics and financial disclosure requirements with regard to officers or employees serving the city and to impose penalties for the violation thereof as are authorized by this Article. 
F.  To adopt rules and regulations and to do other things as are necessary to implement the purposes of this Article.  
§ 33-13. - Advisory opinions. 
A.  An officer, candidate or employee may request and obtain from the Board an advisory opinion as to whether any proposed activity or conduct would in its opinion constitute a violation of the Code of Ethics or any financial disclosure requirements. 
B.  Advisory opinions shall not be made public, except when the Board by the vote of two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of all of its members directs that the opinion be made public. 
C.  Public advisory opinions shall not disclose the name of the officer, candidate or employee unless the Board, in directing that the opinion be made public, so determines.  
§ 33-14. - Complaints. 
A.  The Board, upon receipt of a signed written complaint by any person alleging that the conduct of any officer, candidate or employee serving the city is in conflict with the Code of Ethics or financial disclosure requirements or that a candidate has failed to file or has filed a false financial disclosure statement, shall acknowledge receipt of the complaint within thirty (30) days of receipt and initiate an investigation concerning the facts and circumstances set forth in the complaint. 
B.  The Board shall make a determination as to whether the complaint is within its jurisdiction or frivolous or without any reasonable factual basis. 
C.  If the Board shall conclude that the complaint is outside its jurisdiction or frivolous or without factual basis, it shall reduce that conclusion to writing and shall transmit a copy thereof to the complainant and to the officer, candidate or employee against whom the complaint was filed. 
D.  If the Board shall conclude that the complaint is within its jurisdiction and has at least a minimal factual basis, the Board shall notify the officer, candidate or employee against whom the complaint was filed of the nature of the complaint and the facts and circumstances set forth therein. 
E.  The officer, candidate or employee shall have the opportunity to present the Board with any statement or information concerning the complaint which he or she wishes. 
F.  If the Board determines that a reasonable doubt exists as to whether the officer or employee is in conflict with the Municipal Code of Ethics or any financial disclosure requirements or that a candidate has failed to file or has filed a false financial disclosure statement, the Board shall conduct hearing concerning the possible violation and any other facts which have come to the attention of the Board as to the conduct of the officer or employee or candidate. 
G.  The Board shall render a decision as to whether the conduct of the officer, candidate or employee is in conflict with the Code of Ethics or any financial disclosure requirements. This decision shall be by no less than two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of all members of the Board. 
H.  If the Board determines that the officer, candidate or employee is in conflict with the code as to any financial disclosure requirements, it may impose any penalties which it believes appropriate within the limits of § 33-15.  
§ 33-15. - Enforcement; penalties for offenses. 
A.  An appointed officer or employee found guilty of a violation of any provision of this Article, or of any Code of Ethics pursuant to this Article, shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.), which penalty may be collected in a summary proceeding pursuant to the penalty enforcement law (N.J.S.A. 2A:58-1). The Board shall report its findings to the office or agency having the power of removal or discipline of the appointed officer or employee and may recommend that further disciplinary action be taken. 
B.  An elected officer or employee found guilty by the Board of the violation of any provision of this Article, or of any Code of Ethics in effect pursuant to this Article, shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.), which penalty may be collected in a summary proceeding pursuant to the penalty enforcement law (N.J.S.A. 2A:58-5). 
C.  The finding by the Board that an appointed officer or employee is guilty of the violation of the provisions of this Article, or of any Code of Ethics in effect pursuant to this Article, shall be sufficient cause for his or her removal, suspension, demotion or other disciplinary action by the officer or agency having the power of removal or discipline. When a person who is in the career service is found to have violated the provisions of this Article or any Code of Ethics in effect pursuant to this Article, the procedure leading to removal, suspension, demotion or other disciplinary action shall be governed by any applicable procedures of Title 11A of the New Jersey Statutes and the rules promulgated pursuant thereto. 
D.  A candidate who fails to file a financial disclosure statement or who knowingly files a false financial disclosure statement shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.), which penalty may be collected in a summary proceeding pursuant to the penalty enforcement law (N.J.S.A. 2A:58-5).  
§ 33-16. - Records of Ethical Standards Board. 
All statements, complaints, requests or other written materials filed pursuant to this Article and any rulings, opinions, judgments, transcripts or other official papers prepared pursuant to this Article shall be preserved for a period of five (5) years from the date of filing or preparation, as the case may be.  
Chapter 37 - IMMIGRANT AFFAIRS COMMISSION 
 
§ 37-1. - Establishment. [ ] 
A.  An Immigrant Affairs Commission ("Commission"), to consist of nine members, is hereby established for the City of Jersey City. The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Council, shall appoint all members.  
§ 37-2. - Composition. [ ] 
A.  All members of the Commission shall be residents of Jersey City. Best efforts shall be utilized to compose the Commission to represent the diversity of the immigrant population in Jersey City. All members shall serve without compensation. Members shall have: 
(1)  Experience with established public, non-profit, and/or voluntary community organizations and agencies concerned with the immigrant community in Jersey City and/or the State of New Jersey, and 
(2)  Demonstrated a dedication to, and knowledge of. the needs of the immigrant community in Jersey City and/or the State of New Jersey. 
(3)  At least two members shall be professional specialists, such as attorneys, with substantial records in the area(s) of civil rights and/or human rights of immigrants to the United States.  
§ 37-3. - Appointment. [ ] 
A.  Of the members first appointed, three shall serve for a term of two years; three shall serve for three years; and three shall serve for four years. Thereafter, each member shall serve for a four-year term. The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Council, shall appoint members of the Commission to complete the unexpired term cause by an unexpected vacancy, such as the resignation of a Member, in accordance with §3-125. 
B.  The initial members of the Commission shall be appointed within 60 days of the effective date of the ordinance.  
§ 37-4. - Removal. [ ] 
A.  The Municipal Council may remove any member of the Commission for cause, on written charges. Cause includes, but is not limited to. when a member misses three consecutive meetings or five meetings within any 12-month period. The Municipal Council must serve the written charges upon the member, and afford the member the opportunity to be heard on the allegations in person or by counsel.  
§ 37-5. - By-laws and officers. [ ] 
A.  The Commission shall have power to promulgate rules and regulations governing the conduct of its meetings and the performance of its duties and shall elect a chairperson and vice-chairperson from among its members. The Commission may have such other officers as it deems necessary.  
§ 37-6. - Meetings and official action. [ ] 
A.  The Commission shall hold at least one regular meeting each month. A majority of members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. A majority vote of the quorum shall be required for official action by the Commission.  
§ 37-7. - Department assignment. [ ] 
A.  Pursuant to Jersey City Code § 3-123, the Commission is allocated and assigned to the Office of Equal Employment Opportunity/Affirmative Action within the Department of Business Administration.  
§ 37-8. - Purposes. [ ] 
The Commission shall: 
A.  Advise the Municipal Council and/or Mayor on issues of common concern to immigrants, particularly in the areas of health and human services, civil and human rights, education, business development, and the demographic makeup of the Jersey City immigrant community; 
B.  Monitor requirements of federal, state, and local immigration, welfare and other laws that affect immigrants, and recommend to the Municipal Council and/or Mayor actions to maximize the positive impacts to local immigrants under existing laws and to minimize the adverse impacts to local immigrants under the laws; 
C.  Review and comment on proposed federal, state, and local legislation, regulations, policies, and programs and make policy recommendations on issues affecting the health, safety, and welfare of the immigrant community; 
D.  Promote recognition and preservation of the contributions of immigrants to the economic and cultural vitality of Jersey City; 
E.  Promote the availability of, and promote accessibility to, local educational, economic, legal, and social resources for immigrants; and 
F.  The Commission shall have all powers reasonable and necessary to carry out its purpose. Such powers shall include, but are not limited to, the power to conduct public meetings, studies, and surveys. The Commission shall have the power to issue public statements and resolutions to the extent those are advisory only and would have no binding affect on the governing body.  
§ 37-9. - Public comments at regular meetings. [ ] 
A.  Any person may address the Commission at its regular meetings on any subject of interest to the Commission. Public participation shall be limited to five minutes per person unless otherwise stated by the Chairperson.  
§ 37-10. - Records and Annual Report. [ ] 
A.  The Commission shall keep minutes of its meetings, records of its activities, and shall make an annual report to the Municipal Council. A staff person assigned by the Office of Equal Employment Opportunity/Affirmative Action shall serve as secretary to record minutes of the Commission's meetings.  
§ 37-11. - Website and official documents. [ ] 
A.  The City of Jersey City shall maintain a dedicated page for the Commission on the City's official website. The page shall contain the following: 
(1)  A list of all members of the Commission, including biographical information; 
(2)  Current vacancies on the commission; 
(3)  A schedule of meetings for the calendar year; 
(4)  Agendas for upcoming meetings, to be posted no later than one week prior to the meeting; 
(5)  Minutes for past meetings, to be posted no later than two weeks subsequent to the meeting; 
(6)  Official documents, such as bylaws, resolutions, reports, and studies.  
Chapter 38 - INSURANCE FUND COMMISSION 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City 6-9-1983 as Ord. No. MC-304. Amendments noted where applicable.] 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Division of Risk Management — See Ch. 3, § 3-119. 
 
§ 38-1. - Commission established; appointment; terms; compensation.[1] 
There is hereby established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:10-8 et seq. in the City of Jersey City an Insurance Fund Commission of three (3) Commissioners, appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council, who shall be officials of the city and shall serve for two (2) years or for the remainder of their term of office, whichever shall be less, and until their successors shall have been duly appointed and qualified. The Commission shall serve without compensation. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's Note: See also Ch. 3, Administrative Code, Art. XVII, Agencies and Commissions. 
 
§ 38-2. - Secretary. 
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:10-8 et seq., the Secretary to the Insurance Fund Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council. The Secretary shall serve at the pleasure of the Commission at a salary set by ordinance of the City Council.  
§ 38-3. - Powers and authority. 
A.  Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:10-10, the Commissioners shall have the following powers and authority: 
(1)  To employ necessary clerical assistants, whose compensation shall be fixed and paid by the City Council in the same manner as is that of other employees of the city. 
(2)  To invest the fund and all additions and accretions thereto in such securities as they shall deem best suited for the purposes of this article. 
(3)  To adopt rules and regulations for the control and investment of the fund. 
(4)  To keep on hand at all times sufficient money, or have the same invested in such securities as can be immediately sold for cash, for the payment of losses to any buildings or property of the local unit or liability resulting from the operation of publicly owned motor vehicles, equipment or apparatus or liability for the city's negligence and that of its officers, employees and servants, whether or not compensated or part-time, who are authorized to perform any act or services, but not including an "independent contractor" as the term is defined within the limitations of New Jersey Tort Claims Act ( N.J.S.A. 59:1-1 et seq.) 
(5)  To fix reasonable rates of premium for all insurance carried by the Insurance Fund, and shall effect all insurance in the Insurance Fund or with any insurance company or companies authorized to do business in this state. 
B.  Premiums for insurance, whether carried in the Insurance Fund or placed with insurance companies, shall be paid to the Commissioners by the board, commission, department, committee or officer having charge or control of the property insured. 
C.  All insurance upon property owned or controlled by the city or any of its departments, boards, agencies or commissions shall be placed and effected by the Commissioners. 
D.  The Secretary to the Insurance Fund Commission shall be entrusted with the daily operation of the Insurance Fund and shall submit a report to the Commissioners at least once a month.  
§ 38-4. - Vacancies. 
Vacancies in the office of Insurance Fund Commissioners caused by any reason other than expiration of term as an official shall be filled for the unexpired term. Vacancies in the position of Secretary shall be filled in the manner of the original appointment.  
Chapter 43 - MAYOR'S COMMISSION ON SENIOR AFFAIRS 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City 4-25-1990 as Secs. 2-317.3 through 2-317.5 of Ord. No. McC-122. Amendments noted where applicable.] 
 
§ 43-1. - Commission established; membership; organization; meetings. 
A.  There is hereby established a Mayor's Commission on Senior Affairs, consisting of 13 members appointed as follows: 
(1)  Six members appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council. 
(2)  One Council member appointed by the Council. 
(3)  Two members appointed by the Mayor. 
(4)  Four ex officio members consisting of the Mayor, Council President, Director of the Department of Public Works and the Director of Health and Human Services. Any ex officio member may designate a member of his or her staff to attend a meeting of the Commission as a representative of the ex officio member. 
[Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052; 3-27-02 by Ord. No. 02-038] 
B.  The Commission shall consist of representatives from various segments of the community, preferably from the business and public sector but not limited thereto, and should be affiliated with senior citizen organizations concerned with the health, recreation, social, legal, housing and financial needs of senior citizens. 
C.  Of the members first appointed, three shall serve for a term of two years; three shall serve for three years and three shall serve for four years. Thereafter, each member shall be appointed for a four-year term and shall serve until a successor is appointed. Vacancies caused by resignation or otherwise shall be filled for the unexpired term by the Mayor. [1] 
D.  The Mayor shall designate a member to preside over the Commission as a Chairperson, who shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor. The Commission shall elect a Vice Chairperson, who shall serve at the pleasure of the Commission. The Director of Human Resources or a designee shall, without additional compensation, serve as Executive Secretary to the Commission. 
E.  The Commission shall meet at least once every month at a time fixed by the members of the Commission. The Chairperson, or in the absence of the Chairperson the Vice Chairperson, may call special meetings. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's Note: See also Ch. 3, Administrative Code, Art. XVII, Agencies and Commissions. 
 
§ 43-2. - Purpose of Commission; duties. 
A.  The purpose of the Commission shall be to: 
(1)  Establish and implement a comprehensive system of coordinated health and social services for senior citizens and residents of the community. 
(2)  Advise and assist the Department of Health and Human Services in the preparation of an annual plan for the enhancement of services available to senior citizens and residents of the community or private foundations in obtaining grants to provide for the programs and activities of said Commission and said applications for grants to be made with the approval of the Council. 
B.  The duties of the Commission shall include: 
(1)  Recommending policy and guidelines for the operations of the Jersey City Office on Senior Activities; provided, however, that the Commission's recommendations shall be limited to planning and programmatic review and shall not affect the decisions concerning operation, budget or personnel. 
(2)  Reviewing proposals submitted for funding for services to senior citizens. 
(3)  Assisting departments in the planning and implementation of citywide comprehensive service programs for senior citizens of the City of Jersey City. 
(4)  Establishing policies and procedures for its own governance, in compliance with applicable law. 
(5)  Identifying the needs and service gaps which affect senior citizens. 
(6)  Making recommendations for legislative programs and actions on behalf of senior citizens.  
§ 43-3. - Cooperation of city departments and agencies. 
A.  The Mayor shall through the Director of Health and Human Services, subject to available appropriation, provide for the adequate functioning of the Commission. 
B.  All city departments and agencies shall cooperate with the Commission.  
Chapter 46 - MERCHANTS' ADVISORY PANEL 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City 9-8-1981 as Sec. 2-192 of Ord. No. MC-22. Amendments noted where applicable.] 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Administration of government — See Ch. 3. 
 
§ 46-1. - Panel created; membership. 
There is hereby created a Merchants' Advisory Panel consisting of the following members. 
A.  Class 1: two (2) representatives of each ward, both of whom shall be merchants. 
B.  Class 2: one (1) representative of the Mayor. 
C.  Class 3: one (1) representative of the Department of Public Safety. [ Amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] 
D.  Class 4: one (1) representative of the Department of Community Development.  
§ 46-2. - Appointment. 
The Class 1 representatives from each ward shall be appointed by the Ward Councilmen. The Class 2 representative shall be appointed by the Mayor for a term of one (1) year. The representatives of Classes 3 and 4 shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Municipal Council for a term of one (1) year.  
§ 46-3. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the Merchants' Advisory Panel shall be to develop strategies to assist small businessmen and small business districts within the City of Jersey City. The Merchants' Advisory Panel shall seek volunteers from the business community and urban experts to assist small businessmen to develop programs to assist them in the operation of their businesses and to address problems in small business areas.  
§ 46-4. - Eligibility guidelines. 
The Merchants' Advisory Panel shall have the authority to adopt guidelines to determine which businesses shall be eligible for its assistance.  
Chapter 50 - PARKING FOR THE DISABLED, MUNICIPAL COUNCIL COMMITTEE ON 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City 8-14-1986 as Sec. 2-317.6 of Ord. No. C-268; amended in its entirety 9-12-1990 by Ord. No. McC-173. Subsequent amendments noted where applicable.] 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Administration of government — See Ch. 3. 	Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 332. 
 
 
§ 50-1. - Committee established; membership. 
There is established a Municipal Council Committee on Parking for the Disabled, which shall consist of three (3) Council members and four (4) non-Council members appointed by the President of the City Council who shall serve without salary for terms of two (2) years. [1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's Note: See also Ch. 3, Administration of Government, Art. XVII, Agencies and Commissions. 
 
§ 50-2. - Powers and duties. 
The Committee shall review all new and existing applications for restricted parking spaces for disabled persons and shall review all previous approvals authorized by the Council. The Committee shall also establish guidelines to be used in its reviewing process. An express purpose of such guidelines should be the balancing of the needs of disabled persons with the needs of the local communities. The Committee shall make recommendations to the Council regarding restricted parking spaces for disabled drivers and any ordinances related thereto.  
§ 50-3. - Assignment of municipal personnel. 
The Business Administrator shall assign such municipal personnel as are required by the Committee to perform its duties.  
Chapter 53 - PERSONNEL[1] 
_____

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-078, adopted June 9, 2010, amended the Code by, in effect, repealing former Ch. 53, §§ 53-1, 53-2, 53-6—53-71.1, 53-72—53-80, 53-82, and 53-83, renumbering former §§ 53-3—53-5 as 53-6—53-8, and adding new §§ 53-1—53-5, 53-9 and 53-10. Former Ch. 53 pertained to similar subject matter. Ch. 53 was originally adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City May 4, 1971, as Ch. 17 of the 1971 Jersey City Code and readopted September 19, 1978 by Ord. No. S-128. Subsequently, it was amended by Ord. Nos. S-169 and S-170, adopted December 19, 1978; Ord. No. S-382, adopted May 27, 1980; Ord. No. S-571, adopted January 27, 1981; Ord. No. MC-35, adopted September 22, 1981; Ord. No. MC-458, adopted October 27, 1983; Ord. No. C-104, adopted December 12, 1985; Ord. No. C-571, adopted October 22, 1987; Ord. No. C-675, adopted March 10, 1988; Ord. No. McC-74, adopted December 27, 1989; Ord. No. 92-090, adopted July 22, 1992; Ord. No. 92-115, adopted September 16, 1992; Ord. No. 95-042, adopted May 24, 1995; Ord. No. 95-050, adopted June 14, 1995; Ord. No. 96-023, adopted March 27, 1996; Ord. No. 97-052, adopted August 13, 1997; Ord. No. 08-126, adopted September 10, 2008; Ord. No. 09-094, adopted September 9, 2009; and Ord. No. 10-043, adopted April 14, 2010. 
 
§ 53-1. - Application of Chapter 53; definitions. 
[Added 6-9-2010 by Ord. No. 10-078; amended 12-19-2018 by Ord. No. 18-141 ] 
Under this Chapter "employee" shall mean anyone who works for the City and whose salary and other compensation are required by law to be fixed by ordinance. Such employees include, but are not limited to, the Mayor, Council Members, Council Aides, Department Directors, Municipal Clerk and all Deputy Municipal Clerks, the Tax Assessor and all Deputy Tax Assessors, the Tax Collector, the Chief Financial Officer, and all Municipal Court Judges. 
State Law reference— Mayor, N.J.S.A. 40A:9-165.1; Members of the Governing Body/City Council, N.J.S.A. 40A:9-165.1; Council Aides, N.J.S.A. 40A:69A-60.5; Department Directors, N.J.S.A. 40:69A; Municipal Clerk, N.J.S.A. 40A:9-133; Deputy Municipal Clerk, N.J.S.A. 40A:9-135; Tax Assessor, N.J.S.A. 40A:9-146; Deputy Tax Assessor, N.J.S.A. 40A:9-146; Tax Collector, N.J.S.A. 40A:9-141; Chief Financial Officer/Municipal Finance Officer, N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.10; Municipal Court Judges, N.J.S.A. 2B:12-7. 
"Regular employee" shall mean anyone who works for the City and whose salary and other compensation are required by law to be fixed by ordinance. 
"Uniformed Personnel" shall mean all sworn officers of the Divisions of Police and Fire.  
§ 53-2. - Domicile as condition of employment. 
[Added 6-9-2010 by Ord. No. 10-078; amended 12-19-2018 by Ord. No. 18-141 ] 
A.  All employees, as defined herein, as a condition of their employment, shall maintain a bona fide domicile in the City of Jersey City during the period of their employment. "Domicile" means the permanent place of abode within the meaning, intent and scope of the New Jersey Statutes and court decisions governing and defining "domicile." It shall also mean the permanent abode which the employee occupies with his or her spouse and minor children. 
B.  All Employees shall file with the Department of Human Resources, within 30 days of the effective date of their appointment, an affidavit setting forth the following: 
(1)  The address and telephone number of the employees' bona fide domicile; and 
(2)  The address and telephone number of the employees' spouse and minor children, if applicable,  
§ 53-2.1. - Domicile as condition of applying to serve as uniformed personnel. 
[Added 12-19-2018 by Ord. No. 18-141 ] 
Applicants for employment as uniformed personnel seeking appointment on or after January 1, 2020 must have maintained a bona fide domicile in the City of Jersey City for at least two years prior to the date of their qualifying exam. 
All those seeking employment as uniformed personnel must file an affidavit with the official conducting their background investigation, setting forth the following information: 
(1)  The address and telephone number of their bona fide domicile for the two years prior to the date of their civil service exam and all supporting documentation in support of their affidavit which may include, but shall not be limited to, utility or credit card bills; bank statements; and /or original lease or rental agreements. 
(2)  The address and telephone number of their spouse and minor children, if applicable.  
§ 53-3. - Exceptions. 
[Added 6-9-2010 by Ord. No. 10-078; amended 12-19-2018 by Ord. No. 18-141 ] 
A majority of the full membership of the Municipal Council, at its discretion, for good cause shown, may authorize and permit an employee as defined herein to be domiciled outside the City of Jersey City.  
§ 53-4. - Investigations; hearings; termination of employment. 
[Added 6-9-2010 by Ord. No. 10-078] 
A.  The appointing authority or its duly authorized representatives are hereby authorized to investigate the bona fides of an employees' domicile or failure to comply with the provisions of this Article and to conduct hearings thereon. Such hearings shall be conducted upon no less than ten days' notice to the employee. The notice shall be served upon the employee by mail or personal service and shall set forth the following: 
[Amended 12-19-2018 by Ord. No. 18-141 ] 
(1)  The date, time and place of the hearing. 
(2)  A detailed specification of the charges against the employee. 
(3)  A statement warning the employee that the hearing may result in the termination of the employment of the employee. 
B.  The following shall be sufficient cause to terminate the employment of an employee: 
(1)  Failure to file the affidavit within thirty (30) days. 
(2)  Filing a false or incomplete affidavit.  
§ 53-5. - Affidavit required. 
[Added 6-9-2010 by Ord. No. 10-078] 
No person shall hereafter be appointed to any office or position unless such person shall have first filed an affidavit setting forth the address and telephone number of his or her bona fide domicile.  
§ 53-6. - Vacation and other compensation. 
[Added 6-9-2010 by Ord. No. 10-078] 
A.  All compensation and benefits of employees, as applicable, shall be in accordance with the compensation and benefits established by Executive Order 2008-09 and any amendments thereto, except as herein provided. 
B.  All employees, except the Mayor and Council Members, shall be granted paid vacation days which shall be the greater of: 
(a)  The vacation days earned through years of service as provided by the Mayor's Executive Order: or 
(b)  Twenty working days. 
C.  Compensation shall include the incidental personal use of motor vehicles assigned by the Mayor to employees which shall bear the City Seal and the following identification on each side, in letters at least three inches high: 
CITY OF JERSEY CITY 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
[Amended 10-12-2011 by Ord. No. 11-117] 
D.  All employees whose salary and other compensation are required by law to be fixed by ordinance, except Council Aides [2], shall receive an annual increase in base salary equal to the annual percentage increase in the Implicit Price Deflator for State and Local Government Purchases of Goods and Services promulgated annually by the Director of Local Government Services pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:4-45.1a, provided that: 
[Amended 12-17-2014 by Ord. No. 14-159 ] 
(1)  No such annual increase shall exceed 3.5 percent; and 
(2)  However, the first such increase shall take effect on November 1, 2014 in the amount of 2.5 percent of the base salary. Subsequent increases shall take effect on January 1, 2016 and annually thereafter for those employees covered by this section then on the payroll based upon the rate promulgated in the prior year. 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Note— Council Aides receive a salary fixed by ordinance that shall not exceed $15,000.00 pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:69A-60.5. 
 
§ 53-7. - Workplace regulations. 
[Added 6-9-2010 by Ord. No. 10-078] 
A.  The workplace regulations established in the Mayor's Policies and Procedures Manual as applicable, and any amendments thereto, are hereby adopted for employees, except as herein provided. 
B.  The service day of an employee, (except the Mayor, Council Members and Council Aides) shall consist of a minimum of eight hours of service, inclusive of the lunch period. The hours of employment shall be continuous, except for such lunch period. 
C.  The service day of Council Aides shall be determined by the respective Municipal Council Member.  
§ 53-8. - Hours of employment for regular employees. 
[Amended 6-9-2010 by Ord. No. 10-078; amended 12-19-2018 by Ord. No. 18-141 ] 
A.  The normal service day of each regular employee of the city under the terms of this Chapter shall consist of eight hours of service, inclusive of the lunch period. 
B.  The hours of employment shall be continuous, except for such lunch period. 
C.  The hours of employment shall be designated by the department head according to that schedule which best meets the efficiency of the public service, provided that these limitations regarding lunch periods shall not apply to shift employees, and provided also that in departments where the nature of the work is such that it is impossible to operate in accordance with the normal service day, regular employees may be required to work in excess thereof. 
D.  Where a regular employee is called back to work within 24 hours of the starting time of his or her normal service day, or where the regular employee continues to work beyond the normal service day, all work in excess thereof and within such 24-hour period shall be considered overtime to be compensated as provided by the Council. 
E.  No regular employee shall be required to work in excess of 16 hours within such 24-hour period, except under unusual circumstances where it would be impractical or impossible to provide relief employees. No regular change, however, in shifts or daily schedule shall be construed to provide overtime for the regular employee affected. 
Editor's note— Former 53-3. Renumbered as 53-8 after reorganization of Chapter by Ord. No. 10-078.  
§ 53-9. - Time clock procedures. 
[Amended 6-9-2010 by Ord. No. 10-078] 
Rules and regulations governing time clock procedures shall be those issued by the designee of the Mayor. 
Editor's note— Former 53-4. Renumbered as 53-9 after reorganization of Chapter by Ord. No. 10-078.  
§ 53-10. - Administration; amendments. 
[Amended 6-9-2010 by Ord. No. 10-078] 
The administration of this Article shall be reposed in the Mayor pursuant to law, and the Mayor may designate the Business Administrator or other appropriate official to enforce this Article. Amendments to the aforesaid rules and regulations shall be made by the Mayor pursuant to law. 
Editor's note— Former 53-5. Renumbered as 53-10 after reorganization of Chapter by Ord. No. 10-078.  
§ 53-11. - Fixed salaries. 
[Added 1-12-2011 by Ord. No. 10-171; amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ; 12-17-2014 by 14-157 ; 12-17-2014 by Ord. No. 14-159 ] 
	
(Base with CPI)* 	Title 
	Business Administrator 
	Chief Financial Officer/Municipal Chief 
	Financial Officer 
	City Clerk 
	Corporation Counsel 
	Deputy City Clerk 
	Deputy Tax Assessor 
	Director, Department of Human Resources 
	Director, Department of Health and Human Services 
	Director, Department of Housing, Economic Development, and Commerce 
	Director, Department of Public Safety 
	Director, Department of Public Works 
	Director, Department of Recreation 
	Mayor 
	Tax Assessor 
	Tax Collector*** 
	Assistant Municipal Tax Collector 
	Council Members 
	Municipal Court Judges 
 
* The CPI increase to Base Salaries as set forth in Section 53-6 (Personnel) shall be provided for the above stated Titles** as reinstated by this chapter. 
**Note: Council Aides do not receive the CPI increase in accordance with Section 53-6. 
***Ord. No. 14-157 provides: 
1.  The Tax Collector's base salary shall be increased by $10,000 for as long as the duties and responsibilities related to the financial management and monitoring of tax abatements remain within the tax collector's office. 
2.  In the event these additional functions are assigned to another person and office the base salary shall revert back to the current salary plus any Consumer Price Index (CPI) increase received pursuant to subsection 53-6(D) of the Municipal Code.  
§ 53-12. - Provision of retiree medical and health benefits. 
[Added 1-26-2011 by Ord. No. 11-007; amended 1-26-2011 by Ord. No. 11-008; 8-31-2011 by Ord. No. 11-106] 
The City will pay the entire cost of medical and health benefits, including the premium charges for Part B of the Federal Medicare Program, for certain Eligible Employees, as defined hereinafter, who retire or have already retired from the City, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:10-23.  
§ 53-13. - Eligibility for retiree medical and health benefits. 
[Added 1-26-2011 by Ord. No. 11-007; amended 1-26-2011 by Ord. No. 11-008] 
"Eligible Employees" are defined as employees, including their spouses and dependents, who retire with: 
1.  At least twenty-five (25) years of credited service in a State or locally administered pension system at the time of retirement; and 
2.  At least twenty-five (25) years of actual service with the City of Jersey City, which may include prior actual service with a public body, corporate and politic, that it has been established by the City of Jersey City. 
The additional requirement of retirement with at least twenty-five (25) years of actual service credit with the City of Jersey City, will only apply: 1) to new Eligible Employees, that is, those hired after the effective date of this ordinance, and 2) upon successful negotiation with each collective bargaining unit of the City of Jersey City.  
§ 53-14. - Retiree medical and health benefits plans. 
[Added 8-31-2011 by Ord. No. 11-106] 
Effective October 1, 2011, the City will not pay the premium for a Traditional Indemnity Health Insurance Plan. All retirees will be automatically enrolled in a Point of Service or Preferred Provider Health Plan or its substantial equivalent. Those employees who have already retired, may elect to retain or enroll in a Traditional Plan but only if they pay any difference in cost between the premiums for the Traditional Plan and Point of Service or Preferred Provider Health Insurance Plan.  
Chapter 56 - PLANNING BOARD 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City 9-8-1981 as Ch. 2, Art. XVII, Subarticle 12, of Ord. No. MC-14; amended in its entirety at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. Subsequent amendments noted where applicable.] 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Director of Housing and Economic Development as consultant — See Ch. 3, § 3-73. 	Subdivision of land — See Ch. 299. 
Zoning Board of Adjustment — See Ch. 74. 	Zoning — See Ch. 345. 
 
 
§ 56-1. - Board created; membership. 
There is hereby established, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23, in the City of Jersey City, a Planning Board of nine (9) members and two (2) alternates appointed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23.1.  
§ 56-2. - Powers and duties. 
The Planning Board shall have the powers and duties provided by the Municipal Land Use Law.  
§ 56-3. - Appeals to Council. 
Pursuant to Section 8 of the Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-17), any interested party may appeal to the Municipal Council any final decision of the Planning Board on any class of application for development.  
Chapter 59 - PUBLIC LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City 9-8-1981 as Sec. 2-292 of Ord. No. MC-14. Amendments noted where applicable.] 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Administration of government - See Ch. 3. 
 
§ 59-1. - Board established; legislative authority. 
The Board of Trustees of the Public Library is hereby established pursuant to law ( N.J.S.A. 40:54-1 et seq.).  
Chapter 62 - RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City 6-23-1993 as Ord. No. 93-064. Amendments noted where applicable.] 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Administration of government — See Ch. 3. 
 
§ 62-1. - Inspection permitted. 
Under N.J.S.A. 47:1A-2, all records required by law to be made, maintained or kept on file by any board, body, agency, department, commission, authority or official of the city are considered public records. Every citizen of the state, during regular business hours maintained by the custodian of such records, has the right, during regular business hours and under the supervision of a representative of the custodian, to copy the records by hand and purchase copies of the records. Copies of records must be made available upon payment of the fee established by law. [1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's Note: See Ch. 160, Fees and Charges. 
 
§ 62-2. - Copying by person requesting records.[2] 
If the documents to be copied are more than one hundred (100) pages, the custodian may permit the person requesting copies to use his or her own copying machine, provided that there is no risk of damage or mutilation of the documents and it would not be incompatible with the transaction of public business. The decision is completely within the discretion of the custodian of records. The fee in such case is as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges. [3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. 

--- (3) --- 
Editor's Note: For documents maintained by the Office of the Tax Assessor, see Ch. 3, Administration of Government, § 3-65. 
 
§ 62-3. - Denial of examination of records. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of § 62-1, if it appears that the records sought to be examined pertain to an investigation in progress by any body, agency and/or commission, board, authority or official, the right of examination may be denied if the inspection, copying or publication of the records is inimical to the public interest; provided that this restriction shall not be construed to prohibit any body, agency, commission, board, authority or official from opening such records for public examination if not otherwise prohibited by law.  
Chapter 66 - REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City 9-8-1981 as Sec. 2-293 of Ord. No. MC-14. Amendments noted where applicable.] 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Administration of government — See Ch. 3. 
 
§ 66-1. - Agency established. 
The Redevelopment Agency is hereby established pursuant to law (N.J.S.A. 40:55C-1 et seq.). [1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:55C-1 was repealed by L. 1992, c. 79. Section 59b of that Act provided for the continuation of a Redevelopment Agency established prior to such repeal. For current provisions, see N.J.S.A. 40A:12-11. 
 
§ 66-2. - Commissioners. [Added 12-22-1992 by Ord. No. 92-187] 
Two (2) Commissioners of the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency shall be members of the Municipal Council, each of whom shall serve a term of one (1) year.  
Chapter 67 - PEDESTRIAN MALLS 
_____ 
ARTICLE I. - Newark Avenue Pedestrian Mall 
 
§ 67-1. - Definitions. 
[Added 7-15-2015 by Ord. No. 15-096 ] 
The following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
A.  "Pedestrian Mall" or "Pedestrian Mall Improvement" or "Pedestrian Plaza" or "Mall": Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:56-65 et seq., any local improvement designed to be used primarily for the movement, safety, convenience and enjoyment of pedestrians, whether or not a part of a street is set apart for roadway or emergency vehicles, transit vehicles and private vehicles, or any of them. A pedestrian mall improvement shall include but not be limited to pedestrian thoroughfares, perimeter parking, public seating, park areas, outdoor cafes, shelters, trees, flower plantings, sculpture, newsstands, telephone booths, traffic signs, kiosks, fire hydrants, street lighting, ornamental signs, ornamental lights, trash receptacles, display cases, marquees, awnings, canopies, overhead radiant heating fixtures, underground radiant heating pipes and devices, walls, bollards and chains and all such other fixtures, equipment, facilities and appurtenances which in the judgment of the governing body of a municipality will enhance the movement, safety, convenience and enjoyment of pedestrians and benefit the municipality and adjoining properties.  
§ 67-2. - Findings. 
[Added 7-15-2015 by Ord. No. 15-096 ; 6-27-2018 by Ord. No. 18-064 ] 
A.  The Mayor and Council find and declare: 
(1)  The City of Jersey City may undertake development and maintenance of a Pedestrian Mall as a local improvement pursuant to this act and provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:56-69 et seq. 
(2)  That a Newark Avenue Pedestrian Mall will enhance the movement, safety, convenience and enjoyment of pedestrians. 
(3)  That the portion of Newark Avenue between Grove Street and Erie Street and the portion of Newark Avenue between Barrow Street and Jersey Avenue and Bay Street from Erie Street to Newark Avenue are not a part of any state highway, are located primarily in a business district and are improved to their maximum feasible width with regard to adjoining buildings and improvements. 
(4)  That a reasonably convenient alternate route to other parts of the City and State exist for private vehicles. 
(5)  That continued unlimited use of the street or part thereof by private vehicles may constitute a hazard to the health and safety of pedestrians. 
(6)  That abutting properties can reasonably and adequately be provided with emergency vehicular services and receive and deliver merchandise and materials from other streets and alleys or by provisions for limited use of the streets by emergency vehicles and carriers of such merchandise and materials. 
(7)  That it is in the best interests of the City and the public and of benefit to adjacent properties to use such street primarily for pedestrian purposes, and that pedestrian use is determined to be the highest and best use of such street or part thereof.  
§ 67-3. - Limitations. 
[Added 7-15-2015 by Ord. No. 15-096 ; 6-27-2018 by Ord. No. 18-064 ] 
A.  A pedestrian mall shall be created on the following street(s) or portion thereof: 
(1)  Newark Avenue, between Grove Street and Erie Street as indicated on the street map on file in the office of the City Clerk; 
(2)  Newark Avenue, between Barrow Street and Jersey Avenue as indicated on the street map on file in the office of the City Clerk; and 
(3)  Bay Street from Erie Street to Newark Avenue as indicated on the street map on file in the office of the City Clerk. 
B.  The use of the surface of the above described portion of Newark Avenue and Bay Street shall be limited at all times to pedestrians and also emergency, public works, and other maintenance and service vehicles as required, as well as other vehicles explicitly permitted by the City under § 67-4 below. 
C.  The Business Administrator shall maintain a Newark Avenue Pedestrian Mall operating plan that shall contain rules and regulations regarding the specific permitted uses of the Mall, including but not limited to special events, food and beverage service, and improvements and maintenance of the mall. See § 67-4 below. 
D.  There shall be no limit of vehicular use on either Grove Street, Christopher Columbus Drive, or Erie Street. 
E.  The City acknowledges that there is access to other streets for delivery of or receiving merchandise or materials.  
§ 67-4. - Uses of pedestrian mall; control and regulation. 
[Added 7-15-2015 by Ord. No. 15-096 ] 
A.  Under the direction of the Mayor and governing body, a pedestrian mall may be used for any purpose or activity which will enhance the movement, safety, convenience or enjoyment of pedestrians, subject to the limitations set forth, in this section. 
B.  The Business Administrator shall maintain a pedestrian mall operating plan, to be enforced by the Department of Public Safety and the Division of Commerce, that will provide for the control and regulation of: 
(1)  The distribution and location of movable furniture, sculpture or pedestrian traffic control devices, landscaping and other facilities belonging to the mall and not otherwise located or fixed by plans and specifications. 
(2)  The uses to be permitted on the mall by occupants of abutting property, including but not limited to transit or telephone utilities and other concessionaires. 
(3)  The issuance of permits to conduct any special activity(ies) or operation(s) consistent with the broad purposes of the mall, subject to the limitations set forth in this section. 
(4)  The operation of any heating or other facilities and replacing landscaping and maintaining furniture and facilities in the mall. 
(5)  The designation of parking spaces and/or other specifically reserved uses of the mall or portions thereof. 
(6)  Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:56-69 et seq., the regulation of a limited amount of local vehicle traffic in order to allow for deliveries, pickups and/or drop-offs of business patrons or employees, and/or other loading and unloading of personnel, materials, or other goods to be used directly or indirectly by a business and/or residence along the pedestrian mall. 
C.  The following minimum restrictions and regulations shall be in effect at all times within the mall and shall be noted in the pedestrian mall operating plan: 
[Amended 5-23-2018 by Ord. No. 18-050 ; 6-27-2018 by Ord. No. 18-064 ] 
(1)  Any person(s) creating undue amounts of noise, waste, and/or a potentially dangerous or threatening environment for any mall patrons will be subject to removal from the pedestrian mall and subject to additional penalties allowed by law, if applicable. 
(2)  No person may loiter in the pedestrian mall between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., whether or not that person is making use of any pedestrian mall public seating, fixtures, or any other pedestrian mall features. Any person in violation of this section will be subject to removal from the pedestrian mall in addition to any other penalties allowed by law. 
(3)  Amplified music or other amplified sounds shall not be allowed within fifty (50) feet of the portion of Newark Avenue between Jersey Avenue and Grove Street and Bay Street from Erie Street to Newark Avenue (not including the portion of Newark Avenue between Grove Street and Christopher Columbus Drive). Any other limits on music or noise (including, without limitation, maximum permitted decibel levels) that would otherwise be applicable to these portions of Newark Avenue and Bay Street with or without the establishment of the mall shall remain in full force and in effect within this area. 
(4)  No open-air rooftop bar or restaurant shall be permitted to operate after 12:00 midnight. Food and beverage operations may continue in any fully-enclosed portion of the business until the regularly established closing time in accordance with all existing laws regarding the service of food and alcoholic beverages. 
D.  The following minimum restrictions and regulations with regard to vehicle access shall be in effect at all times within the Mall and shall be noted in the Pedestrian Mall Operating Plan: 
[Added 5-9-2018 by Ord. No. 18-035 ; amended 6-27-2018 by Ord. No. 18-064 ] 
1.  There shall be no limit of vehicular use on either Grove Street, Christopher Columbus Drive, Barrow Street or Erie Street. 
2.  Vehicles are not permitted to enter the Pedestrian Mall at any time, except for vehicles that are performing deliveries, pickups and/or drop-offs of business patrons or employees, and/or other loading and unloading of personnel, materials, or other goods to be used directly or indirectly by a business and/or residence along the Pedestrian Mall ("Permitted Vehicles") and only under the following conditions: 
a.  Permitted vehicles may only enter the Pedestrian Mall between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, and between the hours 10:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m., Saturday and Sunday. 
b.  Permitted vehicles specific to waste removal operations may only enter the Pedestrian Mall between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m., Monday through Sunday. 
c.  Permitted vehicles may only enter the Pedestrian Mall for a period of up to 15 minutes. 
d.  Permitted vehicles must not remain stationary in any portion of the Pedestrian Mall except along curbs (not in the middle travel lane). 
e.  Permitted vehicle size is limited to any vehicle with two axles or less. 
f.  Permitted vehicles shall enter the eastern half of the Pedestrian Mall only from Grove Street and must travel one-way westbound from Grove Street to Erie Street, and permitted vehicles shall enter the western half of the Pedestrian Mall only from Barrow Street and must travel one-way westbound from Barrow Street to Jersey Avenue. 
g.  Permitted vehicles may travel at speeds up to five miles per hour. 
3.  Vehicles that require access for periods longer than 15 minutes and/or after the approved access hours must receive approval from the Division of Engineering, Traffic and Transportation.  
§ 67-5. - Notice to owners and public meeting. 
[Added 7-15-2015 by Ord. No. 15-096 ] 
A.  At least ten (10) days prior to the date fixed for a public hearing, a copy of the proposed ordinance and notice of the date, time and place of the hearing shall be mailed to the owners of the lots and parcels of land abutting or directly affected by the pedestrian mall. 
B.  The City shall hold a public feedback review meeting between six (6) and eight (8) months after approval of the ordinance from which this article derives and full implementation and construction of the mall. The purpose of this meeting will be to discuss issues and any possible changes and/or improvements to the mall. This public feedback review session shall occur at City Hall. Adequate notice shall be provided to all property owners within six hundred (600) feet of any mall boundary, the Historic Downtown Special Improvement District, the Harsimus Cove Association, and other adjacent communities and community groups.  
§ 67-6. - Operating plan. 
[Added 7-15-2015 by Ord. No. 15-096 ] 
A.  The Mall shall be operated and maintained pursuant to the regulations and restrictions set forth in this article and also the pedestrian mall operating plan maintained by the Business Administrator and also pursuant to provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:56-65 et seq.  
§ 67-7. - Specifications for construction. 
[Added 7-15-2015 by Ord. No. 15-096 ] 
A.  The Jersey City Division of Architecture and Engineering and the Jersey City Department of Public Works shall approve the materials or combinations thereof of which the pedestrian mall shall be constructed if applicable. The City may in its discretion narrow any roadway to be kept and maintained in connection with any pedestrian mall, may cause any street vaults to be reconstructed or removed, may construct crosswalks at any point within a block and may cause the roadway to curve and meander within the limits of the street to enhance the usefulness and appearance of the pedestrian mall.  
§ 67-8. - Municipal powers retained. 
[Added 7-15-2015 by Ord. No. 15-096 ] 
A.  Notwithstanding the improvement of any street as a pedestrian mall, the City of Jersey City shall retain all its powers relating to the street or part thereof constituting the mall. 
B.  No such action shall be construed as a vacation in whole or in part; the establishment of a pedestrian mall is a matter of regulation only.  
§ 67-9. - Abandonment of operation. 
[Added 7-15-2015 by Ord. No. 15-096 ] 
A.  Nothing shall prevent the City, from subsequently abandoning the operation of the pedestrian mall, changing special assessments or taxes for annual costs or changing or repealing any limitation on the use of the mall for a particular purpose by ordinance.  
§ 67-10. - Procedures incident to development and maintenance. 
[Added 7-15-2015 by Ord. No. 15-096 ] 
A.  Condemnation proceedings and all other procedures incident to the development and maintenance of a pedestrian mall shall be authorized under N.J.S.A. 40:56-69 et seq., if required.  
Chapter 69 - SPECIAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City as indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.] 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Administration of government — See Ch. 3. 	Urban Enterprise Zone — See Ch. 323. 
Board of Assessment Commissioners — See Ch. 9. 	Zoning — See Ch. 345. 
Taxation — See Ch. 304. 	
  
ARTICLE I - Journal Square Special Improvement District 
[Adopted 4-13-1994 by Ord. No. 94-024; amended in its entirety 12-14-1994 by Ord. No. 94-105; amended in its entirety 9-25-2002 by Ord. No. 02-109] 
 
§ 69-1. - Purpose. 
The purposes of this article are to: 
A.  Promote economic growth and employment within an expanded Journal Square business district; 
B.  Foster and encourage self-help programs to enhance the local business climate; 
C.  Create a self-financing Special Improvement District to assist in meeting local needs, goals and objectives; 
D.  Designate a District Management Corporation to implement and manage the programs and carry out local needs, goals and objectives; 
E.  Impose and collect a special assessment on property and parking lots located within the expanded Journal Square District.  
§ 69-2. - Definitions. 
A.  "Special improvement district" (also referred to as "district") means that area of Journal Square described by Block and Lot numbers and street addresses as set forth in Schedule A and designated by this article, in which a special assessment on property shall be imposed for the purposes of promoting the economic and general welfare of the district and the City. 
B.  "District management corporation" means the Journal Square Special Improvement District Management Corporation, (also referred to as "management corporation") an entity incorporated pursuant to Title 15A of the New Jersey Statutes and designated by this Ordinance to receive funds collected by a special assessment within the special improvement district, as authorized by this article and any amendments thereto.  
§ 69-3. - Findings. 
The Council finds and declares that: 
A.  The Journal Square Special Improvement District area of the City has special needs and requires special services separate and apart from the municipal services already provided to the District by the City. 
B.  These specific services can best be provided through a private-public partnership implemented by the creation of a Special Improvement District to be managed by a District Management Corporation. 
C.  The creation of a Special Improvement District and the designation of a District Management Corporation will promote economic growth and employment; foster and encourage business vitality, expansion and self-help; enhance the local business climate and otherwise be in the best interest of the property owners in the District and the City. 
D.  A District Management Corporation will provide administrative and other services to benefit the businesses, employees, residents and consumers within the Special Improvement District and assist the city in promoting economic growth and employment. 
E.  A special assessment shall be imposed and collected by the City with the regular property tax payment or payment in lieu of taxes or otherwise, and that all or a portion of these payments shall be transferred to the District Management Corporation to effectuate the purposes of this Article and to exercise the powers given to it by this Article.  
§ 69-4. - Creation of district. 
A.  There is hereby created and designated within the City of Jersey City a Special Improvement District to be known as the Journal Square Special Improvement District consisting of those properties designated by tax Block and Lot and street addresses on Schedule A attached hereto and on file in the Office of the City Clerk. The Special Improvement District shall be subject to special assessments on all affected property within the District which assessment shall be imposed by the City for the purposes of promoting the economic and general welfare of the District and the City. 
B.  All commercial properties within the Special Improvement District, including all private properties; and tax exempt land which contain improvements subject to property tax, are deemed included in the assessing and taxing provisions of this Article and are expressly subject to any fee, tax or assessment made for Special Improvement District purposes. 
C.  Only those properties within the Special Improvement District that are fully tax-exempt are deemed excluded from the assessing provisions of this Article and are expressly exempt from any fee, tax or assessment made for Special Improvement District purposes.  
§ 69-5. - Appeal of property owner from inclusion in the district. 
Any owner of property included within the Special Improvement District and subject to the assessing and taxing provisions of this Article may appeal to the Tax Assessor of the City of Jersey City requesting to be excluded from the District and from any assessment and taxing provisions of this Article. This appeal is only as to whether or not a property should be included within the District under the standards set forth in Section 69-3 of this Article. It is not an appeal with regard to any taxes. Appeals with regard to taxes should be taken in the usual manner to the Hudson County Board of Taxation or to the Tax Court. This appeal seeking exclusion from the District and any assessment and taxing provisions of this Article shall be in writing and specifically detail the factual basis for the appeal. The Assessor shall investigate the matter and conduct an informal hearing or conference within thirty (30) days of receipt of the appeal. Within ten (10) days after the conclusion of the informal hearing or conference, the Assessor shall file a report and recommendation with the Municipal Council. The Municipal Council shall review the matter and act within thirty (30) days upon receipt of the report and recommendation from the Assessor.  
§ 69-6. - Assessments. 
A.  It is hereby determined that the operation and maintenance of the District may involve annual costs relating to services peculiar to the District, as distinguished from operation and maintenance services normally provided by the City outside of the District. Those annual costs shall be assessed or taxed to the benefited properties or businesses pursuant to this Article and N.J.S.A. 40:56-65 et seq. 
B.  Each year after the Council shall have acted on the estimated costs and/or on the budget of the District, the Assessor shall prepare an assessment roll setting forth separately the amounts to be specially assessed against the benefited and assessable properties in the District. Descriptions of such properties and the names of the then current owners of such properties, so far as names are available, shall be included in each annual assessment roll. The assessment roll, when so prepared, shall be filed in the Office of the City Clerk and be there available for inspection. The Council shall annually meet to consider objections to the amounts of such special assessments at least ten (10) days after a notice of hearing has been published once in the official newspaper and mailed to the named owners of all tracts, parcels and lots of property proposed to be assessed. The notice shall set forth the time and place of meeting, and set forth the purpose of such meeting, but may refer to the assessment roll for further particulars. When the Council shall have approved the amounts of the special assessments set forth therein or as may be changed by it, the City Clerk shall forthwith certify a copy of the assessment roll with such changes, if any, to the Hudson County Tax Board.  
§ 69-7. - Designation of District Management Corporation. 
The nonprofit corporation, the Journal Square Special Improvement District Management Corporation, is hereby designated as the District Management Corporation for the District. This corporation shall conduct its business in accordance with the Open Public Meetings Law. It shall file copies of its minutes of its meetings with the City Clerk, so as to be available for public inspection. This Management Corporation, in addition to acting as an Advisory Board to the Mayor and Council, shall have all powers necessary and requisite to effectuate the purposes of this Article and the District. In order to receive any funds or exercise any of the powers granted herein, the Board of Trustees of the Journal Square Management Corporation must include as members, the Mayor or his designee and a Member of the City Council as appointed by the Council. The Mayoral and Council members shall serve at the pleasure of, respectively, the Mayor and the Council.  
§ 69-8. - Powers of District Management Corporation. 
The Journal Square Management Corporation may: 
A.  Adopt by-laws for the regulation of its affairs and the conduct of its business and to prescribe rules, regulations and policies in connection with the performance of its functions and duties. 
B.  Employ such persons as may be required and fix and pay their compensation from funds available to the Corporation. 
C.  Apply for, accept, administer and comply with the requirements respecting an appropriation of funds or a gift, grant or donation of property or money. 
D.  Make and execute agreements which may be necessary or convenient to the exercise of the powers and functions of the Corporation, including contracts with a person, firm, corporation, governmental agency or other entity. 
E.  Administer and manage its own funds and accounts and pay its own obligations. 
F.  Borrow money from private lenders for periods not to exceed one hundred eighty (180) days and from governmental entities for that or longer periods. 
G.  Fund the improvement for the exterior appearance of properties in the District through grants or loans. 
H.  Fund the rehabilitation of properties in the District. 
I.  Accept, lease or manage property in the District. 
J.  Enforce the conditions of any loan, grant, sale or lease made by the Corporation. 
K.  Provide security, sanitation and other services to the District, supplemental to those provided normally by the municipality. 
L.  Undertake improvements designated to increase the safety or attractiveness of the district to businesses which may wish to locate there or to visitors to the District including, but not limited to, litter cleanup and control, landscaping, parking areas and facilities, recreational and rest areas and facilities, pursuant to pertinent regulations of the City of Jersey City. 
M.  Publicize the District and the businesses included within the District boundaries. 
N.  Recruit new businesses to fill vacancies in and to balance the business mix of the District. 
O.  Organize special business related events in the District. 
P.  Provide special parking arrangements for the District for customers of businesses within the District. 
Q.  Provide temporary decorative lighting in the District to attract customers to businesses in the District. 
R.  Advise the Municipal Council in connection with the acquisition and construction of improvements in the Special Improvement District, the making of a plan therefore and the operation and maintenance thereof, and to meet and furnish recommendations or comments and requests of members of the public and of owners and occupants of property included within the Special Improvement District.  
§ 69-9. - By-laws. 
The Journal Square Management Corporation shall file with the City Clerk a certified copy of the adopted by-laws of the Corporation, which by-laws shall be in substantial conformity with the draft by-laws filed with the Clerk prior to the adoption of this Article. The Journal Square Management Corporation shall have the right to amend these by-laws from time to time as its members so decide, provided that a certified copy of the adopted amendments shall be filed with the City Clerk no later than fourteen (14) days prior to the date they are to become effective.  
§ 69-10. - Municipal powers retained. 
A.  Notwithstanding the creation of a Special Improvement District, the City of Jersey City expressly retains all its powers and authority over the area designated as within the Special Improvement District. 
B.  Nothing contained herein shall be interpreted or construed to be a vacation, in whole or in part, of any municipal street or part thereof. 
C.  The District Management Corporation shall not make or enter into any contracts for the improvement of any publicly owned or operated facility or property within the Special Improvement District nor adopt any regulations relating to public property in such District. 
D.  The District Management Corporation shall comply with all applicable ordinances or regulations of the City.  
§ 69-11. - Annual budget. 
A.  The fiscal year of the District shall be July 1-June 30. 
B.  The District Management Corporation shall submit a detailed annual budget for the upcoming calendar year no later than April 1st, to the Mayor and Municipal Council. 
C.  The budget shall be submitted with a report which explains how the budget contributes to goals and objectives for the Special Improvement District. The budget shall be reasonably itemized and shall include a summary of the categories of cost properly chargeable as follows: 
1.  The amount of such costs to be charged against the general funds of the municipality, if any. 
2.  The amount of costs to be charged and assessed against properties benefited in the District in proportion to benefits which shall be the aggregate of costs of annual improvements to be made in the District during the ensuing year. 
3.  The amount of costs, if any, to be specially taxed against properties in the District. 
D.  The budget shall be introduced, approved, amended and adopted by resolution passed by not less than a majority of the full membership of the Municipal Council. 
The procedure shall be as follows: 
1.  Introduction and approval; 
2.  Public advertising; 
3.  Public hearing; 
4.  Amendments and public hearings, if required; 
5.  Adoption. 
E.  The budget shall be introduced, in writing, at a meeting of the Municipal Council. Approval thereof shall constitute a first reading, which may be by title. 
Upon the approval of the budget by the Municipal Council, it shall fix the time and place for the holding of a hearing upon the budget. 
F.  The budget shall be advertised after approval. The advertisement shall contain a copy of the budget and shall set forth the date, the time and place of the hearing. It shall be published at least ten (10) days prior to the date fixed therefore in the official newspaper of the City. 
G.  No budget shall be adopted until a public hearing has been held thereon and all persons having an interest therein shall have been given an opportunity to present objections. 
The hearing shall be held not less than twenty-eight (28) days after the approval of the budget. 
H.  The public hearing shall be held at the time and place specified in the advertisement thereof, but may be adjourned from time to time until the hearing is closed. 
I.  The budget, as advertised, shall be read at the public hearing in full or it may be read by its title, if: 
1.  At least one week prior to the date of the hearing, a complete copy of the approved budget as advertised: 
a.  Shall be posted in City of Jersey City, City Clerk's Office. 
b.  Is made available to each person requesting the same during that week and during the public hearing. 
(2)  The Municipal Council shall, by Resolution passed by not less than a majority of the full membership, determine that the budget shall be read by its title and declare that the conditions set forth in subsection (I)(1) have been met. 
J.  The Municipal Council may amend the budget during or after the public hearing. 
No amendment by the Municipal Council shall be effective until taxpayers and all persons having an interest therein shall have been granted a public hearing thereon, if the amendment shall: 
1.  Add a new item in an amount in excess of one percent of the total amount as stated in the approved budget; 
2.  Increase or decrease any item by more than ten (10) percent; or 
3.  Increase the amount to be raised pursuant to Section 16 of P.O. 1972, c. 134 (C.40:56-80) or Section 19 of this amendatory and supplementary act by more than five percent, unless the same is made pursuant to an emergency temporary appropriation only. 
Notice of hearing on an amendment shall be advertised at least three days before the date set therefore. The amendment shall be published in full in the same manner as an original publication and shall be read in full at the hearing and before adoption. 
K.  Final adoption shall be by resolution, adopted by a majority of the full membership of the Municipal Council, and may be by title.  
§ 69-12. - Fiscal requirements; annual report; audit. 
A.  1.  Funds appropriated and collected for the annual costs of operating and maintaining a Special Improvement District, shall be credited to a special account. The Mayor and Municipal Council may incur the annual costs of improving, operating and maintaining a Special Improvement District, during any fiscal year, though not specifically provided for by line item or other category in an approved estimate for such fiscal year, if in their sole discretion it shall be deemed necessary to provide for such annual improvements or operation or maintenance prior to the succeeding fiscal year and so long as the total amount of the account as approved for that year is not exceeded by that expenditure. Any balances to the credit of the account and remaining unexpended at the end of the fiscal year shall be conserved and applied towards the financial requirements of the succeeding year. 
2.  The Mayor and Municipal Council may retain a portion of the collected special assessment proceeds to offset the direct costs incurred in the required assessment and budget processes. 
3.  The Mayor and Municipal Council shall pay over funds to the Management Corporation quarterly on the first day of March, June, September and December of each year. The City shall not be obligated to pay over any funds not actually received by the City. 
B.  The District Management Corporation shall cause an annual audit of its books, accounts and financial transactions to be made and filed with the Mayor and Municipal Council and for that purpose the Corporation shall employ a Certified Public Accountant of New Jersey. The annual audit shall be completed and filed with the Municipal Council within four months after the close of the fiscal year of the Corporation, and a certified duplicate copy of the audit shall be filed with the Director of the Division of Local Government Services in the Department of Community Affairs within five days of the filing of the audit with the Mayor and Council. 
C.  The District Management Corporation shall, within thirty (30) days after the close of each fiscal year, make an annual report of its activities for the preceding fiscal year to the Mayor and Municipal Council.  
§ 69-13. - No limitations of powers. 
Nothing contained herein shall prevent the Council at any time subsequent to the adoption of this Article by Ordinance, from abandoning the operation of the Special Improvement District, changing the extent of the Special Improvement District, supplementing or amending the description of the District to be specially assessed or taxed for annual costs of the Special Improvement District, changing or repealing any plan, rules, requisitions or limitations adopted for the operation of the Special Improvement District or rescinding the designation of or re-designating a District Management Corporation.  
§ 69-14. - Implementation. 
This Special Improvement District shall become operable when the by-laws of the Journal Square Management Corporation are adopted by a vote of the eligible participants in the manner provided for in the draft by-laws on file with the City Clerk.  
§ 69-14.1. - Severability. 
If any provision of this Article or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, such holding shall not affect other provisions or applications of the act and to this end the provisions of this act are severable.  
§ 69-14.2. - Effective date. 
This Article shall take effect upon passage and publication as required by law, and adoption of the by-laws of the Journal Square Management Corporation but no sooner than July 1, 2003.  
ARTICLE II - Central Avenue Special Improvement District 
[Adopted 7-22-1992 as Ord. No. 92-087; amended in its entirety 11-22-1994 by Ord. No. 94-106] 
 
§ 69-15. - District established. 
The Central Avenue Special Improvement District ("district") is hereby established.  
§ 69-16. - District properties. 
[Amended 5-22-1996 by Ord. No. 96-048] 
Subject to § 69-16.1 hereof, the district shall consist of all properties located on Central Avenue between Manhattan Avenue and North Street more specifically designated by tax blocks and lots and street addresses on Schedule A, attached hereto and on file in the office of the City Clerk.  
§ 69-16.1. - Exempt property. 
[Added 5-22-1996 by Ord. No. 96-048] 
The following properties shall be exempt from the special assessment imposed on properties within the district: 
A.  Properties which are used exclusively for residential purposes; and 
B.  In the case of mixed-use properties, the portions of those properties used exclusively for residential purposes.  
§ 69-17. - Annual assessments. 
A.  All costs of development, construction and acquisition relating to the provision of improvements shall be financed by and assessed to properties especially benefited thereby, except exempt properties. 
[Amended 5-22-1996 by Ord. No. 96-048] 
B.  All costs of improvements and maintenance, other than the costs of improvements and maintenance ordinarily incurred by the city out of general funds, shall be determined and approved pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:56-80 or N.J.S.A. 40:56-85 as determined by the District Management Corporation. 
C.  The above costs shall be collected as a special assessment against all properties within the district, except exempt properties. 
[Amended 5-22-1996 by Ord. No. 96-048] 
D.  The Central Avenue Special Improvement District annual assessment rate shall not exceed ten percent (10%) more than the prior year's assessment rate. 
[Amended 6-15-2016 by Ord. No. 16-092 ]  
§ 69-18. - Reports; annual budget. 
The Mayor, with the assistance and concurrence of the District Management Corporation, shall submit all reports and plans required by N.J.S.A. 40:56-80 and N.J.S.A. 40:56-89, together with a detailed annual budget as required by N.J.S.A. 40:56-84, to the governing body for approval.  
§ 69-19. - District Management Corporation. 
A.  Creation. There is hereby created the Central Avenue District Management Corporation (the "Corporation"). 
B.  Membership. The Corporation shall be composed of the following members: one nonvoting Council representative to be appointed by the Council, one nonvoting municipal agency head or designee appointed by the Mayor and seven Central Avenue business and/or commercial property owners to be appointed according to the bylaws of the District Management Corporation. 
[Amended 6-15-2016 by Ord. No. 16-092 ] 
C.  Obligations. In addition to the obligations set forth in the Act, the Corporation shall file an annual audit of its books, accounts and financial transactions, which shall be filed with the governing body and the Division of Local Government Services pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:56-88. 
D.  Powers. In addition to the powers otherwise conferred upon it by the Act, the corporation shall have the power: 
(1)  To adopt bylaws for the regulations of its affairs and the conduct of its business and to prescribe rules, regulations and policies for the performance of its functions and duties. 
(2)  To employ such persons as may be required and fix and pay their compensation from funds available to the Corporation. 
(3)  To apply for, accept, administer and comply with the requirements respecting an appropriation of funds or a gift, grant or donation of property or money. 
(4)  To make and execute agreements which may be necessary or convenient to the exercise of the powers and functions of the Corporation, including contracts with any person, firm, corporation, governmental agency or other entity. 
(5)  To administer and manage its own funds and accounts and pay its own obligations. 
(6)  To borrow money from private lenders or governmental entities for periods not to exceed 180 days. 
(7)  To fund the improvement of the exterior appearance of commercial properties within the district. 
(8)  To fund the rehabilitation of commercial properties in the district. 
(9)  To accept, purchase, rehabilitate, sell, lease or manage property in the district. 
(10)   To enforce the conditions of any loan, grant, sale or lease made by the Corporation; provided, however, that if the businesses in the district petition to dissolve the district, the city shall have the right to amend the current year budget and schedule fees/and or taxes in order to liquidate outstanding claims against the Central Avenue District Management Corporation. 
(11)   To provide security, sanitation and other services to the district supplemental to those normally provided by the city. 
(12)   To undertake improvements designed to increase the safety or attractiveness of the district to businesses which may wish to locate there or to visitors to the district, including but not limited to litter cleanup and control, landscaping, parking areas and facilities, recreational and rest areas and facilities and those improvements generally permitted for pedestrian malls under N.J.S.A. 40:56-66, pursuant to pertinent regulations of the governing body. 
(13)   To publicize the district and all of the businesses included within the district boundaries. 
(14)   To recruit new businesses to fill vacancies and to balance the business mix of the district. 
(15)   To organize and coordinate special business-related events in the district pursuant to pertinent regulations of the city. 
(16)   To provide temporary decorative lighting to attract customers to businesses within the district boundaries. 
(17)   To provide special parking arrangements for the customers of businesses within the district. 
E.  Term of Corporation. The District Management Corporation and the Special Improvement District shall be dissolved in two years from their inception unless a majority of the members of the District Management Corporation voting at a special meeting of the Corporation vote to continue the Corporation and the Special Improvement District for an additional five years. A vote to continue the Corporation and the district shall take place every five years at a special meeting of the Corporation. If the District Management Corporation votes to continue the Corporation and the Special Improvement District, it must file a certified copy of the resolution authorizing the extension with the office of the City Clerk no later than thirty (30) days before the ordinance establishing the SID is scheduled to sunset. For purposes of this section, "members" means all commercial property owners and business owners within the district. 
[Amended 1-14-1998 by Ord. No. 97-099; 6-15-2016 by Ord. No. 16-092 ]  
ARTICLE III - Historic Downtown Special Improvement District 
[Adopted 4-9-1997 by Ord. No. 97-021; amended 7-16-2003 by Ord. No. 03-096] 
 
§ 69-20. - Purpose. 
[Amended 12-16-2015 by Ord. No. 15-172 ] 
The purposes of this article are to: 
A.  Promote economic growth and employment within the expanded Historic Downtown Business District. 
B.  Foster and encourage self-help programs to enhance the local business climate. 
C.  Create a self-financing Special Improvement District to assist in meeting local needs, goals and objectives. 
D.  Designate a District Management Corporation to implement and manage the programs and carry out local needs, goals and objectives. 
E.  Impose and collect a special assessment on commercial, industrial and vacant property located within the Historic Downtown District, as expanded.  
§ 69-21. - Definitions. 
[Amended 12-16-2015 by Ord. No. 15-172 ] 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
SPECIAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT (also referred to as "DISTRICT") — That area of Historic Downtown described by block and lot numbers and street addresses as set forth in Schedule A [1] and designated by this article in which a special assessment on property shall be imposed for the purposes of promoting the economic and general welfare of the district and city. 
DISTRICT MANAGEMENT CORPORATION — The Historic Downtown Special Improvement District Management Corporation, (also referred to as "Management Corporation"), an entity incorporated pursuant to Title 15A of the New Jersey Statutes and designated by this article to receive funds collected by a special assessment within the Special Improvement District, as authorized by this article and any amendments thereto. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Schedule A is on file and available for examination in the office of the City Clerk. Schedule A has been amended to include Block 11108, Lot 39, a/k/a 322 Second Street on March 28, 2018 by Ord. No. 18-024 . 
 
§ 69-22. - Legislative findings. 
The Council finds and declares that: 
A.  The Historic Downtown Special Improvement District area of the City has special needs and requires special services separate and apart from the municipal services already provided to the district by the city. 
B.  These specific services can best be provided through a private-public partnership implemented by the creation of a Special Improvement District to be managed by a District Management Corporation. 
C.  The creation of a Special Improvement District and the designation of a District Management Corporation will promote economic growth and employment; foster and encourage economic vitality, expansion and self-help; enhance the local business climate; and otherwise be in the best interest of the property owners and business owners in the district and the city. 
D.  A District Management Corporation will provide administrative and other services to benefit the businesses, employees, residents and consumers within the Special Improvement District and assist the city in promoting economic growth and employment. 
E.  A special assessment shall be imposed and collected by the city with the regular property tax payment or payment in lieu of taxes or otherwise, and that all or a portion of these payments shall be transferred to the District Management Corporation to effectuate the purposes of this article and to exercise the powers given to it by this article.  
§ 69-23. - District created; applicability. 
A.  There is hereby created and designated within the City of Jersey City a Special Improvement District to be known as the "Historic Downtown Special Improvement District," consisting of those properties designated by tax block and lot and street address on Schedule A on file in the office of the City Clerk and as depicted on the map attached hereto dated April 27, 2015, that is available for inspection in the Office of the City Clerk. The Special Improvement District shall be subject to special assessments on all affected property within the district, which assessment shall be imposed by the city for the purposes of promoting the economic and general welfare of the district and the city. 
[Amended 12-16-2015 by Ord. No. 15-172 ] 
B.  All commercial, industrial and vacant properties within the Special Improvement District, including all private, nonresidential properties and properties subject to payment in lieu of taxes; the nonresidential portions of properties containing more than one use and tax-exempt land; and tax-exempt land which contains improvements subject to property tax are deemed included in the assessing and taxing provisions of this article and are expressly subject to any fee, tax or assessment made for Special Improvement District purposes. 
C.  Only those properties within the Special Improvement District that are fully tax-exempt or used exclusively for residential purposes and those portions of mixed-used properties that are residential are deemed excluded from the assessing provisions of this article and are expressly exempt from any fee, tax or assessment made for Special Improvement District purposes.  
§ 69-24. - Appeals from inclusion. 
Any owner of property included within the Special Improvement District and subject to the assessing and taxing provisions of this article, may appeal to the Tax Assessor of the City of Jersey City requesting to be excluded from the district and from any assessment and taxing provisions of this article. This appeal is only as to whether or not a property should be included within the district under the standards set forth in § 69-22 of this article. It is not an appeal with regard to any taxes. Appeals with regard to taxes should be taken in the usual manner to the Hudson County Board of Taxation or to the Tax Court. This appeal seeking exclusion from the district and any assessment and taxing provisions of this article shall be in writing and specifically detail the factual basis for the appeal. The Assessor shall investigate the matter and conduct an informal hearing or conference within 30 days of receipt of the appeal. With 10 days after the conclusion of the informal hearing or conference, the Assessor shall file a report and recommendation with the Municipal Council. The Municipal Council shall review the matter and act within 30 days upon receipt of the report and recommendation from the Assessor.  
§ 69-25. - Assessments. 
A.  It is hereby determined that the operation and maintenance of the district may involve costs relating to services peculiar to the districts, as distinguished from operation and maintenance services normally provided by the city outside of the district. Those annual costs shall be assessed or taxed to the benefited properties or businesses pursuant to this article and N.J.S.A. 40:56-65 et seq. The properties to be assessed or taxed to provide for the payment of such annual costs are described in assessment lists on file in the office of the City Clerk. 
B.  Each year after the Council shall have acted on the estimated costs and/or on the budget of the district, the Assessor shall prepare an assessment roll setting forth separately the amounts to be specifically assessed against benefited and assessable properties in the district. Descriptions of such properties and the names of the then-current owners of such properties, so far as names are available, shall be included in each annual assessment roll. The assessment roll, when so prepared, shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk and be there available for inspection. The Council shall annually meet to consider objections to the amounts of such special assessments at least 10 days after a notice of hearing has been published once in the official newspaper and mailed to the named owners of all tracts, parcels and lots of property proposed to be assessed. The notice shall set forth the time and place of meeting and set forth the purpose of such meeting, but may refer to the assessment roll for further particulars. When the Council shall have approved the amounts of the special assessments set forth therein, or as may be changed by it, the City Clerk shall forthwith certify a copy of the assessment roll with such changes, if any, to the Hudson County Tax Board.  
§ 69-26. - District Management Corporation designated. 
The nonprofit corporation, the Historic Downtown Management Corporation, is hereby designated as a District Management Corporation for the district. This corporation shall conduct its business in accordance with the Open Public Meetings Law. [2] It shall file copies of its minutes of its meetings with the City Clerk, so as to be available for public inspection. This Management Corporation, in addition to acting as an Advisory Board to the Mayor and the Council, shall have all powers necessary and requisite to effectuate the purposes of this article and the district. In order to receive any funds or exercise any of the powers granted herein, the Board of Trustees of the Historic Downtown Management Corporation must include as members the Mayor or his designee and a member of the City Council as appointed by the Council. The Mayoral and Council members shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor and Council. 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq. 
 
§ 69-27. - Powers of District Management Corporation. 
The Historic Downtown Management Corporation may: 
A.  Adopt bylaws for the regulation of its affairs and the conduct of its business and to prescribe rules, regulations and policies in connection with the performance of its functions and duties. 
B.  Employ such persons as may be required and fix and pay their compensation from funds available to the corporation. 
C.  Apply for, accept, administer and comply with the requirements respecting an appropriation of funds or a gift, grant or donation of property or money. 
D.  Make and execute agreements which may be necessary or convenient to the exercise of the powers and functions of the corporation, including conflicts with a person, firm, corporation, government agency or other entity. 
E.  Administer and manage its own funds and accounts and pay its own obligations. 
F.  Borrow money from private lenders for periods not to exceed 180 days and from government entities for that or longer periods. 
G.  Fund the improvement for the exterior appearance of properties in the district through grants or loans. 
H.  Fund the rehabilitation of properties in the district. 
I.  Accept, lease or manage property in the district. 
J.  Enforce the conditions of any loan, grant, sale or lease made by the corporation. 
K.  Provide security, sanitation and other services to the district, supplemental to those provided normally by the municipality. 
L.  Undertake improvements designated to increase the safety or attractiveness of the district to businesses which may wish to locate there or to visitors to the district, including, but not limited to, litter cleanup and control, landscaping, parking areas and facilities, recreational and rest areas and facilities, pursuant to pertinent regulations of the City of Jersey City. 
M.  Publicize the district and the businesses included within the district boundaries. 
N.  Recruit new businesses to fill vacancies in and to balance the business mix of the district. 
O.  Organize special events in the district. 
P.  Provide special parking arrangements for the district. 
Q.  Provide temporary decorative lighting in the district. 
R.  Advise the Municipal Council in connection with the acquisition and construction of improvements in the Special Improvement District, the making of a plan therefore and the operation and maintenance thereof and to meet and furnish recommendations or comments and requests of members of the public and owners and occupants of property included in the Special Improvement District.  
§ 69-28. - Bylaws. 
The Historic Downtown Management Corporation shall file with the City Clerk a certified copy of the adopted bylaws of the corporation, which bylaws shall be in substantial conformity with the draft bylaws filed with the Clerk prior to the adoption of this article. The Historic Downtown Management Corporation shall have the right to amend these bylaws from time to time as its members so decide, provided that a certified copy of the adopted amendments shall be filed with the City Clerk no later than 14 days prior to the date they are to become effective.  
§ 69-29. - Municipal powers retained. 
A.  Notwithstanding the creation of a Special Improvement District, the City of Jersey City expressly retains all its powers and authority over the area designated as within the Special Improvement District. 
B.  Nothing contained herein shall be interpreted or construed to be a vacation, in whole or in part, of any municipal street or part thereof. 
C.  The District Management Corporation shall not make or enter into any contracts for the improvement of any publicly owned or operated facility or property within the Special Improvement District nor adopt any regulations relating to public property in such district. 
D.  The District Management Corporation shall comply with all applicable ordinances or regulations of the city.  
§ 69-30. - Fiscal year; annual budget. 
A.  The fiscal year of the district shall be July 1 through June 30. 
B.  The District Management Corporation shall submit a detailed annual budget for the upcoming calendar year no later than April 1 to the Mayor and Municipal Council. 
[Amended 12-16-2015 by Ord. No. 15-172 ] 
C.  The budget shall be submitted with a report which explains how the budget contributes to the goals and objectives for the Special Improvement District. The budget shall be reasonably itemized and shall include a summary of the categories of costs properly chargeable as follows: 
(1)  The amount of such costs to be charged against general funds of the municipality, if any. 
(2)  The amount of costs to be charged and assessed against properties benefited in the district in proportion to benefits which shall be the aggregate costs of annual improvements to be made in the district during the ensuing year. 
(3)  The amount of costs, if any, to be specially taxed against properties in the district. 
D.  The budget shall be introduced, approved, amended and adopted by resolution passed by not less than a majority of the full membership of the Municipal Council. The procedure shall be as follows: 
(1)  Introduction and approval. 
(2)  Public advertising. 
(3)  Public hearing. 
(4)  Amendments and public hearings, if required. 
(5)  Adoption. 
E.  The budget shall be introduced, in writing, at a meeting of the Municipal Council. Approval thereof shall constitute a first reading, which may be by title.  
§ 69-31. - Fiscal requirements; annual report; audit. 
A.  Funds appropriated and collected for the annual costs of operating and maintaining a Special Improvement District shall be credited to a special account. The Mayor and City Council may incur the annual costs of improving, operating and maintaining a Special Improvement District during any fiscal year, though not specifically provided for by line item or other category in an approved estimate for such fiscal year, if in their sole discretion it shall be deemed necessary to provide for such annual improvements or operation or maintenance prior to the succeeding fiscal year, so long as the total amount of the account as approved for that year is not exceeded by the expenditure. Any balances to the credit of the account and remaining unexpended at the end of the fiscal year shall be conserved and applied towards the financial requirements of the succeeding year. 
B.  The Mayor and Municipal Council may retain a portion of the collected special assessment proceeds to offset the direct costs incurred in the required assessment and budget processes. 
C.  The Mayor and Municipal Council shall pay over funds to the Management Corporation quarterly on the first day of March, June, September and December of each year. The city shall not be obligated to pay over any funds not actually received by the city. 
D.  The District Management Corporation shall, within 30 days after the close of each fiscal year, make an annual report of its activities for the preceding fiscal year to the Mayor and Municipal Council.  
§ 69-32. - Amendments. 
Nothing contained herein shall prevent the Council at any time subsequent to the adoption of this article, by ordinance, from abandoning the operation of the Special Improvement District, changing the extent of the Special Improvement District, supplementing or amending the description of the district to be specifically assessed or taxed for annual costs of the Special Improvement District or rescinding the designation of or redesignating a District Management Corporation.  
§ 69-33. - Implementation. 
[Amended 12-16-2015 by Ord. No. 15-172 ] 
This Special Improvement District shall become operable when the bylaws of the Expanded Historic Downtown Management Corporation are adopted by a vote of the eligible participants in the manner provided for in the draft bylaws on file with the City Clerk.  
§ 69-34. - Severability. 
If any provision of this article or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, such holding shall not affect other provisions or applications of the act and to this end the provisions of this act are severable.  
§ 69-35. - When effective. 
[Amended 7-16-2003 by Ord. No. 03-096; 12-16-2015 by Ord. No. 15-172 ] 
This article shall take effect upon passage and publication as required by law nunc pro tunc July 1, 2003 and adoption of the bylaws of the Expanded Historic Downtown Management Corporation.  
ARTICLE IV - McGinley Square Special Improvement District 
[Adopted 4-9-1997 by Ord. No. 97-022] 
 
§ 69-36. - Purpose. 
The purposes of this article are to: 
A.  Promote economic growth and employment within the McGinley Square Business District. 
B.  Foster and encourage self-help programs to enhance the local business climate. 
C.  Create a self-financing Special Improvement District to assist in meeting local needs, goals and objectives. 
D.  Designate a District Management Corporation to implement and manage the programs and carry out local needs, goals and objectives. 
E.  Impose and collect a special assessment on commercial, industrial and vacant property located within the McGinley Square District.  
§ 69-37. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
SPECIAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT (also referred to as "DISTRICT") - That area of McGinley Square described by block and lot numbers and street addresses as set forth in Schedule A [3] and designated by this article, in which a special assessment on property shall be imposed for the purposes of promoting the economic and general welfare of the district and city. 
DISTRICT MANAGEMENT CORPORATION - The McGinley Square Special Improvement District Management Corporation, (also referred to as "Management Corporation"), an entity incorporated pursuant to Title 15A of the New Jersey Statutes and designated by this article to receive funds collected by a special assessment within the Special Improvement District, as authorized by this article and any amendments thereto. 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's Note: Schedule A is on file and available for examination in the office of the City Clerk. 
 
§ 69-38. - Legislative findings. 
The Council finds and declares that: 
A.  The McGinley Square Special Improvement District area of the city has special needs and requires special services separate and apart from the municipal services already provided to the district by the city. 
B.  These specific services can best be provided through a private-public partnership implemented by the creation of a Special Improvement District to be managed by a District Management Corporation. 
C.  The creation of a Special Improvement District and the designation of a District Management Corporation will promote economic growth and employment; foster and encourage economic vitality, expansion and self-help; enhance the local business climate, and otherwise be in the best interest of the property owners and business owners in the district and the city. 
D.  A District Management Corporation will provide administrative and other services to benefit the businesses, employees, residents and consumers within the Special Improvement District and assist the city in promoting economic growth and employment. 
E.  A special assessment shall be imposed and collected by the city with the regular property tax payment or payment in lieu of taxes or otherwise, and that all or a portion of these payments shall be transferred to the District Management Corporation to effectuate the purposes of this article and to exercise the powers given to it by this article.  
§ 69-39. - District created; applicability. 
A.  There is hereby created and designated within the City of Jersey City a Special Improvement District to be known as the "McGinley Square Special Improvement District," consisting of those properties designated by tax block and lot and street address on Schedule A on file in the office of the City Clerk. The Special Improvement District shall be subject to special assessments on all affected property within the district, which assessment shall be imposed by the city for the purposes of promoting the economic and general welfare of the district and the city. 
B.  All commercial, industrial and vacant properties within the Special Improvement District, including all private, nonresidential properties; the nonresidential portions of properties containing more than one use and tax-exempt land; and tax-exempt land which contain improvements subject to property tax are deemed included in the assessing and taxing provisions of this article and are expressly subject to any fee, tax or assessment made for Special Improvement District purposes. 
C.  Only those properties within the Special Improvement District that are fully tax-exempt or used exclusively for residential purposes and those portions of mixed-used properties that are residential are deemed excluded from the assessing provisions of this article and are expressly exempt from any fee, tax or assessment made for Special Improvement District purposes.  
§ 69-40. - Appeals from inclusion. 
Any owner of property included within the Special Improvement District and subject to the assessing and taxing provisions of this article, may appeal to the Tax Assessor of the City of Jersey City requesting to be excluded from the district and from any assessment and taxing provisions of this article. This appeal is only as to whether or not a property should be included within the district under the standards set forth in § 69-38 of this article. It is not an appeal with regard to any taxes. Appeals with regard to taxes should be taken in the usual manner to the Hudson County Board of Taxation or to the Tax Court. This appeal seeking exclusion from the district and any assessment and taxing provisions of this article shall be in writing and specifically detail the factual basis for the appeal. The Assessor shall investigate the matter and conduct an informal hearing or conference within 30 days of receipt of the appeal. With 10 days after the conclusion of the informal hearing or conference, the Assessor shall file a report and recommendation with the Municipal Council. The Municipal Council shall review the matter and act within 30 days upon receipt of the report and recommendation from the Assessor.  
§ 69-41. - Assessments. 
A.  It is hereby determined that the operation and maintenance of the district may involve costs relating to services peculiar to the districts, as distinguished from operation and maintenance services normally provided by the city outside of the district. Those annual costs shall be assessed or taxed to the benefited properties or businesses pursuant to this article and N.J.S.A. 40:56-65 et seq. The properties to be assessed or taxed to provide for the payment of such annual costs are described in assessment lists on file in the office of the City Clerk. 
B.  Each year after the Council shall have acted on the estimated costs and/or on the budget of the district, the Assessor shall prepare an assessment roll setting forth separately the amounts to be specifically assessed against benefited and assessable properties in the district. Descriptions of such properties and the names of the then-current owners of such properties, so far as names are available, shall be included in each annual assessment roll. The assessment roll, when so prepared, shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk and be there available for inspection. The Council shall annually meet to consider objections to the amounts of such special assessments at least 10 days after a notice of hearing has been published once in the official newspaper and mailed to the named owners of all tracts, parcels and lots of property proposed to be assessed. The notice shall set forth the time and place of meeting and set forth the purpose of such meeting, but may refer to the assessment roll for further particulars. When the Council shall have approved the amounts of the special assessments set forth therein, or as may be changed by it, the City Clerk shall forthwith certify a copy of the assessment roll with such changes, if any, to the Hudson County Tax Board.  
§ 69-42. - District Management Corporation designated. 
The nonprofit corporation, the McGinley Square Management Corporation, is hereby designated as a District Management Corporation for the district. This corporation shall conduct its business in accordance with the Open Public Meetings Law. [4] It shall file copies of its minutes of its meetings with the City Clerk, so as to be available for public inspection. This Management Corporation, in addition to acting as an Advisory Board to the Mayor and the Council, shall have all powers necessary and requisite to effectuate the purposes of this article and the district. In order to receive any funds or exercise any of the powers granted herein, the Board of Trustees of the McGinley Square Management Corporation must include as members the Mayor or his designee and a Member of the City Council as appointed by the Council. The Mayoral and Council members shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor and Council. 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq. 
 
§ 69-43. - Powers of District Management Corporation. 
The McGinley Square Management Corporation may: 
A.  Adopt bylaws for the regulation of its affairs and the conduct of its business and to prescribe rules, regulations and policies in connection with the performance of its functions and duties. 
B.  Employ such persons as may be required and fix and pay their compensation from funds available to the corporation. 
C.  Apply for, accept, administer and comply with the requirements respecting an appropriation of funds or a gift, grant or donation of property or money. 
D.  Make and execute agreements which may be necessary or convenient to the exercise of the powers and functions of the corporation, including contracts with a person, firm, corporation, government agency or other entity. 
E.  Administer and manage its own funds and accounts and pay its own obligations. 
F.  Borrow money from private lenders for periods not to exceed 180 days and from government entities for that or longer periods. 
G.  Fund the improvement for the exterior appearance of properties in the district through grants or loans. 
H.  Fund the rehabilitation of properties in the district. 
I.  Accept, lease or manage property in the district. 
J.  Enforce the conditions of any loan, grant, sale or lease made by the corporation. 
K.  Provide security, sanitation and other services to the district, supplemental to those provided normally by the municipality. 
L.  Undertake improvements designated to increase the safety or attractiveness of the district to businesses which may wish to locate there or to visitors to the district, including but not limited to litter cleanup and control, landscaping, parking areas and facilities, recreational and rest areas and facilities, pursuant to pertinent regulations of the City of Jersey City. 
M.  Publicize the district and the businesses included within the district boundaries. 
N.  Recruit new businesses to fill vacancies in and to balance the business mix of the district. 
O.  Organize special events in the district. 
P.  Provide special parking arrangements for the district. 
Q.  Provide temporary decorative lighting in the district. 
R.  Advise the Municipal Council in connection with the acquisition and construction of improvements in the Special Improvement District, the making of a plan therefore and the operation and maintenance thereof and to meet and furnish recommendations or comments and requests of members of the public and owners and occupants of property included in the Special Improvement District.  
§ 69-44. - Bylaws. 
The McGinley Square Management Corporation shall file with the City Clerk a certified copy of the adopted bylaws of the corporation, which bylaws shall be in substantial conformity with the draft bylaws filed with the Clerk prior to the adoption of this article. The McGinley Square Management Corporation shall have the right to amend these bylaws from time to time as its members so decide, provided that a certified copy of the adopted amendments shall be filed with the City Clerk no later than 14 days prior to the date they are to become effective.  
§ 69-45. - Municipal powers retained. 
A.  Notwithstanding the creation of a Special Improvement District, the City of Jersey City expressly retains all its powers and authority over the area designated as within the Special Improvement District. 
B.  Nothing contained herein shall be interpreted or construed to be a vacation, in whole or in part, of any municipal street or part thereof. 
C.  The District Management Corporation shall not make or enter into any contract for the improvement of any publicly owned or operated facility or property within the Special Improvement District nor adopt any regulations relating to public property in such district. 
D.  The District Management Corporation shall comply with all applicable ordinances or regulations of the city.  
§ 69-46. - Fiscal year; annual budget. 
A.  The fiscal year of the district shall be July 1 through June 30. 
B.  The District Management Corporation shall submit a detailed annual budget for the upcoming calendar year by April 1 to the Mayor and Municipal Council. 
C.  The budget shall be submitted with a report which explains how the budget contributes to the goals and objectives for the Special Improvement District. The budget shall be reasonably itemized and shall include a summary of the categories of costs properly chargeable as follows: 
(1)  The amount of such costs to be charged against general funds of the municipality, if any. 
(2)  The amount of costs to be charged and assessed against properties benefited in the district in proportion to benefits which shall be the aggregate costs of annual improvements to be made in the district during the ensuing year. 
(3)  The amount of costs, if any, to be specially taxed against properties in the district. 
D.  The budget shall be introduced, approved, amended and adopted by resolution passed by not less than a majority of the full membership of the Municipal Council. The procedure shall be as follows: 
(1)  Introduction and approval. 
(2)  Public advertising. 
(3)  Public hearing. 
(4)  Amendments and public hearings, if required. 
(5)  Adoption. 
E.  The budget shall be introduced, in writing, at a meeting of the Municipal Council. Approval thereof shall constitute a first reading, which may be by title.  
§ 69-47. - Fiscal requirements; annual report. 
A.  Funds appropriated and collected for the annual costs of operating and maintaining a Special Improvement District shall be credited to a special account. The Mayor and City Council may incur the annual costs of improving, operating and maintaining a Special Improvement District during any fiscal year, though not specifically provided for by line item or other category in an approved estimate for such fiscal year, if in their sole discretion it shall be deemed necessary to provide for such annual improvements or operation or maintenance prior to the succeeding fiscal year, so long as the total amount of the account as approved for that year is not exceeded by the expenditure. Any balances to the credit of the account and remaining unexpended at the end of the fiscal year shall be conserved and applied towards the financial requirements of the succeeding year. 
B.  The Mayor and Municipal Council may retain a portion of the collected special assessment proceeds to offset the direct costs incurred in the required assessment and budget processes. 
C.  The Mayor and Municipal Council shall pay over funds to the Management Corporation quarterly on the first day of March, June, September and December of each year. The city shall not be obligated to pay over any funds not actually received by the city. 
D.  The District Management Corporation shall, within 30 days after the close of each fiscal year, make an annual report of its activities for the preceding fiscal year to the Mayor and Municipal Council.  
§ 69-48. - Amendments. 
Nothing contained herein shall prevent the Council at any time subsequent to the adoption of this article, by ordinance, from abandoning the operation of the Special Improvement District, changing the extent of the Special Improvement District, supplementing or amending the description of the district to be specifically assessed or taxed for annual costs of the Special Improvement District or rescinding the designation of or redesignating a District Management Corporation.  
§ 69-49. - Implementation. 
This Special Improvement District shall become operable when the bylaws of the McGinley Square Management Corporation are adopted by a vote of the eligible participants in the manner provided for in the draft bylaws on file with the City Clerk.  
§ 69-50. - Severability. 
If any provision of this article or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, such holding shall not affect other provisions or applications of the act and to this end the provisions of this act are severable.  
§ 69-51. - When effective. 
This article shall take effect upon passage and publication as required by law, and adoption of the bylaws of the McGinley Square Management Corporation.  
ARTICLE V - Jackson Hill Main Street Special Improvement District 
[Adopted 12-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-152] [5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-152, adopted December 14, 2011, amended the Code by including a new Art. III to Ch. 69. In order to avoid duplication of article numbers, and at the direction of the city, the editor has redesignated the provisions of Ord. No. 11-152 as a new Art. V. 
 
§ 69-52. - Purpose. 
[Adopted 12-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-152] 
The purposes of this article are to: 
A.  Promote economic growth and employment within the Monticello/Martin Luther King business district. 
B.  Foster and encourage self-help programs to enhance the local business climate. 
C.  Create a self-financing Special Improvement District to assist in meeting local needs, goals and objectives. 
D.  Designate a District Management Corporation to implement and manage the programs and carry out local needs, goals and objectives. 
E.  Impose and collect a special assessment on commercial, industrial and vacant property located within the Monticello/Martin Luther King business district.  
§ 69-53. - Definitions. 
[Adopted 12-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-152] 
A.  SPECIAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT (also referred to as "District") means that area of Monticello/Martin Luther King Main Street area described by Block and Lot numbers and street addresses as set forth in Schedule A and designated by the ordinance, in which a special assessment on property shall be imposed for the purposes of promoting the economic and general welfare of the District and City. 
B.  DISTRICT MANAGEMENT CORPORATION means the Jackson Hill Main Street Special Improvement District Management Corporation, (also referred to as "Management Corporation") an entity incorporated pursuant to Title 15A of the New Jersey Statutes and designated by this article to receive funds collected by a special assessment within the Special Improvement District, as authorized by this article and any amendments thereto.  
§ 69-54. - Legislative findings. 
[Adopted 12-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-152] 
The Council finds and declares that: 
A.  The Jackson Hill Main Street Special Improvement District are of the City has special needs and requires special services separate and apart from the municipal services already provided to the District by the City. 
B.  These specific services can best be provided through a private-public partnership implemented by the creation of a Special Improvement District. 
C.  The creation of a Special Improvement District and the will promote economic growth and employment; foster and encourage economic vitality, expansion and self-help; enhance the local business climate and otherwise be in the best interest of the property owners and business owners of the District and the City. 
D.  A District Management Corporation will provide administrative and other services to benefit the businesses, employees, residents and consumers within the Special Improvement District and assist the City in promoting economic growth and employment. 
E.  A special assessment shall be imposed and collected by the City with the regular property tax payment or payment in lieu of taxes or otherwise, and that all or a portion of these payments shall be transferred to the District Management Corporation to effectuate the purposes of the article and to exercise the powers given to it by this article.  
§ 69-55. - District created; applicability. 
[Adopted 12-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-152] 
A.  There is hereby created and designated within the City of Jersey City a Special Improvement District to be known as the Jackson Hill Main Street Special Improvement District consisting of those properties designated by tax Block and Lot and street address on Schedule A on file in the office of the City Clerk. The Special Improvement District shall be subject to special assessments on all affected property within the District which assessment shall be imposed by the City for the purposes of promoting the economic and general welfare of the District and the City. 
B.  All commercial, industrial and vacant properties within the Special Improvement District, including all private, non-residential properties and properties subject to payment in lieu of taxes; the non-residential portions of properties containing more than one use and tax exempt land; and tax exempt land which contain improvements-subject to property tax are deemed included in the assessing and taxing provisions, of this article and are expressly subject to any fee, tax or assessment made for Special Improvement District purposes. 
C.  Only those properties within the Special Improvement District that are fully tax-exempt or used exclusively for residential purposes and those portions of mixed-use properties that are residential, are deemed excluded from the assessing provisions of this article and are expressly exempt from any fee, tax or assessment made for Special Improvement District purposes.  
§ 69-56. - Appeals from inclusion. 
[Adopted 12-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-152] 
Any owner of property included within the Special Improvement District and subject to the assessing and taxing provisions of the article, may appeal to the Tax Assessor of the City of Jersey City requesting to be excluded from the District and from any assessment and taxing provisions of this article. This appeal is only as to whether or not a property should be included within the District under the standards set forth in § 69-54 of the article. It is not an appeal with regard to any taxes. Appeals with regard to taxes should be taken in the usual manner to the Hudson County Board of Taxation or to the Tax Court. This appeal seeking exclusion from the District and any assessment and taxing provisions of this article shall be in writing and specifically detail the factual basis for the appeal. The Assessor shall investigate the matter and conduct and informal hearing or conference within thirty (30) days of receipt of the appeal, with ten (10) days after the conclusion of the informal hearing or conference, the Assessor shall file a report and recommendation with the Municipal Council. The Municipal Council shall review the matter and act within thirty (30) days upon receipt of the report and recommendation from the Assessor.  
§ 69-57. - Assessments. 
[Adopted 12-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-152] 
A.  It is hereby determined that the operation and maintenance of the District may involve costs relating to services peculiar to the Districts, as distinguished from operation and maintenance services normally provided by the City outside of the District. These annual costs shall be assessed or taxed to the benefitted properties or business pursuant to this article and N.J.S.A. 40:56-65 et seq. The properties to be assessed or taxed to provide for the payment of such annual costs are described in assessment lists on file in the Office of the City Clerk. 
B.  Each year after the Council shall have acted on the estimated costs and/or on the budget of the District, the Assessor shall prepare an assessment roll setting forth separately the amounts to be specifically assessed against benefitted and assessable properties in the District. Descriptions of such properties and the names of the then current owners of such properties, so far as names are available, shall be included in each annual assessment role. The assessment rolls, when so prepared, shall be filed in the Office of the City Clerk and be there available for inspection. The Council shall annually meet to consider objections to the amounts of such special assessments at least ten (10) days after a notice of hearing has been published once in the official newspaper and mailed to the named owners of all tracts, parcels and lots of property proposed to be assessed. The notice shall set forth the time and place of meeting, and set forth the purpose of such meeting, but may refer to the assessment roll for further particulars. When the Council shall have approved the amounts of the special assessments set forth therein, or as may be changed by it, the City Clerk shall forthwith certify a copy of the assessment roll with such changes, if any, to the Hudson County Tax Board.  
§ 69-58. - District Management Corporation designation. 
[Adopted 12-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-152] 
The non-profit corporation, the Jackson Hill Main Street Management Corporation, is hereby designated as a District Management Corporation for the District. The corporation shall conduct its business in accordance with the Open Public Meetings Law. It shall file copies of its minutes of its meetings with the City Clerk, so as to be available for the public inspection. This Management Corporation, in addition to acting as an Advisory Board to the Mayor and the Council, shall have all powers necessary and requisite to effectuate the purposes of this article and the District. In order to receive any funds or exercise any of the powers granted herein, the Board of Trustees of the Jackson Hill Main Street Management Corporation must include as members, the Mayor or his designee and a Member of the City Council as appointed by the Council. The Mayoral and Council members shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor and Council.  
§ 69-59. - Power of District Management Corporation. 
[Adopted 12-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-152] 
The Jackson Hill Main Street Management Corporation may: 
A.  Adopt by-laws for the regulation of its affairs and the conduct of its business and to prescribe rules, regulations and policies in connection with the performance of its functions and duties. 
B.  Employ such persons as may be required, and fix and pay their compensation from funds available to the Corporation. 
C.  Apply for, accept, administer and comply with the requirements respecting an appropriation of funds or a gift, grant or donation of property or money. 
D.  Make and execute agreements which may be necessary or convenient to the exercise of the powers and functions of the Corporation, including contracts with a person, firm, corporation, government agency or other entity. 
E.  Administer and manage its own funds and accounts and pay its own obligations. 
F.  Borrow money from private lenders for periods not to exceed 180 days and from government entities for that or longer periods. 
G.  Fund the improvement for the exterior appearance of properties in the District through grants or loans. 
H.  Fund the rehabilitation of properties in the District. 
I.  Accept, lease or manage property in the District. 
J.  Enforce the conditions of any loan, grant, sale or lease made by the Corporation. 
K.  Provide security, sanitation and other services to the District, supplemental to those provided normally by the municipality., 
L.  Undertake improvements designated to increase the safety or attractiveness of the District to businesses which may wish to locate there or to visitors to the District including, but not limited to, litter clean-up, and control, landscaping, parking areas and facilities, recreational and rest areas and facilities, pursuant to pertinent regulations of the City of Jersey City. 
M.  Publicize the District and the businesses included within the District boundaries. 
N.  Recruit new businesses to fill vacancies in, and to balance the business mix of, the District. 
O.  Organize special events in the District. 
P.  Provide special parking arrangements for the District. 
Q.  Provide temporary decorative lighting in the District. 
R.  Advise the Municipal Council in connection with the acquisition and construction of improvement is the Special Improvement District, the making of a plan therefore and the operation and maintenance thereof, and to meet and furnish recommendations or comments and requests of members of the public and owners and occupants of property included in the Special Improvement District.  
§ 69-60. - Bylaws. 
[Adopted 12-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-152] 
The Jackson Hill Main Street Management Corporation shall file with the City Clerk a certified copy of the adopted bylaws of the Corporation, which bylaws shall be in substantial conformity with the draft By-Laws filed with the Clerk prior to the adoption of this article. The Corporation shall have the right to amend these bylaws from time to time as its members so decide, provided that a certified copy of the adopted amendments shall be filed with the City Clerk no later than fourteen (14) days prior to the date they are to become effective.  
§ 69-61. - Municipal powers retained. 
[Adopted 12-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-152] 
A.  Notwithstanding the creation of a Special Improvement District, the City of Jersey City expressly retains all its powers and authority over the area designated as within the Special Improvement District. 
B.  Nothing contained herein shall be interpreted or construed to be a vacation, in whole or in part, of any municipal street or part thereof. 
C.  The District Management Corporation shall not make or enter into any contracts for the improvement of any publicly owned or operated facility or property within the Special Improvement District nor adopt any regulations relating to public property in such District. 
D.  The District Management Corporation shall comply with all applicable ordinance or regulations of the City.  
§ 69-62. - Annual budget. 
[Adopted 12-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-152] 
A.  The fiscal year of the District shall be January 1—December 30. 
B.  The District Management Corporation shall submit a detailed annual budget for the upcoming calendar year by October 1, to the Mayor and the Municipal Council. 
C.  The budget shall be submitted with a report which explains how the budget contributes to . the goals and objectives for the Special Improvement District. The budget shall be reasonably itemized and shall include a summary of the categories of cost properly chargeable as follows: 
1.  The amount of such costs to be charged against general funds of the municipality, if any. 
2.  The amount of costs to be charged and assessed against properties benefitted in the District in proportion to benefits which shall be the aggregate costs of annual improvements to be made in the District during the ensuing year. 
3.  The amount of costs, if any, to be specially taxed against properties in the District. 
D.  The budget shall be introduced, approved, amended and adopted by Resolution passed by not less than a majority of the full membership of the Municipal Council. The procedure shall be as follows: 
1.  Introduction and approval; 
2.  Public advertising; 
3.  Public hearing; 
4.  Amendments and public hearings, if required; 
5.  Adoption. 
E.  The budget shall be introduced in writing at a meeting of the Municipal Council. Approval thereof shall constitute a first reading, which may be by title.  
§ 69-63. - Fiscal requirements, annual report, audit. 
[Adopted 12-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-152] 
A.  (1)  Funds appropriated and collected for the annual costs of operating and maintaining a Special Improvement District, shall be credited to a special account. The Mayor and City Council may incur the annual cost of improving, operating and maintaining a Special Improvement District, during any fiscal year through not specifically provided for by line item or other category in an approved estimate for such fiscal year, if in their sole discretion it shall be deemed necessary to provide for such annual improvements or operation or maintenance prior to the succeeding fiscal year so long as the total amount of the account as approved for that year is not exceeded by the expenditure. Any balances to the credit of the account and remaining unexpended at the end of the fiscal year shall be conserved and applied towards the financial requirements of the succeeding year. 
(2)  The Mayor and Municipal Council may retain a portion of the collected special assessment proceeds to offset the direct costs incurred in the required assessment and budget processes. 
(3)  The Mayor and Municipal Council shall pay over funds to the Management Corporation quarterly on the first day of March, June, September and December of each year. The City shall not be obligated to pay over any funds not actually received by the City. 
B.  The District Management Corporation shall, within thirty (30) days after the close of each fiscal year, make an annual report of its activities for the preceding fiscal year or the Mayor and Municipal Council.  
§ 69-64. - No limitations of powers. 
[Adopted 12-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-152] 
Nothing contained herein shall prevent the Council at any time subsequent to the adoption of this article by ordinance, from abandoning the operation of the Special Improvement District, changing the extent of the Special Improvement District, supplementing or amending the description of the District to be specifically assessed or taxed for annual costs of the Special Improvement District or rescinding the designation of or re-designating a District Management Corporation.  
§ 69-65. - Implementation. 
[Adopted 12-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-152] 
This Special Improvement District shall become operable when the bylaws of the Jackson Hill Main Street Management Corporation are adopted by a vote of the eligible participants in the manner provided for in the draft bylaws on file with the City Clerk.  
§ 69-66. - Severability. 
[Adopted 12-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-152] 
If any provision of this article or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, such holding shall not affect other provisions or applications of the act and to this end the provisions of this act are severable.  
§ 69-67. - Effective date. 
[Adopted 12-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-152] 
This article shall take effect upon the passage and publication as required by law, and adoption of the bylaws of the Jackson Hill Main Street Management Corporation.  
ARTICLE VI - Exchange Place Special Improvement District 
 
§ 69-68. - Purpose. 
[Added 12-14-2016 by Ord. No. 16-176 ; amended 3-27-2019 by Ord. No. 19-017 ] 
The purposes of this article are to: 
A.  Promote economic growth and employment within the expanded Exchange Place business district; 
B.  Foster and encourage self-help programs to enhance the local business climate; 
C.  Create a self-financing special improvement district to assist in meeting local needs, goals and objectives; 
D.  Designate a district management corporation to implement and manage the programs and carry out local needs, goals and objectives; 
E.  Impose and collect a special assessment on property and parking lots located within the expanded Exchange Place Business District.  
§ 69-69. - Definitions. 
[Added 12-14-2016 by Ord. No. 16-176 ; amended 3-27-2019 by Ord. No. 19-017 ] 
A.  Special improvement district (also referred to as "district") means that area of Exchange Place described by block and lot numbers and street addresses as set forth in Schedule A, as amended by Ordinance 19-017 , and a copy of the assessment role which is on file in the office of the City Clerk, and designated by this article, in which a special assessment on the commercial property within the district (including multi-tenant residential rental buildings), including without limitation those properties set forth on Schedule B, shall be imposed for the purposes of promoting the economic and general welfare of the district and the City. The amount of the special assessment for each property subject to the special assessment shall be equal to the percentage derived by dividing the assessed value of such property as of January 1 of any given calendar year, notwithstanding that the assessment may thereafter change, by the assessed value of all properties subject to the special assessment on January 1 of a given year, notwithstanding that the assessment may thereafter change, multiplied by the total amount of the budget proposed by the district management corporation and approved by the Municipal Council. 
B.  District management corporation means the Exchange Place Alliance, (also referred to as "Management Corporation"] an entity incorporated pursuant to Title 15A of the New Jersey Statutes and designated by this article to receive funds collected by a special assessment within the special improvement district, as authorized by this article and any amendments thereto.  
§ 69-70. - Findings. 
[Added 12-14-2016 by Ord. No. 16-176 ] 
The Council finds and declares that: 
A.  The Exchange Place Special Improvement District area of the City has special needs and requires special services separate and apart from the municipal services already provided to the district by the City, 
B.  These specific services can best be provided through a private-public partnership implemented by the creation of a special improvement district to be managed by a district management corporation. 
C.  The creation of a special improvement district and the designation of a district management corporation will promote economic growth and employment; foster and encourage business vitality, expansion and self-help; enhance the local business climate and otherwise be in the best interest of the property owners in the district and the City. 
D.  A district management corporation will provide administrative and other services to benefit the businesses, employees, residents and consumers within the special improvement district and assist the city in promoting economic growth and employment. 
E.  A special assessment shall be imposed and collected by the City with the regular property tax payment or payment in lieu of taxes or otherwise, and that all or a portion of these payments shall be transferred to the district management corporation to effectuate the purposes of this article and to exercise the powers given to it by this article.  
§ 69-71. - Creation of district. 
[Added 12-14-2016 by Ord. No. 16-176 ; amended 3-27-2019 by Ord. No. 19-017 ] 
A.  There is hereby created and designated within the City of Jersey City a special improvement district to be known as the Exchange Place Special Improvement District consisting of those properties designated by tax block and lot and street addresses on Schedule A, as amended by Ordinance 19-017 , attached hereto and on file in the Office of the City Clerk. The properties within the special improvement district that shall be subject to special assessment for the purposes of promoting the economic and general welfare of the district and the City include all commercial properties (including multi-tenant residential rental buildings), including without limitation those properties set forth on Schedule B, shall be imposed for the purposes of promoting the economic and general welfare of the district and the City. The amount of the special assessment for each property subject to the special assessment shall be equal to the percentage derived by dividing the assessed value of such property as of January 1 of any given calendar year, notwithstanding that the assessment may thereafter change, by the assessed value of all properties subject to the special assessment on January 1 of a given year, notwithstanding that the assessment may thereafter change, multiplied by the total amount of the budget proposed by the district management corporation and approved by the Municipal Council. 
B.  All commercial properties within the special improvement district (including multi-tenant residential rental buildings), including without limitation those properties set forth on Schedule B, all private properties; and tax exempt land which contain improvements subject to property tax, are deemed included in the assessing and taxing provisions of this article and are expressly subject to any fee, tax or assessment made for special improvement district purposes. 
C.  Only those properties within the special improvement district that are fully tax-exempt or are deemed excluded from the assessing provisions of this article and are expressly exempt from any fee, tax or assessment made for special improvement district purposes.  
§ 69-72. - Appeal of property owner from inclusion in the district. 
[Added 12-14-2016 by Ord. No. 16-176 ] 
Any owner of property included within the special improvement district and subject to the assessing and taxing provisions of this article may appeal to the Tax Assessor of the City of Jersey City requesting to be excluded from the district and from any assessment and taxing provisions of this article. This appeal is only as to whether or not a property should be included within the district under the standards set forth in § 69.70 of this article. It is not an appeal with regard to any taxes. Appeals with regard to taxes should be taken in the usual manner to the Hudson County Board of Taxation or to the Tax Court. This appeal seeking exclusion from the district and any assessment and taxing provisions of this article shall be in writing and specifically detail the factual basis for the appeal. The Assessor shall investigate the matter and conduct an informal hearing or conference within thirty (30) days of receipt of the appeal. Within ten (10) days after the conclusion of the informal hearing or conference, the assessor shall file a report and recommendation with the Municipal Council. The Municipal Council shall review the matter and act within thirty (30) days upon receipt of the report and recommendation from the Assessor.  
§ 69-72.1. - Assessments. 
[Added 12-14-2016 by Ord. No. 16-176 ] 
A.  It is hereby determined that the operation and maintenance of the district may involve annual costs relating to services peculiar to the district, as distinguished from operation and maintenance services normally provided by the City outside of the district Those annual costs shall be assessed or taxed to the benefited properties or businesses pursuant to this article and N.J.S.A. 40:56-65 et seq. 
B.  Each year after the Council shall have acted on the estimated costs and/or on the budget of the district, the Assessor shall prepare an assessment roll setting forth separately the amounts to be specially assessed against the benefited and assessable properties in the district. Descriptions of such properties and the names of the then current owners of such properties, so far as names are available, shall be included in each annual assessment roll. The assessment roll, when so prepared, shall be filed in the Office of the City Clerk and be there available for inspection. The Council shall annually meet to consider objections to the amounts of such special assessments at least ten (10) days after a notice of hearing has been published once in the official newspaper and mailed to the named owners of all tracts, parcels and lots of property proposed to be assessed. The notice shall set forth the time and place of meeting, and set forth the purpose of such meeting, but may refer to the assessment roll for further particulars. When the Council shall have approved the amounts of the special assessments set forth therein or as may be changed by it, the City Clerk shall forthwith certify a copy of the assessment roll with such changes, if any, to the Hudson County Tax Board.  
§ 69-73. - Designation of district management corporation. 
[Added 12-14-2016 by Ord. No. 16-176 ] 
The nonprofit corporation, Exchange Place Alliance, is hereby designated as the district management corporation for the district. This corporation shall conduct its business in accordance with the Open Public Meetings Law. It shall file copies of its minutes of its meetings with the City Clerk, so as to be available for public inspection. This management corporation, in addition to acting as an advisory board to the Mayor and Council, shall have all powers necessary and requisite to effectuate the purposes of this article and the district. In order to receive any funds or exercise any of the powers granted herein, the Board of Trustees of the Exchange Place Alliance must include as members, the Mayor or his designee and a member of the Municipal Council as appointed by the Council. The Mayoral and Council members shall serve at the pleasure of, respectively, the Mayor and the Council.  
§ 69-74. - Powers of district management corporation. 
[Added 12-14-2016 by Ord. No. 16-176 ] 
The Exchange Place Alliance may: 
A.  Adopt by-laws for the regulation of its affairs and the conduct of its business and to prescribe rules, regulations and policies in connection with the performance of its functions and duties. 
B.  Employ such persons as may be required and fix and pay their compensation from funds available to the corporation. 
C.  Apply for, accept, administer and comply with the requirements respecting an appropriation of funds or a gift, grant or donation of property or money. 
D.  Make and execute agreements which may be necessary or convenient to the exercise of the powers and functions of the corporation, including contracts with a person, firm, corporation, governmental agency or other entity. 
E.  Administer and manage its own funds and accounts and pay its own obligations. 
F.  Borrow money from private lenders for periods not to exceed 180 days and from governmental entities for that or longer periods. 
G.  Fund the improvement for the exterior appearance of properties in the district through grants or loans. 
H.  Fund the rehabilitation of properties in the district. 
I.  Accept, lease or manage property in the district. 
J.  Enforce the conditions of any loan, grant, sale or lease made by the corporation. 
K.  Provide security, sanitation and other services to the district, supplemental to those provided normally by the municipality. 
L.  Undertake improvements designated to increase the safety or attractiveness of the district to businesses which may wish to locate there or to visitors to the district including, but not limited to, litter cleanup and control, landscaping, parking areas and facilities, recreational and rest areas and facilities, pursuant to pertinent regulations of the City of Jersey City. 
M.  Publicize the district and the businesses included within the district boundaries. 
N.  Recruit new businesses to fill vacancies in and to balance the business mix of the district. 
O.  Organize special business related events in the district. 
P.  Provide special parking arrangements for the district for customers of businesses within the district. 
Q.  Provide temporary decorative lighting in the district to attract customers to businesses in the district. 
R.  Advise the Municipal Council in connection with the acquisition and construction of improvements in the special improvement district, the making of a plan therefore and the operation and maintenance thereof, and to meet and furnish recommendations or comments and requests of members of the public and of owners and occupants of property included within the special improvement district.  
§ 69-75. - By-laws. 
[Added 12-14-2016 by Ord. No. 16-176 ] 
The Exchange Place Alliance shall file with the City Clerk a certified copy of the adopted by-laws of the corporation, which by-laws shall be in substantial conformity with the draft by-laws filed with the Clerk prior to the adoption of this article. The Exchange Place Alliance shall have the right to amend these by-laws from time to time as its members so decide, provided that a certified copy of the adopted amendments shall be filed with the City Clerk no later than fourteen (14) days prior to the date they are to become effective.  
§ 69-76. - Municipal powers retained. 
[Added 12-14-2016 by Ord. No. 16-176 ] 
A.  Notwithstanding the creation of a special improvement district, the City of Jersey City expressly retains all its powers and authority over the area designated as within the special improvement district. 
B.  Nothing contained herein shall be interpreted or construed to be a vacation, in whole or in part, of any municipal street or part thereof. 
C.  The district management corporation shall not make or enter into any contracts for the improvement of any publicly owned or operated facility or property within the special improvement district nor adopt any regulations relating to public property in such district without the consent of the City. 
D.  The district management corporation shall comply with all applicable ordinances or regulations of the City.  
§ 69-77. - Annual budget. 
[Added 12-14-2016 by Ord. No. 16-176 ] 
A.  The fiscal year of the district shall be July 1—June 30. 
B.  Except with respect to the initial budget which may be presented for approval by the City Council at any time, the district management corporation shall submit a detailed annual budget for the upcoming calendar year no later than April 1, to the Mayor and Municipal Council. 
C.  The budget shall be submitted with a report which explains how the budget contributes to goals and objectives for the special improvement district. The budget shall be reasonably itemized and shall include a summary of the categories of cost properly chargeable as follows: 
1.  The amount of such costs to be charged against the general funds of the municipality, if any. 
2.  The amount of costs to be charged and assessed against properties benefited in the district in proportion to benefits which shall be the aggregate of costs of annual improvements to be made in the district during the ensuing year. 
3.  The amount of costs, if any, to be specially taxed against properties in the district. 
D.  The budget shall be introduced, approved, amended and adopted by resolution passed by not less than a majority of the full membership of the Municipal Council. 
The procedure shall be as follows: 
1.  Introduction and approval; 
2.  Public advertising; 
3.  Public hearing; 
4.  Amendments and public hearings, if required; and 
5.  Adoption. 
E.  The budget shall be introduced, in writing, at a meeting of the Municipal Council. Approval thereof shall constitute a first reading, which may be by title. Upon the approval of the budget by the Municipal Council, it shall fix the time and place for the holding of a hearing upon the budget. 
F.  The budget shall be advertised after approval. The advertisement shall contain a copy of the budget and shall set forth the date, the time and place of the hearing. It shall be published at least ten (10) days prior to the date fixed therefore in the official newspaper of the City. 
G.  No budget shall be adopted until a public hearing has been held thereon and all persons having an interest therein shall have been given an opportunity to present objections. The hearing shall be held not less than twenty-eight (28) days after the approval of the budget. 
H.  The public hearing shall be held at the time and place specified in the advertisement thereof, but may be adjourned from time to time until the hearing is closed. 
I.  The budget, as advertised, shall be read at the public hearing in full or it may be read by its title, if: 
1.  At least one week prior to the date of the hearing, a complete copy of the approved budget as advertised: 
a.  Shall be posted in City of Jersey City, City Clerk's Office; 
b.  Is made available to each person requesting the same during that week and during the public hearing; 
2.  The Municipal Council shall, by resolution passed by not less than a majority of the full membership, determine that the budget shall be read by its title and declare that the conditions set forth in subsection (I)(1) have been met. 
J.  The Municipal Council may amend the budget during or after the public hearing. No amendment by the Municipal Council shall be effective until taxpayers and all persons having an interest therein shall have been granted a public hearing thereon, if the amendment shall: 
1.  Add a new item in an amount in excess of one (1) percent of the total amount as stated in the approved budget; 
2.  Increase or decrease any item by more than ten (10) percent; or 
3.  Increase the amount to be raised pursuant to Section 16 of P.O. 1972, c.134 (C.40:56-80) or Section 19 of this amendatory and supplementary act by more than five (5) percent, unless the same is made pursuant to an emergency temporary appropriation only. Notice of hearing on an amendment shall be advertised at least three (3) days before the date set therefore. The amendment shall be published in full in the same manner as an original publication and shall be read in full at the hearing and before adoption, 
K.  Final adoption shall be by resolution, adopted by a majority of the full membership of the Municipal Council, and may be by title.  
§ 69-78. - Fiscal requirements; annual report; audit. 
[Added 12-14-2016 by Ord. No. 16-176 ] 
A.  1.  Funds appropriated and collected for the annual costs of operating and maintaining a special improvement district shall be credited to a special account. The Mayor and Municipal Council may incur the annual costs of improving, operating and maintaining a special improvement district, during any fiscal year, though not specifically provided for by line item or other category in an approved estimate for such fiscal year, if in their sole discretion it shall be deemed necessary to provide for such annual improvements or operation or maintenance prior to the succeeding fiscal year and so long as the total amount of the account as approved for that year is not exceeded by that expenditure. Any balances to the credit of the account and remaining unexpended at the end of the fiscal year shall be conserved and applied towards the financial requirements of the succeeding year. 
2.  The Mayor and Municipal Council may retain a portion of the collected special assessment proceeds to offset the direct costs incurred in the required assessment and budget processes. 
3.  The Mayor and Municipal Council shall pay over funds to the management corporation quarterly on the first day of March, June, September and December of each year. The City shall not be obligated to pay over any funds not actually received by the City. 
B.  The district management corporation shall cause an annual audit of its books, accounts and financial transactions to be made and filed with the Mayor and Municipal Council and for that purpose the Corporation shall employ a certified public accountant of New Jersey. The annual audit shall be completed and filed with the Municipal Council within four (4) months after the close of the fiscal year of the Corporation, and a certified duplicate copy of the audit shall be filed with the Director of the Division of Local Government Services in the Department of Community Affairs within five (5) days of the filing of the audit with the Mayor and Council. 
C.  The district management corporation shall, within thirty (30) days after the close of each fiscal year, make an annual report of its activities for the preceding fiscal year to the Mayor and Municipal Council.  
§ 69-79. - No limitations of powers. 
[Added 12-14-2016 by Ord. No. 16-176 ] 
Nothing contained herein shall prevent the Council at any time subsequent to the adoption of this article by ordinance, from abandoning the operation of the special improvement district, changing the extent of the special improvement district, supplementing or amending the description of the district to be specially assessed or taxed for annual costs of the special improvement district, changing or repealing any plan, rules, requisitions or limitations adopted for the operation of the special improvement district or rescinding the designation of or re-designating a district management corporation.  
§ 69-80. - Implementation. 
[Added 12-14-2016 by Ord. No. 16-176 ] 
This special improvement district shall become operable when the by-laws of the Exchange Place Alliance are adopted by a vote of the eligible participants in the manner provided for in the draft by-laws on file with the City Clerk.  
§ 69-81. - Severability. 
[Added 12-14-2016 by Ord. No. 16-176 ] 
If any provision of this article or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, such holding shall not affect other provisions or applications of the act and to this end the provisions of this act are severable.  
ARTICLE VII - West Side Ave Special Improvement District 
 
§ 69-82. - Purpose. 
[Added 12-19-2018 by Ord. No. 18-131 ] 
The purposes of this Article are to: 
A.  Promote economic growth and employment within the West Side Avenue business district; 
B.  Foster and encourage self-help programs to enhance the local business climate; 
C.  Create a self-financing Special Improvement District to assist in meeting local needs, goals and objectives; 
D.  Designate a District Management Corporation to implement and manage the programs and carry out local needs, goals and objectives; 
E.  Impose and collect a special assessment on property and parking lots located within the West Side Ave Business District.  
§ 69-83. - Definitions. 
[Added 12-19-2018 by Ord. No. 18-131 ] 
A.  "Special Improvement District" (also referred to as "District") means that area of West Side Ave described by Block and Lot numbers and street addresses as set forth in Schedule A, copy of the assessment role dated October 25, 2018 which is on-file in the office of the City Clerk, and designated by this Article, in which a special assessment on the commercial property within the District (including multi-tenant residential rental buildings), including without limitation those properties set forth on Schedule B, shall be imposed for the purposes of promoting the economic and general welfare of the District and the City. The amount of the special assessment for each property subject to the special assessment shall be equal to the percentage derived by dividing the assessed value of such property as of January 1 of any given calendar year, notwithstanding that the assessment may thereafter change, by the assessed value of all properties subject to the special assessment on January 1 of a given year, notwithstanding that the assessment may thereafter change, multiplied by the total amount of the budget proposed by the District Management Corporation and approved by the Municipal Council. 
B.  "District Management Corporation" means the West Side Ave Special Improvement District, (also referred to as "Management Corporation") an entity incorporated pursuant to Title 15A of the New Jersey Statutes and designated by this Article to receive funds collected by a special assessment within the Special Improvement District, as authorized by this Article and any amendments thereto.  
§ 69-84. - Findings. 
[Added 12-19-2018 by Ord. No. 18-131 ] 
The Council finds and declares that: 
A.  The West Side Avenue Special Improvement District area of the City has special needs and requires special services separate and apart from the municipal services already provided to the District by the City. 
B.  These specific services can best be provided through a private-public partnership implemented by the creation of a Special Improvement District to be managed by a District Management Corporation. 
C.  The creation of a Special Improvement District and the designation of a District Management Corporation will promote economic growth and employment; foster and encourage business vitality, expansion and self-help; enhance the local business climate and otherwise be in the best interest of the property owners in the District and the City. 
D.  A District Management Corporation will provide administrative and other services to benefit the businesses, employees, residents and consumers within the Special Improvement District and assist the city in promoting economic growth and employment. 
E.  A special assessment shall be imposed and collected by the City with the regular property tax payment or payment in lieu of taxes or otherwise, and that all or a portion of these payments shall be transferred to the District Management Corporation to effectuate the purposes of this Article and to exercise the powers given to it by this Article.  
§ 69-85. - Creation of District. 
[Added 12-19-2018 by Ord. No. 18-131 ] 
A.  There is hereby created and designated within the City of Jersey City a Special Improvement District to be known as the West Side Avenue Special Improvement District consisting of those properties designated by tax Block and Lot and street addresses on Schedule A attached hereto and on file in the Office of the City Clerk. The properties within the Special Improvement District that shall be subject to special assessment for the purposes of promoting the economic and general welfare of the District and the City includes all commercial properties (including multi-tenant residential rental buildings), including without limitation those properties set forth on Schedule B, shall be imposed for the purposes of promoting the economic and general welfare of the District and the City. The amount of the special assessment for each property subject to the special assessment shall be equal to the percentage derived by dividing the assessed value of such property as of January 1 of any given calendar year, notwithstanding that the assessment may thereafter change, by the assessed value of all properties subject to the special assessment on January 1 of a given year, notwithstanding that the assessment may thereafter change, multiplied by the total amount of the budget proposed by the District Management Corporation and approved by the Municipal Council. 
B.  All commercial properties within the Special Improvement District, (including multi-tenant residential rental buildings), including without limitation those properties set forth on Schedule B, all private properties; and tax exempt land which contain improvements subject to property tax, are deemed included in the assessing and taxing provisions of this Article and are expressly subject to any fee, tax or assessment made for Special Improvement District purposes. 
C.  Only those properties within the Special Improvement District that are fully tax exempt or are deemed excluded from the assessing provisions of this Article and are expressly exempt from any fee, tax or assessment made for Special Improvement District purposes.  
§ 69-86. - Appeal of property owner from inclusion in the district. 
[Added 12-19-2018 by Ord. No. 18-131 ] 
Any owner of property included within the Special Improvement District and subject to the assessing and taxing provisions of this Article may appeal to the Tax Assessor of the City of Jersey City requesting to be excluded from the District and from any assessment and taxing provisions of this Article. This appeal is only as to whether or not a property should be included within the District under the standards set forth in § 69-84 of this Article. It is not an appeal with regard to any taxes. Appeals with regard to taxes should be taken in the usual manner to the Hudson County Board of Taxation or to the Tax Court. This appeal seeking exclusion from the District and any assessment and taxing provisions of this Article shall be in writing and specifically detail the factual basis for the appeal. The Assessor shall investigate the matter and conduct an informal hearing or conference within 30 days of receipt of the appeal. Within ten days after the conclusion of the informal hearing or conference, the Assessor shall file a report and recommendation with the Municipal Council. The Municipal Council shall review the matter and act within 30 days upon receipt of the report and recommendation from the Assessor.  
§ 69-87. - Assessments. 
[Added 12-19-2018 by Ord. No. 18-131 ] 
A.  It is hereby determined that the operation and maintenance of the District may involve annual costs relating to services peculiar to the District, as distinguished from operation and maintenance services normally provided by the City outside of the District. Those annual costs shall be assessed or taxed to the benefited properties or businesses pursuant to this Article and N.J.S.A. 40:56-65 et seq. 
B.  Each year after the Council shall have acted on the estimated costs and/or on the budget of the District, the Assessor shall prepare an assessment roll setting forth separately the amounts to be specially assessed against the benefited and assessable properties in the District. Descriptions of such properties and the names of the then current owners of such properties, so far as names are available, shall be included in each annual assessment roll. The assessment roll, when so prepared, shall be filed in the Office of the City Clerk and be there available for inspection. The Council shall annually meet to consider objections to the amounts of such special assessments at least ten [10] days after a notice of hearing has been published once in the official newspaper and mailed to the named owners of all tracts, parcels and lots of property proposed to be assessed. The notice shall set forth the time and place of meeting, and set forth the purpose of such meeting, but may refer to the assessment roll for further particulars. When the Council shall have approved the amounts of the special assessments set forth therein or as may be changed by it, the City Clerk shall forthwith certify a copy of the assessment roll with such changes, if any, to the Hudson County Tax Board.  
§ 69-88. - Designation of District Management Corporation. 
[Added 12-19-2018 by Ord. No. 18-131 ] 
The nonprofit corporation, The West Side Avenue Special Improvement District, is hereby designated as the District Management Corporation for the District. This corporation shall conduct its business in accordance with the Open Public Meetings Law. It shall file copies of its minutes of its meetings with the City Clerk, so as to be available for public inspection. This Management Corporation, in addition to acting as an Advisory Board to the Mayor and Council, shall have all powers necessary and requisite to effectuate the purposes of this Article and the District. In order to receive any funds or exercise any of the powers granted herein, the Board of Trustees of the West Side Avenue Special Improvement District must include as members the Mayor or his designee and a Member of the Municipal Council as appointed by the Council. The Mayoral and Council members shall serve at the pleasure of, respectively, the Mayor and the Council.  
§ 69-89. - Powers of District Management Corporation. 
[Added 12-19-2018 by Ord. No. 18-131 ] 
The West Side Avenue Special Improvement District may: 
A.  Adopt by-laws for the regulation of its affairs and the conduct of its business and to prescribe rules, regulations and policies in connection with the performance of its functions and duties. 
B.  Employ such persons as may be required and fix and pay their compensation from funds available to the Corporation. 
C.  Apply for, accept, administer and comply with the requirements respecting an appropriation of funds or a gift, grantor donation of property or money. 
D.  Make and execute agreements which may be necessary or convenient to the exercise of the powers and functions of the Corporation, including contracts with a person, firm, corporation, governmental agency or other entity. 
E.  Administer and manage its own funds and accounts and pay its own obligations. 
F.  Borrow money from private lenders for periods not to exceed 180 days and from governmental entities for that or longer periods. 
G.  Fund the improvement for the exterior appearance of properties in the District through grants or loans. 
H.  Fund the rehabilitation of properties in the District. 
I.  Accept, lease or manage property in the District. 
J.  Enforce the conditions of any loan, grant, sale or lease made by the Corporation. 
K.  Provide security, sanitation and other services to the District, supplemental to those provided normally by the municipality. 
L.  Undertake improvements designated to increase the safety or attractiveness of the district to businesses which may wish to locate there or to visitors to the District including, but not limited to, litter cleanup and control, landscaping, parking areas and facilities, recreational and rest areas and facilities, pursuant to pertinent regulations of the City of Jersey City. 
M.  Publicize the District and the businesses included within the District boundaries. 
N.  Recruit new businesses to fill vacancies in and to balance the business mix of the District. 
O.  Organize special business related events in the District. 
P.  Provide special parking arrangements for the District for customers of businesses within the District. 
Q.  Provide temporary decorative lighting in the District to attract customers to businesses in the District. 
R.  Advise the Municipal Council in connection with the acquisition and construction of improvements in the Special Improvement: District, the making of a plan therefore and the operation and maintenance thereof, and to meet and furnish recommendations or comments and requests of members of the public and of owners and occupants of property included within the Special Improvement District.  
§ 69-90. - By-laws. 
[Added 12-19-2018 by Ord. No. 18-131 ] 
The West Side Avenue Special Improvement District shall file with the City Clerk a certified copy of the adopted by-laws of the Corporation, which by-laws shall be in substantial conformity with the draft by-laws filed with the Clerk prior to the adoption of this Article. The West Side Avenue Special Improvement District shall have the right to amend these by-laws from time to time as its members so decide, provided that a certified copy of the adopted amendments shall be filed with the City Clerk no later than 14 days prior to the date they are to become effective.  
§ 69-91. - Municipal powers retained. 
[Added 12-19-2018 by Ord. No. 18-131 ] 
A.  Notwithstanding the creation of a Special Improvement District, the City of Jersey City expressly retains all its powers and authority over the area designated as within the Special Improvement District. 
B.  Nothing contained herein shall be interpreted or construed to be a vacation, in whole or in part, of any municipal street or part thereof. 
C.  The District Management Corporation shall not make or enter into any contracts for the improvement of any publicly owned or operated facility or property within the Special Improvement District nor adopt any regulations relating to public property in such District without the consent of the City. 
D.  The District Management Corporation shall comply with all applicable ordinances or regulations of the City.  
§ 69-92. - Annual budget. 
[Added 12-19-2018 by Ord. No. 18-131 ] 
A.  The fiscal year of the District shall be July 1—June 30. 
B.  Except with respect to the initial budget, which may be presented for approval by the City Council at any time, the District Management Corporation shall submit a detailed annual budget for the upcoming calendar year no later than April 1, to the Mayor and Municipal Council. 
C.  The budget shall be submitted with a report which explains how the budget contributes to goals and objectives for the Special Improvement District. The budget shall be reasonably itemized and shall include a summary of the categories of cost properly chargeable as follows: 
1.  The amount of such costs to be charged against the general funds of the municipality, if any. 
2.  The amount of costs to be charged and assessed against properties benefited in the District in proportion to benefits which shall be the aggregate of costs of annual improvements to be made in the District during the ensuing year. 
3.  The amount of costs, if any, to be specially taxed against properties in the District D. 
D.  The budget shall be introduced, approved, amended and adopted by resolution passed by not less than a majority of the full membership of the Municipal Council. The procedure shall be as follows: 
1.  Introduction and approval; 
2.  Public advertising; 
3.  Public hearing; 
4.  Amendments and public hearings if required; and 
5.  Adoption. 
E.  The budget shall be introduced, in writing, at a meeting of the Municipal Council. Approval thereof shall constitute a first reading, which may be by title. Upon the approval of the budget by the Municipal Council, it shall fix the time and place for the holding of a hearing upon the budget. 
F.  The budget shall be advertised after approval. The advertisement shall contain a copy of the budget and shall set forth the date, the time and place of the hearing. It shall be published at least ten days prior to the date fixed therefore in the official newspaper of the City. 
G.  No budget shall be adopted until a public hearing has been held thereon and all persons having an interest therein shall have been given an opportunity to present objections. The hearing shall be held not less than 28 days after the approval of the budget. 
H.  The public hearing shall be held at the time and place specified in the advertisement thereof, but may be adjourned from time to time until the hearing is closed. 
I.  The budget, as advertised, shall be read at the public hearing in full or it may be read by its title, if: 
1.  At least one week prior to the date of the hearing, a complete copy of the approved budget as advertised: a. shall be posted in City of Jersey City/City Clerk's Office; b. is made available to each person requesting the same during that week and during the public hearing; 
2.  The Municipal Council shall, by Resolution passed by not less than a majority of the full membership, determine that the budget shall be read by its title and declare that the conditions set forth in subsection (I)(l) have been met. 
J.  The Municipal Council may amend the budget during or after the public hearing. No amendment by the Municipal Council shall be effective until taxpayers and all persons having an interest therein shall have been granted a public hearing thereon, if the amendment shall: 
1.  Add a new item in an amount in excess of one percent of the total amount as stated in the approved budget; 
2.  Increase or decrease any item by more than ten percent; or 
3.  Increase the amount to be raised pursuant to Section 16 of P.O. 1972, c.134 [C.40:56-80] or Section 19 of this amendatory and supplementary act by more than five percent, unless the same is made pursuant to an emergency temporary appropriation only. 
Notice of hearing on an amendment shall be advertised at least three days before the date set therefore. The amendment shall be published in full in the same manner as an original publication and shall be read in full at the-hearing and before adoption. 
K.  Final adoption shall be by resolution, adopted by a majority of the full membership of the Municipal Council, and may be by title.  
§ 69-93. - Fiscal requirements; annual report; audit. 
[Added 12-19-2018 by Ord. No. 18-131 ] 
A.  1.  Funds appropriated and collected for the annual costs of operating and maintaining a Special Improvement District, shall be credited to a special account, The Mayor and Municipal Council may incur the annual costs of improving, operating and maintaining a Special Improvement District, during any fiscal year, though not specifically provided for by line item or other category in an approved estimate for such fiscal year, if in their sole discretion it shall be deemed necessary to provide for such annual improvements or operation or maintenance prior to the succeeding fiscal year and so long as the total amount of the account as approved for that year is not exceeded by that expenditure. Any balances to the credit of the account and remaining unexpended at the end of the fiscal year shall be conserved and applied towards the financial requirements of the succeeding year. 
2.  The Mayor and Municipal Council may retain a portion of the collected special assessment proceeds to offset the direct costs incurred in the required assessment and budget processes. 
3.  The Mayor and Municipal Council shall pay over funds to the Management Corporation quarterly on the first day of March, June, September and December of each year. The City shall not be obligated to pay over any funds not actually received by the City. 
B.  The District Management Corporation shall cause an annual audit of its books, accounts and financial transactions to be made and filed with the Mayor and Municipal Council and for that purpose the Corporation shall employ a Certified Public Accountant of New Jersey. The annual audit shall be completed and filed with the Municipal Council within four months after the close of the fiscal year of the Corporation, and a certified duplicate copy of the audit shall be filed with the Director of the Division of Local Government Services in the Department of Community Affairs within five days of the filing of the audit with the Mayor and Council. 
C.  The District Management Corporation shall, within 30 days after the close of each fiscal year, make an annual report of its activities for the preceding fiscal year to the Mayor and Municipal Council.  
§ 69-94. - No limitations of powers. 
[Added 12-19-2018 by Ord. No. 18-131 ] 
Nothing contained herein shall prevent the Council at any time subsequent to the adoption of this Article by Ordinance, from abandoning the operation of the Special Improvement District, changing the extent of the Special Improvement District, supplementing or amending the description of the District to be specially assessed or taxed for annual costs of the Special Improvement District, changing or repealing any plan, rule's, requisitions or limitations adopted for the operation of the Special Improvement District or rescinding the designation of or re-designating a District Management Corporation.  
§ 69-95. - Implementation. 
[Added 12-19-2018 by Ord. No. 18-131 ] 
This Special Improvement District shall become operable when the by-laws of the West Side Avenue Special Improvement District are adopted by a vote of the eligible participants in the manner provided for in the draft by-laws on file with the City Clerk.  
§ 69-96. - Severability. 
[Added 12-19-2018 by Ord. No. 18-131 ] 
If any provision of this Article or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, such holding shall not affect other provisions or applications of the Article and to this end the provisions of this Article are severable.  
§ 69-97. - Effective date. 
[Added 12-19-2018 by Ord. No. 18-131 ] 
This article shall take effect upon the passage and publication as required by law, and adoption of the bylaws of the District Management Corporation.  
Chapter 71 - TOURIST DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City 6-9-1993 by Ord. No. 93-059. Amendments noted where applicable.] 
 
§ 71-1. - Commission established; members; terms; vacancies. 
There is hereby established the Jersey City Tourist Development Commission as an agency of the City of Jersey City. The Commission shall consist of five members who shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the Council. One member shall be a representative of the City of Jersey City and shall advise the Council of the work of the Commission. The remaining four members shall be municipal licensees upon whom an additional license fee has been imposed pursuant to N,J.S.A. 40:52-7. (NOTE: N.J.S.A. 40:54C-1 provides as follows: The commissioner representing the municipality shall serve at the pleasure of the Council. The terms of office of the remaining commissioners shall be two years, except that of the members first appointed, two shall be appointed for a term of one year and two shall be appointed for terms of two years. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the original appointment. Members shall serve without compensation in performance of their duties.)  
§ 71-2. - Organization; powers and duties; joint action. 
The Jersey City Tourist Development Commission shall be organized and possess all of the powers and discharge all of the duties in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:54C-1 to 40:54C-5. The Commission may act jointly with any commission in any other municipality in furtherance of purposes stated in N.J.S.A. 40:54C-3.  
Chapter 74 - ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City 9-8-1981 as Sec. 2-226 of Ord. No. MC-14. Amendments noted where applicable.] 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Administration of government — See Ch. 3. 	Zoning — See Ch. 345. 
 
 
§ 74-1. - Board continued. 
The Board of Adjustment, as heretofore established pursuant to law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69 et seq.) is reconstituted and continued.  
Chapter 81 - ADVERTISING MATERIALS 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City as indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.] 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Peddling, soliciting and canvassing — See Ch. 245. 	Sales — See Ch. 269. 
Solid waste — See Ch. 287. 	Trees — See Ch. 321 
  
ARTICLE I - Handbills and Signs 
[Adopted 5-4-1971 as Ch. 3, Art. II, of the 1971 Jersey City Code, as readopted 9-19-1978 by Ord. No. S-128; amended in its entirety 10-9-1996 by Ord. No. 96-095] 
 
§ 81-1. - Title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Jersey City Anti-Litter Ordinance."  
§ 81-2. - Intent and purpose. 
The Council finds that the promiscuous distribution of handbills and circulars contributes to the litter covering streets and sidewalks and to the degradation of the quality of life within the city. In order to control the proliferation of handbills, the purposes of this article are specifically declared to be as follows: 
A.  To protect local residents against trespassing by canvassers or handbill distributors upon the private property of residents if they have given reasonable notice that they do not wish to be solicited by such persons or do not desire to receive handbills or advertising matter. 
B.  To protect the people against the health and safety menace and the expense incident to the littering of the streets and public places by the promiscuous and uncontrolled distribution of advertising matter and commercial and noncommercial information. 
C.  To improve traffic safety by reducing visual distractions from public facilities.  
§ 81-3. - Definitions. 
The following terms, when used in this article, have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
HANDBILL - Any printed or written matter, any sample or device, circular, business card, calling card, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter or literature. 
[Amended 2-24-1999 by Ord. No. 99-023; 9-24-2015 by Ord. No. 15-127 ] 
NEWSPAPER - Any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general law, any newspaper duly entered with the United States Postal Service, in accordance with federal statute or regulation, and any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law; and, in addition, any periodical or current magazine regularly published and sold to the public. [1] 
PERSON - Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
PRIVATE PREMISES - Any dwelling, house, building, including any condominium or cooperative, or other structure, designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes, whether inhabited, uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other structure. 
[Amended 1-12-2005 by Ord. No. 04-150] 
PUBLIC PLACE - Any and all streets, boulevards, avenues, lanes, alleys or other public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, plazas, grounds and buildings. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The former definition of "noncommercial handbill," which immediately followed this definition, was repealed 2-24-1999 by Ord. No. 99-023. 
 
§ 81-4. - Throwing down handbills in public place prohibited. 
[Amended 2-24-1999 by Ord. No. 99-023] 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, place or throw any handbill in or upon any public place within the city; provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful for any person to hand out or distribute without charge to the receiver any handbill in any public place to any person willing to accept the handbill.  
§ 81-5. - Posting handbills or signs on public property. 
A.  No person may paint, mark, write on, post or otherwise affix any handbill or sign to or upon any public property or structure without the authorization of the Traffic Engineer. Authorization shall be given only for the purpose of regulating, warning, identifying and guiding traffic. 
B.  Property protected by this article includes but is not limited to traffic signal poles, traffic signal facilities, traffic signs, parking meters, utility poles, telephone pole trees, United States mail receptacles, letter receptacles, benches, bus shelters, vacant buildings, fences, bordering vacant lots, public buildings or any object affixed to or places thereon for public purposes or for the use of the public. 
C.  Upon approval from the Traffic Engineer, construction contractors and utility companies may erect temporary signs at work sites to protect the public, equipment and workers. 
D.  The City of Jersey City may post signs without notice to protect the public and/or employees from harm.  
§ 81-6. - Distribution of handbills on private property where prohibition properly posted. 
[Amended 2-24-1999 by Ord. No. 99-023] 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, place or throw any handbill upon any premises, if requested by any resident thereof not to do so or if there is placed on the premises in a conspicuous position near the entrance a sign which can be seen from the street bearing the words: "No Trespassing," "No Advertisements" or any similar notice, indicating in any manner that the occupants of the premises do not wish to have their right of privacy disturbed or to have any handbills left upon their premises. With regard to premises which are multifamily dwellings, the posting of such a sign shall also conspicuously identify the unit in which the resident who has posted the sign resides.  
§ 81-7. - Liability for conduct of another; complicity. 
[Added 2-24-1999 by Ord. No. 99-023] [2] 
A.  A person shall be liable for a violation under this article if: 
(1)  Such person's own conduct or the conduct of another person for whom he or she is legally accountable causes the violation. 
(2)  He or she is an accomplice of another person whose acts cause a violation of this article. 
(3)  He or she engages in a conspiracy to commit a violation of this article. 
B.  For the purpose of this section, the terms "legally accountable," "accomplice" and "conspiracy" shall be defined in accordance with N.J.S.A. 2C:2-6. To the extent relevant, all of the conditions of liability for the conduct of another in N.J.S.A. 2C:2-6 shall apply to any prosecution under this article. [3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 81-7, Depositing handbills on vacant premises. 

--- (3) --- 
Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 2C:2-6 defines criminal liability for the conduct of another person. 
 
§ 81-8. - Affixing handbills or signs to vacant private property. 
Without the written consent of the owner or authorized agent for such property, no person may paint, write on, post or otherwise affix any handbill or sign to or upon any vacant private property. This shall include but is not limited to utility poles, telephone poles, private fences and private trees.  
§ 81-9. - Distributing handbills at private premises; exceptions. 
A.  No person shall deposit, place or throw any handbill in or upon any inhabited private premises except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly to the owner, occupant or other person then present on the premises; provided that, except where the premises are posted as provided in this article or where any resident of the premises requests otherwise, a person may place or deposit a handbill in or upon private premises if [Amended 2-24-1999 by Ord. No. 99-023] : 
(1)  The handbill is contained in a plastic bag ventilated with airholes throughout the surface of the bag or unventilated plastic bag no greater than six inches in width; or 
(2)  The handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent it from being blown or scattered about the premises or sidewalks, streets or other public places. Mailboxes may not be so used when so prohibited by federal postal law or regulations. 
B.  The provisions of this section shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States or to newspapers; except that newspapers shall be placed on private or public property in such a manner as to prevent their being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property.  
§ 81-10. - Placing handbills in or upon vehicles prohibited. 
[Amended 2-24-1999 by Ord. No. 99-023] 
It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any handbill in or upon any automobile or other vehicle. The provisions of this section shall not be deemed to prohibit the handing, transmitting or distributing of any handbill to the owner or other occupant of any automobile or other vehicle who is willing to accept the same.  
§ 81-11. - Removal of signs and handbills, responsibility. 
Any handbill or sign found posted or otherwise affixed upon any public, or utility property contrary to the provisions of this section may be removed by any company, utility, organization or individual owning or responsible for maintaining that property or the Department of Public Works. When the property is not owned by the City of Jersey City, the City shall obtain written permission before removal of any sign or handbill.  
§ 81-12. - Removal of signs and handbills; costs of removal. 
[Amended 2-24-1999 by Ord. No. 99-023] 
A.  The Director of Public Works or an authorized agent may notify the individual or organization of the location of all unauthorized sign(s) and handbill(s) and require their removal. If the individual or organization, after notification, fails to remove the unauthorized signs and handbill within 10 days after receipt of such notice, the Director may authorize the removal and charge the cost of removal to the individual or organization. 
B.  The individual or organization responsible for the unauthorized sign(s) and handbill(s) shall not be responsible for the cost of removal if notice is not given within the specified time. 
C.  The Director of Public Works shall determine the reasonable costs to the City of Jersey City incurred in removing handbills and signs pursuant to this section. Such costs shall include but are not limited to direct labor, material and equipment costs, as well as departmental and general city overhead costs attributable to removal of signs. 
D.  Notice under this section may be by registered or ordinary mail if an address is indicated on the sign or by phone if a telephone number is indicated or by any means reasonably intended to give notice to the unauthorized sign.  
§ 81-13. - Presumptions applicable in action seeking costs of removal. 
[Amended 2-24-1999 by Ord. No. 99-023] 
A.  For purposes of any civil action by the Director of Public Works under §§ 81-11 and 81-12 seeking to recover the costs of removal, there shall be a presumption that: 
(1)  The real estate agent, broker, brokerage firm or other person whose name or telephone number appears on the handbill or sign is the person responsible for posting a handbill or sign advertising property for sale, lease or rent; 
(2)  The organization whose name appears on a sign as the sponsor of a candidate seeking office is the organization responsible for posting a handbill or sign promoting the candidate for public office; 
(3)  The owner, or lessee if the property is leased, of property used for a yard or garage sale is the person responsible for posting a handbill or sign advertising a yard or garage sale; 
(4)  The owner, or lessee if the property is leased, of property used for a commercial activity or event is the person responsible for posting a handbill or sign advertising the subject commercial activity or event; 
(5)  The person whose name, telephone number or address appears as the sponsor for a sporting event, concert, theatrical performance or similar activity or event is the person responsible for posting a handbill or sign advertising the subject activity or event; 
(6)  The person whose name, telephone number or address appears as the person to contact on any handbill or sign posted is the person responsible for having posted the same; and 
(7)  The company's name appearing on a circular, flyer or advertisement promoting products or services is the responsible party for distribution of such material. 
B.  For purposes of this section, the person presumed to be responsible for posting a handbill or sign on public or utility property may rebut such presumption by declaring under penalty of perjury or swearing under oath that the person did not cause, authorize, allow or permit the posting of the handbill or sign on public or utility property.  
§ 81-14. - Existing ordinances not affected. 
This article shall not be deemed to repeal, amend or modify any ordinance ever ordained, either prohibiting, regulating or licensing canvassers, hawkers, peddlers, transient merchants or any person using the public streets or places for any private business or enterprise, or for commercial sales, not covered herein.  
§ 81-15. - Severability. 
[Amended 2-24-1999 by Ord. No. 99-023] 
If any provision, or portion of a provision, of this article or its application to any person or circumstances shall be held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of the article or the application of the provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected. Specifically, if a court finds that any or all of the presumptions in § 81-11 are invalid, it is the intent of this article that the presumptions be severed from the article.  
§ 81-16. - Violations and penalties. 
[Amended 2-24-1999 by Ord. No. 99-023; 9-24-2015 by Ord. No. 15-127 ] 
The person responsible for the unauthorized sign(s) or handbill(s) may be punished as provided in Chapter 1, General provisions, § 1-25. and the minimum fine for violating this Chapter shall be not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) except that in a civil claim by Public Works for restitution, no penal sanctions may be applied. 
Any person who is convicted of violating this ordinance within one (1) year of the date of a previous violation and who was fined for the previous violation, shall be sentenced by a court to an additional fine as a repeat offender. The additional fine imposed by the court upon a person for a repeated offense shall not be less than the minimum or exceed the maximum fine fixed for a violation of the ordinance, but shall be calculated separately from the fine imposed for the violation of the ordinance.  
Chapter 83 - ALARM SYSTEMS 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City 3-22-1995 as Ord. No. 95-020. Amendments noted where applicable.] 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Noise — See Ch. 222, § 222-4 	Security gates — See Ch. 278. 
 
 
§ 83-1. - Purpose. 
A.  The purpose of this chapter is to encourage security alarm users and alarm businesses (sales, installation, customer service and/or monitoring) to maintain the operational reliability and the proper use of alarm systems in limiting unnecessary police emergency responses to false alarms. 
B.  This chapter governs burglary systems, requires permits, establishes fees for use, provides for penalties for violations, establishes a system of administration and sets conditions for suspension or loss of permit.  
§ 83-2. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
ALARM ADMINISTRATOR - A person or persons designated by the Director to monitor and review alarm permit holder applications, who is responsible for utilizing computerized police data to evaluate false alarms and make necessary notifications and issue bills for use under this chapter. 
ALARM NOTIFICATION - A notification intended to summon the police by an alarm system that responds to a stimulus characteristic of unauthorized intrusion. 
ALARM SITE - A single premise or location served by an alarm system or systems. 
ALARM SYSTEM - A device or system that emits, transmits or relays a signal intended to summon, or that would reasonably be expected to summon, police services of the city, including but not limited to local alarms. "Alarm system" does not include: 
A.  An alarm installed on a vehicle unless the vehicle is permanently located at a site; 
B.  An alarm designed to alert only the inhabitants of premises that do not have a local alarm; 
C.  An alarm designed to be activated by an individual to alert about a robbery or holdup or personal attack in progress. 
DIRECTOR - The Director of Public Safety or his designee. [ Amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] 
FALSE ALARM NOTIFICATION (F.A.N.) - An alarm notification to the Department of Public Safety when the responding officers find no evidence of a criminal offense or attempted criminal offense. Excluded from this definition are alarms occurring during electrical storms, hurricanes, tornadoes, blizzards and acts of God. [ Amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] 
LOCAL ALARM - An alarm system that emits a signal at an alarm site that is audible or visible from the exterior of a structure. 
PERMIT HOLDER - The person designated in the application who is responsible for responding to alarms and giving access to the site and who is responsible for proper maintenance and operation of the alarm system and payment of fees.  
§ 83-3. - Permit required; fee; application; false statements; nontransferability; exemptions. [ ] 
A.  A person is in violation of this chapter if he or she operates or causes to be operated an alarm system without a valid permit issued by the Department of Public Safety. A separate permit is required for each alarm system. 
B.  Upon receipt of a completed application form and payment of the fees set forth in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges, the Department of Public Safety shall issue an alarm permit to an applicant unless the applicant has: [Amended 4-24-1996 by Ord. No. 96-033] 
(1)  Failed to pay a fee assessed under this chapter; or 
(2)  Had an alarm permit for the alarm site revoked and the violation causing the revocation has not been corrected. 
C.  Each permit applicant must include the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the permit holder and will be responsible for the proper maintenance and operation of the alarm system and payment of fees assessed under this chapter. 
(2)  The classification of the alarm site as public or private property, residential, commercial or apartment complex. 
(3)  For each alarm system located at the alarm site, the purpose of the alarm: burglary, robbery, personal hostage or panic. 
(4)  A consent to inspect any premises where alarms are located during regular business hours or during any other mutually agreeable time. 
(5)  Other information required by the Director and the Department of Public Safety that is necessary for the enforcement of this chapter. 
D.  Any false statement of a material matter made by an applicant for the purpose of obtaining an alarm permit shall be sufficient cause for refusal to issue a permit. 
E.  An alarm permit cannot be transferred to another person. A permit holder shall inform the Department of Public Safety, in writing, of any change which alters any information on the permit application within ten (10) business days of said changes becoming effective. No fees will be assessed for such changes. The alarm administrator will make all necessary notifications of permit changes to the Director as soon as it is practical. 
F.  All fees owed by an applicant must be paid before a permit may be issued or renewed. Alarms owned by the city will be exempt from the permit fee requirement.  
§ 83-4. - Apartment complexes. 
A.  The owner or property manager of an apartment complex shall obtain a master alarm permit if any alarm system is operated in any residential unit on the premises, whether the alarm system is furnished by the apartment complex owner as an amenity or contracted by an individual tenant. This shall include public housing projects. 
B.  A tenant of an apartment complex shall also obtain an alarm permit before operating or causing the operation of an alarm system in the tenant's residential unit in order to make a clear distinction between the individual apartment owner and common areas of the apartment complex. 
C.  For purposes of enforcing this chapter against an individual residential unit, the alarm permit of the tenant supersedes the master alarm permit of the apartment complex; the tenant is responsible for false alarm notification emitted from the alarm system in the tenant's residential unit. The master alarm permit holder is responsible for false alarm notifications emitted from unoccupied residential units. 
D.  The owner or property manager of an apartment complex shall obtain a separate alarm permit for any alarm system operated in a nonresidential area of the apartment complex, including but not limited to common tenant areas, office, storage and equipment areas.  
§ 83-5. - Permit duration and renewal. 
A.  A permit expires three (3) years from the date of issuance and must be renewed for a new three-year period by submitting an updated application and a permit renewal fee to the Department of Public Safety. It is the responsibility of the applicant to submit an application prior to the permit expiration date. Failure to renew will be classified as use of a nonpermitted alarm system, and citations and penalties will be assessed. [ Amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] 
B.  All alarms operating on the effective date of this chapter shall apply for security alarm permits within one (1) year. 
C.  Any person operating a nonpermitted alarm system shall be subject to the penalties provided for in this chapter.  
§ 83-6. - Proper operation and maintenance. 
A.  A permit holder or person in control of an alarm system shall: 
(1)  Maintain the premises and alarm system in a manner that will minimize or eliminate false alarm notifications. 
(2)  Respond or cause a representative to appear at the systems location within a reasonable period of time, not to exceed thirty (30) minutes, when notified by the city to deactivate a malfunctioning alarm system, provide access to the premises or provide security for the premises. 
(3)  Not manually activate an alarm for any reason other than an occurrence of an event that the alarm system was intended to report. 
B.  A person in control of a local alarm shall adjust the mechanism or cause the mechanism to be adjusted so that an alarm signal will sound for no longer than fifteen (15) minutes after being activated. In the case of a malfunction where an alarm continuously resets and activates, the police may use reasonable means to render the alarm inoperable.  
§ 83-7. - Indirect alarm reporting. 
A person who is engaged in the business of relaying alarm notifications to the city shall: 
A.  Report an alarm only over designated telephone numbers or other communications facilities designated by the Director; and/or 
B.  Communicate alarm notifications to the Department of Public Safety in a manner and form determined by the Director. [ Amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ]  
§ 83-8. - Direct alarm reporting; automatic alarm notifications. 
A permit holder or person in control of an alarm site whose alarm system transmits automatic alarm notifications directly to the communications center of the Department of Public Safety shall: [ Amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] 
A.  Transmit the alarm in the form and with the content specified by the Director. 
B.  Ensure that any recorded message is intelligible.  
§ 83-9. - Operating instructions. 
A person in control of an alarm system, as a condition of being issued a permit, shall maintain at each alarm site a complete set of written operating instructions for each alarm system. Special codes, combinations or passwords should not be included in these instructions.  
§ 83-10. - Dispatch records. 
A.  The police dispatcher who dispatches a responding police unit to an alarm call shall record such information on designated Department of Public Safety forms as necessary to permit the Director to maintain records and ensure compliance with this chapter. [ Amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] 
B.  The responding police officer shall indicate on the dispatch record whether the notification was caused by a criminal offense, false alarm or an assumed false alarm ("apparently secure") disposition.  
§ 83-11. - False alarm notification. 
A.  The holder of an alarm permit or the person in control of the alarm system shall be subject to warnings, bills for service and suspension or revocation of his or her permit depending on the number of false alarm notifications (F.A.N.s) emitted from an alarm system within a twelve-month period, based on the following schedule: [ Amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] 
Number of False Alarm Notifications 	Action Taken 
First 	Telephone call and warning letter 
Second 	Telephone call and warning letter number 2 
Third 	Telephone call and warning letter number 3 
Fourth and fifth 	Bill for $100, each occurrence 
Sixth and after 	Bill for $100 and notice of proposed suspension and suspension of service pending a hearing with the Director of Public Safety to determine status of permit 
 
NOTE: Beginning January 1 of each calendar year. 
B.  Any person who operates a newly installed system will not be penalized for any F.A.N.s during the first thirty-days following the system completion, provided that a permit application is received by the Department. 
C.  Any person operating a nonpermitted alarm system will be subject to a summons and will be assessed a one-hundred-dollar fee for each F.A.N., without benefit of the notifications provided for in this chapter. 
D.  Alarm activation caused by actual criminal offense or with evidence of a criminal attempt shall not be counted as an F.A.N. 
E.  At the discretion of the Director, his designee or the alarm administrator, multiple false alarm notifications within a twenty-four-hour period of time may be counted as only one (1) F.A.N. for the purpose of billing for violations under this chapter.  
§ 83-12. - Suspension of permit. [ ] 
A.  The sixth false alarm notification shall result in a notice of proposed suspension/revocation/loss of permit. The permit holder must: 
(1)  Respond to the notice of proposed suspension by acknowledging receipt of the same, in writing, to the Department of Public Safety; and 
(2)  Take immediate action to remedy the cause(s) of the faulty or false alarm problem and report such remedial action, in writing, to the Department of Public Safety in order to avoid revocation/suspension/loss of alarm permit. 
B.  If the permit holder fails to respond to the notice or fails to remediate the false alarm problems, then the Department of Public Safety will revoke permit privileges, and the permit holder will be subject to penalties as provided for by law, as well as those specified in this chapter.  
Chapter 84 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City 5-4-1971 as Ch. 4 of the 1971 Jersey City Code, as readopted 9-19-1978 by Ord. No. S-128. Amendments noted where applicable.] 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Board of Alcoholic Beverage Control — See Ch. 7. 	Dine-dance establishments — See Ch. 175, Art. I. 
Theft of cable services — See Ch. 116. 	Itinerant eating and drinking establishments — See Ch. 175, Art. II. 
Fees and charges — See Ch. 160. 	Peace and Good Order — See Ch. 242. 
	Solid waste — See Ch. 287. 
  
ARTICLE I - Plenary Retail Consumption and Distribution Licenses 
 
§ 84-1. - Number of licenses limited. 
A.  No plenary retail consumption license to sell alcoholic beverages at retail shall be granted hereafter unless the number of such licenses issued and outstanding is fewer than five hundred (500), except as hereinafter set forth. 
B.  No plenary retail distribution license to sell alcoholic beverages at retail shall be granted hereafter unless the number of such licenses issued and outstanding is fewer than seventy (70), except as hereinafter set forth. 
C.  No seasonal retail consumption licenses, no limited retail distribution licenses and no club licenses to sell alcoholic beverages at retail shall be granted.  
§ 84-2. - Creation of new licenses. 
When the number of plenary retail consumption licenses or plenary retail distribution licenses issued and outstanding is fewer than the number specified above, additional licenses may be granted, but only in sufficient numbers so that the number of licenses outstanding will equal, but not exceed, the number specified in this article.  
§ 84-3. - Exceptions to license limitations. 
Section 84-1 shall not apply to the renewal of licenses which are issued and outstanding, nor shall it apply to the transfer of such licenses from person to person nor to the renewal of licenses so transferred; provided, however, that the Municipal Council reserves the right of issuing plenary retail consumption licenses to any banquet hall with adequate kitchen facilities or new and bona fide restaurants or hotel premises, as defined by the laws of the State of New Jersey governing alcoholic beverages, notwithstanding any limitation in this article.  
§ 84-4. - Plenary retail consumption licenses; restrictions. [Amended 12-27-1984 by Ord. No. MC-758] 
A.  No plenary retail consumption license shall be granted for or transferred to any premises the entrance of which is within the area of a circle having a radius of 750 feet and having as its central point the entrance of an existing licensed premises covered by a plenary retail consumption license, shall be compelled to vacate the licensed premises for any reason that in the opinion of the Board of Alcoholic Beverage Control was not caused by any action on the part of the licensee, or, if the landlord of the licensed premises shall consent to a vacation thereof, the licensee may, in the discretion of the Board of Alcoholic Beverage Control, be permitted to have such license transferred to another premises within a radius of 1,000 feet measured from the entrance. The provisions of this subsection relating to distances between licensed premises shall not apply to the issuance or transfer of any license to premises which will be operated by the licensee as a bowling academy. The premises shall be deemed to be operated as a bowling academy if it contains four or more pairs of bowling alleys. 
B.  Whenever any municipal, county, state or federal government or agency acquires any property in accordance with law which results in or causes holders of plenary retail consumption or distribution licenses to vacate their premises thereby, the licensees may make application to the Board of Alcoholic Beverage Control for a transfer of their respective licenses, and the Board shall, in its discretion, grant the transfer of such license hereunder, provided that the licensee shall locate elsewhere and within a radius of 6,000 feet of the premises which the licensee has been or may be compelled to vacate.  
§ 84-5. - Geographical limitation on issuance of new licenses; license transfers. [Added 12-5-1990 by Ord. No. McC-240] 
A.  No plenary retail consumption license and no plenary retail distribution license shall be granted for or transferred to any premises located within the area bounded by Summit Avenue on the east, Bergen Avenue on the west and lying between Fairmont Avenue on the north and Communipaw Avenue and Grand Street on the south. 
B.  This section shall not apply to the transfer of a plenary retail consumption license or to the transfer of a plenary retail distribution license when the premises from which the license is being transferred is located within the area bounded by Summit Avenue on the east, Bergen Avenue on the west and lying between Fairmont Avenue on the north and Communipaw Avenue and Grand Street on the south.  
§ 84-6. - Plenary retail distribution licenses; proximity of licensed premises. 
No plenary retail distribution license, excepting renewals or transfers from person to person, shall be granted for or transferred to the premises the entrance of which is within the area of a circle having a radius of 750 feet and having as its central point the entrance of an existing licensed premises covered by a plenary retail distribution license. In the event that a licensee desires to transfer to the other premises, the licensee shall be permitted to do so within 750 feet of the premises wherein the licensee is located at the time of transfer but shall comply with the provision aforementioned when transferring to premises in excess of 750 feet from the premises from which a transfer is sought.  
§ 84-6.1. - Redevelopment areas. 
[Added 1-11-1995 by Ord. No. 94-141; amended 7-13-01 by Ord. No. 01-064; 6-29-2016 by Ord. No. 16-103 ] 
A.  Anything herein contained to the contrary notwithstanding, any existing plenary retail consumption license may be transferred from a premises within a redevelopment area or from a premises outside of a redevelopment area to: 
(1)  A restaurant located in a new building or renovated building within a redevelopment area. 
(2)  A restaurant located in a new retail shopping area within a redevelopment area. 
(3)  A restaurant located in a new mixed-use apartment building or renovated mixed-use apartment building within a redevelopment area. 
(4)  A hotel or motel containing one hundred (100) guest sleeping rooms or more. 
B.  Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, any transfer of a plenary retail consumption license that complies with the provisions of this subsection shall be permitted, notwithstanding that: 
(1)  The new building, renovated building, new mixed-use apartment building, renovated mixed-use apartment building or new retail shopping area is within 750 feet of an existing plenary retail consumption license; or 
(2)  The new building, renovated building, new mixed-use apartment building, renovated mixed-use apartment building or new retail shopping area is more than 1,000 feet from the premises from which the license is transferred. 
C.  Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
HOTEL - As defined in the Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Law ( N.J.S.A. 55:13A). 
MOTEL - As defined in the Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Law ( N.J.S.A. 55:13A-3). 
NEW BUILDING — A commercial building or a free standing garage with space reserved for either restaurant or neighborhood retail use, which has been constructed subsequent to January 1, 1985, or the construction of which is commenced subsequent to January 1, 1985. 
NEW MIXED-USE APARTMENT BUILDING — A multi-family building which has been constructed subsequent to January 1, 1985, or the construction of which is commenced subsequent to January 1, 1985 having at least 3 dwelling units each containing one or more rooms serving as the home or residence of any individual, family, or household with space reserved for either restaurant or neighborhood retail use. 
NEW RETAIL SHOPPING AREA: 
(1)  A retail shopping mall; or 
(2)  A combination of a new retail space within the same redevelopment area, having at least fifty thousand (50,000) square feet of retail space which has been constructed subsequent to January 1, 1985, or the construction of which is commenced subsequent to January 1, 1985. 
REDEVELOPMENT AREA — An area defined in N.J.S.A. 40A:20-3(f). 
RENOVATED BUILDING — An existing building, seventy-five percent (75%) of the structure of which is rehabilitated subsequent to January 1, 1985. 
RENOVATED MIXED-USE APARTMENT BUILDING — An existing building where seventy-five percent (75%) of the building was renovated subsequent to January 1, 1985 or the renovation of which is commenced subsequent to January, 1985 having at least three dwelling units each containing one or more rooms serving as a home or residence of any individual, family, or household with space reserved for either a restaurant or neighborhood retail use. 
RESTAURANT: 
(1)  A place of business where food and drink are prepared and consumed on the premises; and 
(2)  The number of dining seats to bar seats are maintained at a four-to-one ratio, or a minimum of fifty-five percent (55%) of the restaurant facility's space is allocated to restaurant functions (i.e., kitchen, food-preparation area, storage, offices and nonbar seating). 
D.  Anything herein contained to the contrary notwithstanding, any existing plenary retail distribution license may be transferred from a premises within a redevelopment area or from a premises outside of a redevelopment area to a premises within the redevelopment area subject to the following conditions [Added 3-10-2010 by Ord. No. 10-033] : 
(1)  No plenary retail distribution license, excepting renewals or transfers from person to person, shall be granted for or transferred to the premises the entrance of which is within the area of a circle having a radius of five hundred twenty (520) feet and having as its central point the entrance of an existing licensed premises covered by a plenary retail distribution license. 
(2)  Transfer must be to a new building or renovated building within a redevelopment area; or 
(3)  Building or renovated building must be located in a new retail shopping area within a redevelopment area; or 
(4)  Premises must be located in a new mixed-use apartment building or renovated mixed use apartment building within a redevelopment area.  
§ 84-6.2. - Retail mall areas. [Added 6-25-1997 by Ord. No. 97-045: amended 9-8-2004 by Ord. No. 04-095] 
A.  Anything herein contained to the contrary notwithstanding, any existing plenary retail consumption license may be transferred from a premises within a redevelopment area or from a premises outside of a redevelopment area to: 
(1)  A restaurant located in a retail mall area located along Route 440, Jersey City, New Jersey, between Communipaw Avenue, Jersey City, New Jersey, and Danforth Avenue, Jersey City, New Jersey. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, any transfer of a plenary retail consumption license that complies with the provisions of this subsection shall be permitted notwithstanding that: 
(a)  The retail mall area is within seven hundred fifty (750) feet of an existing plenary retail consumption license; or 
(b)  The retail mall area is more than one thousand (1,000) feet from the premises from which the license is transferred. 
B.  Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
RESTAURANT: 
(1)  A place of business where food and drink are prepared and consumed on the premises. 
(2)  A number of dining seats to bar seats are maintained at a four-to-one ratio or a minimum of fifty-five percent (55%) of the restaurant facility's space is allocated to restaurant functions (i.e., kitchen, food preparation area storage, offices and nonbar seating.) 
RETAIL MALL AREA — A retail mall having at least one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of retail space located along Route 440, Jersey City, New Jersey, between Communipaw Avenue, Jersey City, New Jersey, and Danforth Avenue, Jersey City, New Jersey.  
§ 84-6.3. - Restaurant Overlay Zones. [Added 9-8-1999 by Ord. No. 99-121] 
Anything herein contained to the contrary notwithstanding, any plenary retail consumption license may be transferred to any premises located within a duly designated Restaurant Overlay Zone, as defined and designated in Section 345-56 and depicted on the Zoning Map of the City of Jersey City, without regard to the distance restrictions between licensed premises contained in this chapter.  
§ 84-7. - Surrender, transfer or lapse of license; conditions for new license issuance. 
If any license is surrendered, transferred to another premises or is permitted to lapse, the Board of Alcoholic Beverage Control may grant a license for said premises, notwithstanding any limitation in this Article, provided that: 
A.  The owner of the premises filed a petition with the City Clerk accompanied by an application for a license in proper form requesting the Board of Alcoholic Beverage Control to grant a license for the premises. 
B.  The petition and application are filed within six months of the date that the license for the premises was surrendered, transferred or permitted to lapse. 
C.  The license applied for is of the same class as the one that was surrendered, transferred or lapsed. 
D.  The owners of the premises making application have held the fee simple Title to the premises for which application is made for a period of at least one year prior to the surrendering, transferring or lapsing. 
E.  The surrendering or lapsing is not the result of any action on the part of the owner who knowingly permitted a violation of the ordinances of the city, of the statutes of the State of New Jersey or of the rules and regulations of the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control. 
F.  The owner of the premises making application, whether an individual, partnership or corporation, or any member of the family of said individual or partnership or stockholder in the corporation, had no interest whatsoever in the license surrendered, transferred or permitted to lapse for said premises. This provision shall not apply in the case of the lapsing of a license caused by a death in the family of an individual owner. 
G.  The petition and application is not filed for the purpose of circumventing the policy of the Council established herein to reduce the number of such licenses.  
§ 84-8. - License fee. [Amended 2-10-1983 by Ord. No. MC-296; 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050; ] 
A.  Each holder of a plenary retail consumption license shall pay the sum as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges.  
§§ 84-9—84-13. - Reserved.  
§ 84-14. - Municipal authority not affected. 
Nothing in this Article shall affect the authority of the City of Jersey City to acquire and retire licenses pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.39.  
§ 84-15. - Death of licensee; continuance or renewal of license. 
In the case of the death of any individual licensee holding either a plenary retail consumption license or a plenary retail distribution license, the Board of Alcoholic Beverage Control may, after petition and application, grant the continuance or renewal to a member of the immediate family of the deceased licensee.  
§ 84-16. - "Lapse" defined. 
As used herein, "lapse" means the failure to renew a plenary retail consumption license or a plenary retail distribution license.  
§ 84-17. - Amendments. 
The Municipal Council hereby reserves the right to alter, amend or repeal this Article.  
§ 84-18. - License fees. [Amended 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050] 
A.  The annual license fee for the plenary retail consumption license shall be as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges. 
B.  The annual license fee for the plenary retail distribution license shall be as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges.  
§ 84-19. - Corporate structure changes of license; fee. [Amended 6-9-1981 by Ord. No. S-625; 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050] 
A.  There shall be a fee as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges, charged to any licensee desiring a change in the corporate structure of the corporate license. 
B.  Any application for a change in the corporate structure of a retail consumption license or retail distribution license shall be accompanied by the payment of a fee as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges, for processing and granting approval for said corporate structure changes.  
§ 84-20. - Term of plenary retail consumption license. 
A plenary retail consumption license shall be for the term of one year beginning on July 1 of each year.  
§ 84-21. - Application for plenary retail consumption license; deposit. 
Every application for a plenary retail consumption license shall be accompanied by the deposit of the prorated annual fee for such license.  
§ 84-22. - Plenary retail consumption license; additional restrictions. 
[Amended 6-9-1981 by Ord. No. S-623; 2-10-1983 by Ord. No. MC-296; 1-28-1992 by Ord. No. McC-405; 10-12-2005 by Ord. 05-144] 
A.  The holder of a plenary retail consumption license shall be entitled, subject to rules and regulations, to: 
(1)  Sell for consumption on the licensed premises any alcoholic beverage by the glass or open receptacle. 
(2)  Sell all alcoholic beverages in original containers for consumption off the premises between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. only. 
(3)  Sell wine and malt alcoholic beverages in original containers for consumption off the premises during permitted business hours. 
B.  No holder of a plenary retail consumption license shall conduct the licensed business or suffer or permit any person whatsoever, except the licensee and the licensee's actual employees and agents, in or upon the licensed premises during other than the hours indicated. Hotels, restaurants and other operating businesses on the same licensed premises, other than for the sale of alcoholic beverages, may keep said premises open after the hours herein specified for the conduct of such other business only. There may be no glasses containing alcoholic beverages or open receptacles containing alcoholic beverages in or upon the licensed premises after the hours herein specified. 
[Amended 8-16-17 by Ord. No. 17-103 ; 7-8-2018 by Ord. No. 18-078 ] 
(1)  Outside the Downtown Restaurant Overlay Zone: 
(a)  Monday through Thursday, inclusive: 6:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m. the following day; 
(b)  Fridays and Saturdays: 6:00 a.m. to 3:00 a.m. the following day; 
(c)  Sundays: 10:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m., and 
(d)  New Year's Eve: the opening hours herein specified to 4:00 a.m. of the following day. 
(e)  As to golf facilities defined by N.J.A.C. 13:2-5.3 the hours of operation during any golf tournament or special event directly related to playing golf on Sunday shall be from 10:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m. 
(2)  As to Restaurants within the Downtown Restaurant Overlay Zone; 
(a)  As used in this section, the term Restaurant shall mean a place of business where food and drink are prepared and consumed on the premises and which contains: 
(i)  A minimum of sixty percent (60%) of the total area of the licensed premises allocated to restaurant functions (i.e. kitchen, food preparation area, storage, offices and nonbar seating); and 
(ii)  A commercial kitchen as defined in N.J.A.C. 5:70-4.7(g). 
(b)  For a Restaurant as defined above, the permitted hours of operation shall be the same as for a restaurant located outside the Downtown Restaurant Overlay Zone, provided the kitchen of such Restaurant is open until 11:59 p.m. on Sundays through Thursdays and until 1:00 a.m. of the day following Fridays and Saturdays; 
(c)  For a Restaurant as defined above, Sundays through Thursdays, no entry of new patrons to the premises or the re-entry of patrons to the premises shall be permitted after 1:00 a.m. of the following day; 
(d)  For a Restaurant as defined above, Fridays and Saturdays, no entry of new patrons to the premises or the re-entry of patrons to the premises shall be permitted after 2:00 a.m. of the following day; 
(e)  All Restaurants located within the Downtown Restaurant Overlay Zone shall post in a conspicuous location on the front of the licensed premises a sign provided by the Division of Commerce listing the hours of operation and rules regarding entry and re-entry to the premises: 
C.  During hours of sales of alcoholic beverages hereinabove, all shades, screens and other obstructions whatsoever are prohibited and shall be removed so as to permit a clear view of the bar and the inside of the licensed premises.  
§ 84-23. - Plenary retail distribution licenses; permitted hours of sale. 
[Added 9-9-1999 by Ord. No. 99-121] [1] 
A.  The holder of a plenary retail distribution license shall be permitted to sell all alcoholic beverages during the following times only: 
[Amended 12-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-165 ] 
(1)  Monday through Saturday, 9:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.; and 
(2)  Sunday, 12:00 noon to 10:00 p.m.; provided, however, that whenever Christmas Eve (December 24) and New Year's Eve (December 31) fall on Sunday, the holders of plenary retail distribution licenses shall be permitted to sell all alcoholic beverages beginning at 9:00 a.m. 
B.  No holder of such a license may sell or offer to sell any alcoholic beverage during any other time. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The hours of operation for holders of plenary retail distribution licenses are not affected by Ord. No. 99-121. 
 
§ 84-23.1. - Minimum age of bartenders.[2] 
No licensee shall employ as bartender anyone under the age of 18 years. 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former § 84-23, Minimum age of bartenders, as § 84-23.1. 
 
§ 84-24. - Sale of alcoholic beverages. 
No sale shall be made of any distilled, fortified, rectified or blended alcoholic beverages for consumption on or off the licensed premises except beverages in bottles or other containers which are properly sealed, have affixed thereto all necessary federal stamps and comply with the standards of fill required by the state rules and regulations.  
§ 84-25. - Inspection of licensed premises; alteration of premises. 
[Amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] 
No license shall be granted unless the premises sought to be licensed has been inspected and approved by the Department of Public Safety. If the applicant fails to abide by any directions for a change in the premises sought to be licensed, the application shall be denied. If, after the granting of any application and the issuance of a license, the premises shall be altered or changed in any way contrary to the directions of the Department of Public Safety, the license may, after hearing, be revoked.  
§ 84-26. - Unlawfully stamped alcoholic beverage containers. 
If any alcoholic containers, either filled, partly filled or empty, are found upon the licensed premises of any licensee without all lawful and proper stamps attached thereto or with forged, counterfeit or any unlawful stamps or if such stamps, whether attached to any container or not, shall be found upon licensed premises, then and in any of such events the license of the licensee may be revoked.  
§ 84-27. - Gambling devices. 
If any gambling device, lottery or number slip is found in or about any licensed premises or on or about the person of any licensee, agent, bartender, waiter or any other employee of the licensee, the license of the licensee may be revoked after hearing as hereinafter provided for.  
§ 84-28. - Sales to minors or intoxicated persons. 
No licensee shall sell any alcoholic beverage to any person under the age of 21 years or to any person actually or apparently intoxicated.  
§ 84-29. - Plenary retail consumption license; answer to questionnaire. 
Every licensee and the licensee's agent, bartender, waiter or other employees shall make full and complete answers in writing on forms furnished by the ABC Board, herein occasionally referred to as the "Alcoholic Beverage Control Board," to all questions printed thereon as to the identity, character, antecedents and general experience of the licensee, agent, bartender and other employee.  
§ 84-30. - Fingerprinting and photographing of plenary retail consumption licensee. 
[Amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] 
Upon notification by the Alcoholic Beverage Control Board to a person that his or her application for a license has been approved, the licensee and every agent, bartender, waiter and other employee connected with or employed by or to be connected with or employed by the licensee shall, before the license is issued, permit the Department of Public Safety to take an impression of the thumb and fingertips of both hands. At the time of the taking of fingerprints, the licensee and every agent, bartender, waiter and other employee of the licensee or to be connected with or employed by the licensee shall furnish to the Alcoholic Beverage Control Board a photograph in triplicate of himself or herself. The photograph shall be of a size two inches by two inches, shall be satisfactory to the Board and shall have been taken within one year from the date when the photograph is submitted.  
§ 84-31. - Identification card required. 
[Amended 2-10-1983 by Ord. No. MC-296; 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050] 
The Alcoholic Beverage Control Board shall furnish to the licensee and to every agent, bartender, waiter and other employee connected with or employed by the licensee an identification card showing compliance with the provisions of this Article which shall be on file on the premises of the licensee so that it can be exhibited upon demand at any time. Such identification shall expire on June 30 of each year, at which time new photographs shall be submitted, if requested by the Alcoholic Beverage Control Board, and the identification card holder shall pay a fee as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges, for each original issue and renewal.  
§ 84-32. - New employees of plenary retail consumption licensees. 
No licensee shall engage any agent, bartender, waiter or other employee in connection with the business of the licensee until or unless such person has conformed to the requirements of this Article.  
§ 84-33. - Change of employment; notification of Board. 
[Amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] 
Every agent, bartender, waiter or other employee of a licensee shall forthwith notify the Alcoholic Beverage Control Board of any change in employment, and any licensee employing any agent, bartender, waiter or other person who is the holder of an identification card from the Alcoholic Beverage Control Board shall forthwith report to the Department of Public Safety the employment of such persons.  
§ 84-34. - Suspension or revocation of licenses; hearing before Board. 
Any license issued hereunder may be suspended or revoked by the Alcoholic Beverage Control Board for any violation of this Article. No suspension or revocation of any license shall be made until a five-day notice of the charges preferred against the licensee has been given to the licensee personally or by mailing the same by registered mail addressed to the licensee at the licensed premises and until a reasonable opportunity to be heard thereon has been afforded the licensee. The hearing shall be held before and conducted by the Alcoholic Beverage Control Board, which shall determine what action, if any, is to be taken. All suspensions or revocations of licenses shall be effected by notice in writing of such suspension or revocation, designating the effective date thereon and, in case of suspension, the term of such suspension, which notice may be served upon the licensee personally or by mailing it by registered mail addressed to the licensee at the licensed premises. Any revocation shall render the licensee ineligible to receive any other license hereunder for a period of two years from the effective date thereof and may, in the discretion of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Board, render the licensed premises ineligible to become a subject for any future license hereunder during the period of two years.  
§ 84-35. - Rights reserved by Council. 
All licenses issued under this Article shall be subject to the rights hereby reserved by the Municipal Council to change, alter, amend or repeal this Article at any time.  
ARTICLE II - Special Permits to Sell Alcoholic Beverages 
 
§ 84-36. - Application; fee. 
[Amended 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050] 
Applications for special permits to sell alcoholic beverages shall be accompanied by payment to the City Clerk of a fee as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges.  
§ 84-37. - Records to be kept. 
The City Clerk shall keep a record of all applications for special permits to sell alcoholic beverages and the fees received by the Clerk, by virtue of services rendered in connection therewith, and such fees shall be paid monthly into the City Treasury.  
ARTICLE III - Consumption in Public Places 
[Added 11-9-1979 by Ord. No. S-306] 
 
§ 84-38. - Definitions. 
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE - Any liquid intended for human consumption containing more than one-half of one percent (1/2 of 1%) of alcohol by volume. 
PUBLIC PLACE - A place to which the public or a substantial group of persons has access, including but not limited to any highway, street, road, sidewalk, parking area, shopping area, place of amusement, playground, park or beach located within the city, except that the definition of a "public place" shall not include those premises duly licensed for the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises or within their own private property.  
§ 84-39. - Public consumption restricted. 
No person shall drink or consume an alcoholic beverage or possess, with intent to drink or consume, an open container containing an alcoholic beverage in any public place except at a block party, feast or similar function for which a permit has been issued.  
§ 84-40. - Possession; presumption of intent. 
Possession of an open container containing an alcoholic beverage by any person shall create a rebuttable presumption that such person did intend to consume the contents thereof in violation of this Article.  
§ 84-41. - Exception. 
Nothing in this Article shall be deemed to prohibit the consumption of an alcoholic beverage in any duly licensed establishment whose certificate of occupancy extends upon a street.  
§ 84-42. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person who violates the provisions of this Article shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25. 
Editor's note— Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.  
§ 84-43. - Possession and consumption on private property. 
[Added 5-9-2007 by Ord. No. 07-076] 
I.  Possession and Consumption on Private Property. 
1.  Restrictions and Penalties. Any person under the legal age to purchase alcoholic beverages who, without legal authority, knowingly possesses or who knowingly consumes any alcoholic beverage on private property shall be punished by a fine of Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00) for a first offense and Three Hundred Fifty Dollars ($350.00), for any subsequent offenses. 
2.  The court may, in addition to the fine authorized for this offense, suspend or postpone for six months the driving privilege of the defendant. Upon conviction of any person and the suspension or postponement of that person's driver's license, the Court shall forward a report to the State Motor Vehicle Commission stating the first and last day of the suspension or postponement period imposed by the Court pursuant to this section. If a person at the time of the imposition of a sentence is less than seventeen (17) years of age, the period of license postponement, including a suspension or postponement of the privilege of operating a motorized bicycle, shall commence on the day the sentence is imposed and shall run for a period of six months after the person reaches the age of seventeen (17) years. 
3.  If a person at the time of the imposition of a sentence has a valid driver's license issued by this State, the Court shall immediately collect the license and forward it to the Motor Vehicle Commission along with the report. If for any reason the license cannot be collected, the Court shall include in the report the complete name, address, date of birth, eye color, and sex of the person, as well as the first and last date of the license suspension period imposed by the Court. 
4.  The Court shall inform the person orally and in writing that if the person is convicted of operating a motor vehicle during the period of license suspension or postponement, the person shall be subject to the penalties set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:3-40. A person shall be required to acknowledge receipt of the written notice in writing. Failure to receive a written notice or failure to acknowledge in writing the receipt of a written notice shall not be a defense to a subsequent charge of a violation of N.J.S.A. 39:3-40. 
5.  The Court shall, of any person convicted under this section who is not a New Jersey resident, suspend or postpone, as appropriate, the non-resident driving privileges in the State of New Jersey of the person based on the age of the person and submit to the Motor Vehicle Commission the required report. The Court shall not collect the license of a non-resident convicted under this section. Upon receipt of a report by the Court, the Motor Vehicle Commission shall notify the appropriate officials in the licensing jurisdiction of the suspension or postponement. 
II.  Exceptions. 
1.  This provision shall not apply to or prohibit an under aged person from consuming or possessing an alcoholic beverage in connection with a religious observance ceremony or rite, or consuming or possessing an alcoholic beverage in the presence of and with the permission of their parent, guardian or relative who has attained the legal age to purchase and consume alcoholic beverages. As used herein: 
"Guardian" means a person who has qualified as a guardian of the under aged person pursuant to testimony or court appointment. 
"Relative" means the under aged person's grandparent, aunt or uncle, sibling or any other person related by blood or affinity. 
2.  This provision shall not apply to or prohibit possession of alcoholic beverages by any such under aged person while actually engaged in performance of employment by a person or facility licensed under Title 33 of the Revised Statutes, or while actively engaged in the preparation of food while enrolled in a culinary arts or hotel management program at the county vocational school or post secondary educational institution; however, no ordinance enacted pursuant to this section shall be construed to preclude the imposition of a penalty under this section, N.J.S.A. 33;1-81, or any other section of law against a person who is convicted of unlawful alcoholic beverage activity on or at premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
3.  If any section, paragraph, subparagraph, clause or provision of the Ordinance shall be adjudged invalid such adjudication shall apply only to the section, paragraph, subparagraph, clause or provision so adjudged and the remainder of this Ordinance shall be deemed valid and effective.  
Chapter 87 - AMUSEMENT DEVICES 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City: Art. I, 5-4-1971 as Ch. 5, Art. III, of the 1971 Jersey City Code, as readopted 9-19-1978 by Ord. No. S-128; Art. II, 5-4-1971 as Ch. 5, Art. IV, of the 1971 Jersey City Code, as readopted 9-19-1978 by Ord. No. S-128; Art. III, 5-4-1971 as Ch. 5, Art. V, of the 1971 Jersey City Code, as readopted 9-19-1978 by Ord. No. S-128. Amendments noted where applicable.] 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 84. 	Vending machines — See Ch. 329. 
Fees and charges — See Ch. 160. 	Zoning — See Ch. 345. 
Poolrooms — See Ch. 248. 	
  
ARTICLE I - Automatic Amusement Devices 
[Adopted 5-4-1971 as Ch. 5, Art. III, of the 1971 Jersey City Code, as readopted 9-19-1978 by Ord. No. S-128] 
 
§ 87-1. - Definitions. [Amended 12-13-1984 by Ord. No. MC-725; 10-23-1986 by Ord. No. C-306; 11-10-2010 by Ord. No. 10-139] 
As used herein, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
AUTOMATIC AMUSEMENT DEVICE - Any device which, upon the insertion of a coin or any other object, may be operated as a game or amusement, whether or not registering a score. The term includes but is not limited to amusement devices commonly known as "electronic video games," "pinball," "skill ball," "mechanical grab machines," "marble machines," "baseball," "bagatelle" and all similar devices under whatever name they may be designated. The term "device," as used in this Article, refers to "automatic amusement devices." Jukeboxes and pool tables are specifically excluded from this term. 
BUSINESS PREMISES - Any building, business, store, restaurant, tavern or other place to which the public is invited or may enter. The term "premises," as used in this Article, refers to "business premises" unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
DIRECTOR - The Business Administrator. 
DISTRIBUTOR - Any person who supplies or offers to supply by sale, lease or any other manner automatic amusement devices to any other person. 
HEARING OFFICER - The Business Administrator or his or her designee. 
[Added 6-9-1988 by Ord. No. C-731; amended 12-30-1992 by Ord. No. 92-190] 
LICENSE SUPERVISOR - The Supervisor in charge of processing applications for licenses, as provided for in this Article, and the collection of the license fee. 
OPERATOR - Any person who owns, leases, rents or operates any premises on which any automatic amusement device is kept for use by the public. 
PERSON - Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association or entity.  
§ 87-2. - Operator's license required; application. [Amended 12-13-1984 by Ord. No. MC-725] 
A.  No person may keep any automatic amusement device in any business premises unless that person has first secured an operator's license issued by the License Supervisor for each device. No operator's license shall be issued unless the licensed premises complies with the requirements of the construction, fire safety, property maintenance and health codes of the City of Jersey City. [1] 
B.  No person may distribute any automatic amusement device unless that person has first secured a distributor's license issued by the License Supervisor. 
C.  Applications for licenses shall be made to the License Supervisor on a form provided by the License Supervisor for that purpose. 
D.  The License Supervisor shall furnish each holder of an operator's license with a sticker bearing the license number and expiration date of each automatic amusement device license which shall be affixed to each licensed device on a location visible to the public. 
E.  No distributor may keep or display unlicensed automatic amusement devices in the same premises with licensed devices, nor may any unlicensed devices be kept for storage in any area accessible to the public. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's Note: See Ch. 131, Uniform Construction Codes, Ch. 254, Property Maintenance, and Ch. 182, Health and Sanitation. 
 
§ 87-3. - Contents of application. [Amended 12-13-1984 by Ord. No. MC-725] 
Applications for automatic amusement device licenses shall contain the following information: 
A.  The name and address of the applicant. Applications for an operator's license shall show the location of the premises where the devices are to be kept. If the applicant is a partnership or corporation, the names and addresses of all partners or stockholders and their respective interests shall also be shown. Applications shall also list all the persons, partners, officers and stockholders who owned an interest in the business for a period of six months prior to the date of the application and the extent of their interest. 
B.  Applications for a distributor's license shall show the name and address of the applicant and the location of the applicant's principal place of business. If the applicant is a partnership or corporation, the names and addresses of all partners or stockholders and their respective interest shall be shown. Applications shall also list all the persons, partners, officers and stockholders who owned an interest in the business for a period of six months prior to the date of the application and the extent of their interest. 
C.  Applications for an operator's license for a premises for which a retail liquor consumption or distribution license has been issued shall indicate the current number of such consumption or distribution license. [2] 
D.  A detailed description of the devices for which an operator's license is sought. 
E.  The name and address of the person from whom such devices are to be purchased, leased or otherwise obtained. 
F.  The name and address of the manufacturer of such devices. 
G.  A copy of the agreement governing the acquisition and installation of such device. 
H.  Photographs of the area in which the devices are or are to be located. 
[Added 10-23-1986 by Ord. No. C-306] 
I.  Any other information which the License Supervisor shall consider relevant and necessary for the full protection of the interests of the public. 
[Amended 10-23-1986 by Ord. No. C-306] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's Note: See Ch. 84, Art. I, Plenary Retail Consumption and Distribution Licenses. 
 
§ 87-4. - Investigation of applicant; approval or disapproval; hearing. [Added 12-13-1984 by Ord. No. MC-725; 10-23-1986 by Ord. No. C-306; 6-9-1988 by Ord. No. C-731; 12-30-1992 by Ord. No. 92-190; ] 
A.  The License Supervisor shall refer all applications for new licenses and thereafter, upon each fifth year of renewal, all renewal applications to the Director of the Department of Public Safety, the Superintendent of Buildings and the Health Officer, as provided in this section, for their review and recommendation. 
B.  The Director of the Department of Public Safety shall conduct an investigation of the applicant and shall submit a written recommendation to the License Supervisor based upon the applicant's business reputation and character, past business operations, convictions of any crime which may relate adversely to the conduct of the licensed premises and any other information the Director considers relevant to the operation of the licensed premises. 
C.  The Director of the Department of Public Safety shall review each application for compliance with the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Jersey City, shall inspect and test any automatic or other fire alarm system or fire extinguishing equipment and shall submit a written recommendation to the License Supervisor based upon his or her findings. 
D.  The Superintendent of Buildings shall review each applicant for compliance with construction, zoning and property management codes [3] and shall submit a written recommendation to the License Supervisor based upon his or her findings. 
E.  Where the application is for the licensure of an establishment which requires the issuance of a health license in accordance with Chapter 182, Health and Sanitation, of this Code, the Health Officer shall review each application for compliance with construction, zoning and property management codes and shall submit a written recommendation to the License Supervisor based upon his or her findings. 
F.  The recommendation of the Director of the Public Safety, Superintendent of Buildings and the Health Officer shall be submitted to the License Supervisor within 15 working days of the date said recommendations were requested. Failure to submit recommendations in a timely manner shall be a violation of the provisions of this Article and shall subject the violator to disciplinary action. 
G.  After receiving the recommendations of the Director of the Department of Public Safety, the Superintendent of Buildings and the Health Officer, the License Supervisor shall review each application, together with the recommendations furnished to the License Supervisor. The License Supervisor shall deny a license if the License Supervisor finds that [Amended 11-10-2010 by Ord. No. 10-139] : 
(1)  The applicant's business premises does not comply with the construction code and zoning ordinances of the city, the Fire Prevention Code of the city or the health and sanitary code; [4] 
(2)  The applicant's past business operations, business integrity or conviction of crimes warrants denial of a license; 
(3)  Issuance of the license would unreasonably increase pedestrian or vehicle traffic in the area approximate to the applicant's premises; or 
(4)  Issuance of a license would increase the incidence of disruptive conduct or unreasonably increase the level of noise in the area where the premises are located. 
H.  If the License Supervisor denies a license, the License Supervisor shall provide the applicant with a written notice which shall explain the reasons for denial. 
I.  Premises shall be available for inspection during the city's normal business hours. 
J.  If an application is denied, the applicant shall have the right to appeal to the Director within 10 days of the notice of denial of his or her application. An appeal from the denial of a license is taken by serving a written notice of appeal upon the Director and a copy thereof upon the License Supervisor. The notice of appeal shall set forth the name of the party taking the appeal and his or her address or the address of his or her attorney, if he or she is represented, and shall designate the decision appealed from and the basis of the appeal. Failure to comply with the requirements of the notice of appeal or the failure to submit complete information shall be grounds for such action as the Director deems appropriate, including rejection or dismissal of the appeal. The Director or the Hearing Officer shall set a time and place for a hearing not later than 20 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. At such hearing, the applicant shall be afforded the opportunity to be represented by counsel and produce witnesses to sustain his or her appeal for the right to receive a license. The decision of the Director or the Hearing Officer shall constitute the final decision of the City of Jersey City on the application. 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's Note: See Ch. 131, Uniform Construction Codes, Ch. 345, Zoning, and Ch. 254, Property Maintenance. 

--- (4) --- 
Editor's Note: See Ch. 131, Uniform Construction Codes, Ch. 182, Health and Sanitation, and Ch. 345, Zoning. 
 
§ 87-5. - License fees; expiration. [Amended 2-25-1982 by Ord. No. MC-123; 12-13-1984 by Ord. No. MC-725; 10-23-1986 by Ord. No. C-306; 6-9-1988 by Ord. No. C-731; 12-30-1992 by Ord. No. 92-190] 
A.  The fee for a operator's license shall be as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges. 
[Amended 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050] 
B.  The fee for a distributor's license shall be as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges. 
[Amended 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050] 
C.  No operator's license or distributor's license shall be transferable from person to person or from place to place. Licenses shall be valid only for the person and place designated in the license. 
D.  All licenses shall expire on December 31 of each year. The initial license fee following the change in expiration date will be subject to proration by the Division of Licenses and Fees. 
[Added 2-11-1998 by Ord. No. 98-004]  
§ 87-6. - Gambling; duties of distributors; other licenses required; permitted hours; age limitations. [Amended 12-13-1984 by Ord. No. MC-725] 
A.  No distributor may distribute automatic amusement devices for the purpose of gambling. 
B.  All automatic amusement devices shall contain on a permanent place in view of the player and in a form approved by the License Supervisor a notice that the device may not be used for gambling purposes and that no reward or prize of any kind may be given by any person in connection with the play or operation of the device. 
C.  A distributor shall report to the License Supervisor, in a form and manner approved by the Supervisor, the name and address of the person and the premises to whom and to which an automatic amusement device has been delivered within seven days after delivery. 
D.  No person shall be granted any operator's license for a tavern unless such applicant is the holder of the plenary retail consumption license issued for such tavern or has a financial interest therein. 
E.  No person may permit the operation of an automatic amusement device in a tavern during hours when the tavern is prohibited from operating by regulations of the Board of Alcoholic Beverage Control. 
F.  No person under the age of 19 may operate an automatic amusement device in a tavern or any other premises used primarily for the consumption or serving of alcohol at any time.  
§ 87-7. - Narcotics and illegal activities. [Added 12-13-1984 by Ord. No. MC-725] 
A.  No licensee may permit upon the licensed premises any unlawful possession of or any unlawful activity pertaining to narcotic or other drugs or other controlled dangerous substances as defined by the New Jersey Controlled Dangerous Substances Act ( N.J.S.A. 24:21-1 et seq.) or any prescription legend drug, in any form, which is not a narcotic, depressant or stimulant drug or controlled dangerous substance as so defined. 
B.  No licensee may permit the licensed premises to be accessible to any premises upon which any illegal activity or enterprise is carried on or the licensed premises to be used in aid of or accessible to any illegal activity or enterprise.  
§ 87-8. - Unlawful acts. [Added 12-13-1984 by Ord. No. MC-725] 
A.  No licensee may engage in or permit upon the licensed premises: 
(1)  Any lewdness or immoral activity. 
(2)  Any brawl, act of violence, disturbance or unnecessary noise. 
B.  Nor may any licensee permit the licensed premises to be conducted in such a manner as to become a nuisance.  
§ 87-9. - Suspension or revocation of license. [Amended 12-13-1984 by Ord. No. MC-725] 
The License Supervisor may suspend or revoke any license on three days' notice if the licensee has violated any provision of this Article or any other ordinance or statute related to the operation of the licensed premises. A licensee whose license is suspended or revoked shall have the same right of appeal to the Director as upon disapproval of any original application.  
§ 87-10. - Attendant on premises required. [Added 12-13-1984 by Ord. No. MC-725] 
A.  The operator shall provide one attendant over 18 years of age for every increment of one to 10 automatic amusement devices kept on the premises. The requisite number of attendants shall be present at all times during which the public is invited to use the automatic amusement devices. 
B.  If more than three devices are kept on the premises for use by the public, the attendant shall have no duties other than those exclusively related to supervision of the use and operation of the devices. 
C.  Each attendant shall be identified by an appropriate badge or other means of identification. The names of each attendant shall be furnished to the License Supervisor at the time of application.  
§ 87-11. - Minors. [Added 12-13-1984 by Ord. No. MC-725] 
A.  No operator may permit the use of any automatic amusement device by persons under the age of 18 years unaccompanied by a parent or legal guardian during the following hours: 
(1)  Between 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on days when elementary, middle and secondary schools in the City of Jersey City are in regular session; and 
(2)  Between 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. every day. 
B.  The operator or the attendant in charge shall direct any minors present and unaccompanied by a parent or legal guardian to leave the premises at 10:00 p.m.; no such unaccompanied minor shall be admitted to the premises after 10:00 p.m. or before 8:00 a.m.  
§ 87-12. - Violations and penalties. [Added 12-13-1984 by Ord. No. MC-725][5] 
Any person convicted by the Municipal Court of the City of Jersey City for a violation of the provisions of this Article shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25. 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. 
 
ARTICLE II - Mobile Amusement Devices 
[Adopted 5-4-1971 as Ch. 5, Art. IV, of the 1971 Jersey City Code, as readopted 9-19-1978 by Ord. No. S-128] 
 
§ 87-13. - Definitions. 
As used herein, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
CAROUSELS, WHIPS and MOBILE AMUSEMENT DEVICES - Any and all forms of amusement devices, whether or not accompanied by music, mechanical or otherwise, or by entertainment of any kind, and whether or not providing rides or other amusement for patrons, where the amusement device may be moved from place to place with the purpose of soliciting patrons or attracting audiences. 
LICENSE ISSUING AUTHORITY - As defined in Chapter 1, General Provisions. [6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. 
 
§ 87-14. - License required; application. 
No person shall operate or conduct a mobile carousel, whip or any other mobile amusement device unless such person shall first obtain a mobile amusement license. Application for such license shall be made to the license issuing authority upon a form to be supplied by him or her for that purpose.  
§ 87-15. - Contents of application. 
A.  The application for a mobile amusement license shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of the applicant. 
(a)  If a natural person, the age. 
(b)  If a corporation, the state under which incorporated and the date of incorporation, the address of the principal office and the names and addresses of officers. 
(c)  If any other type of organization, the name of the same and, if recorded, in what office and when and the names and addresses of the principal officers and directors. 
(2)  Prior convictions of the applicant, if any, giving the crime for which convicted, the date of conviction and name of the court where convicted. 
(3)  Place or places where the device or devices will be operated. 
(4)  Description of the device to be covered by the license. 
B.  No license shall be issued to any applicant unless the applicant is 18 years or over and a citizen of the United States.  
§ 87-16. - Form of application; investigation. [Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
A.  Application for license shall be made in duplicate, one copy being referred to the Business Administrator and the other copy being retained by the license issuing authority. 
B.  The license issuing authority shall cause an investigation to be made to ascertain if the applicant is a person of good moral character and to determine whether the amusement device is in such a condition as to permit it to be operated in a safe manner. A report of such investigation shall be made to the Business Administrator. 
C.  No license shall be issued by the license issuing authority unless it is approved by the Business Administrator.  
§ 87-17. - License fee; expiration. [Amended 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050] 
The fee for the issuance of a license under this article shall be as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges, and the license shall be valid for one year from the date of its issuance.  
§ 87-18. - License to be posted; license nontransferable. 
A.  The license herein provided for shall be posted permanently and conspicuously on the amusement device so licensed. 
B.  Such license shall not be transferred from one person to another or from one amusement device to another amusement device.  
§ 87-19. - Restrictions; violations and penalties. 
A.  No person holding a license under this article shall permit any person under 18 years of age to play or operate the licensed device. 
B.  No person holding a license under this article shall permit the operation of the licensed amusement device before 11:00 a.m. or after 6:00 p.m. Such device shall not be operated within 600 feet of any church during religious services or within 600 feet of any school during school hours or within 600 feet of any hospital at any time. Such mobile equipment may be operated on Sunday, pursuant to these regulations. 
C.  No person shall be granted a license under this article unless the person first furnished evidence to the license issuing authority that he or she has secured a public liability insurance policy in amounts of not less than $50,000 for one person and $100,000 for any one accident. 
D.  At the time of making application for a license under this article, the applicant shall deposit with the license issuing authority a bond in the sum of $1,000 conditioned upon saving harmless the city from any and all liabilities or causes of action which might arise by virtue of the granting of a license to the applicant and conditioned further that no damage shall be done to the streets, sewers, trees or adjoining property and that no dirt, paper, litter or other debris shall be permitted to remain upon the streets or upon any private property by such applicant. Such bond shall be canceled upon certification by the license issuing authority that all conditions of this article have been complied with. 
E.  Every applicant shall, before a license is issued, file with the license issuing authority a power of attorney constituting and appointing the City Treasurer his or her agent for the acceptance of service of process of any court of competent jurisdiction. 
F.  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25. 
[Amended 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050]  
ARTICLE III - Jukeboxes 
[Adopted 5-4-1971 as Ch. 5, Art. V, of the 1971 Jersey City Code, as readopted 9-19-1978 by Ord. No. S-128] 
 
§ 87-20. - Definitions. 
As used herein, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
DIRECTOR - The Director of the Department of Administration. 
[Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
LICENSE ISSUING AUTHORITY - As defined in Chapter 1, General Provisions. 
[Amended 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050] 
MUSIC DEVICE - Any playing machine, contrivance or device which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, disc or key into any slot, crevice or any other opening, or upon the payment of any price, operates or may be operated for the playing of records, or otherwise, of songs or music and shall include devices commonly known as "jukeboxes." 
OPERATOR - Any individual, firm, member of a partnership, corporation or any officer, director or stockholder of any corporation or any agent or employee of any such firm, partnership or corporation who or which operates one or more of the devices defined herein. 
PUBLIC PLACE or QUASI-PUBLIC PLACE - Any building, store, marketplace, club, tavern, inn, cocktail lounge, restaurant, hotel, confectionary store or other place wherein the public is invited or wherein the public may enter.  
§ 87-21. - License required; application. 
A.  No person shall place, install, keep or operate any of the devices described herein in any public or quasi-public place owned or controlled by him or her within the confines of the city unless that person has first secured an operator's license issued by the Director. An operator's license shall be issued for each device in use within the confines of the city. 
B.  Application for such an operator's license shall be made to the license issuing authority on a form to be supplied for that purpose. 
C.  No such license shall be issued until the applicant produces a receipt from the City Treasurer showing the payment of the fees required therefor.  
§ 87-22. - Contents of application. 
The application for the licenses required in this Article shall contain the following information: 
A.  All applications shall be made on forms furnished by the Director and shall show the name and address of the applicant and the location of the premises where the device is to be installed. If the applicant is a partnership, it shall show the names and addresses of all partners and their partnership interest. In case of a corporation, it shall show the names and addresses of the officers and stockholders for a period of six months prior to the date of the application and their stock interest. All applications shall show whether any of the persons, partners, officers or stockholders have ever been convicted of a crime or a violation of any city ordinance and, if so, the nature of the crime or violation. 
B.  When an application is made for a license for a premises for which a retail liquor consumption or distribution license has been issued, the applicant shall indicate the current number of such license. [7] 
C.  A detailed description of the device for which an operator's license is sought. 
D.  The name and address from whom such device is to be leased, rented or otherwise obtained. 
E.  The name and address of the manufacturer of such device. 
F.  Terms of agreement governing the acquisition and installation of the device. 
G.  Any other information which the Director shall deem necessary and proper for the full protection of the interests of the public. 
H.  The application shall have annexed thereto an affidavit to be sworn to by the applicant. 
I.  The application shall be in triplicate and delivered to the Director, who shall promptly transmit one copy thereof to the City Treasurer for filing. 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's Note: See Ch. 84, Art. I, Plenary Retail Consumption and Distribution Licenses. 
 
§ 87-23. - Investigation; hearing. 
A.  The Director shall, upon receipt of an application for an operator's license, cause an investigation to be made of the applicant. The Director shall request the various agencies of the city government having jurisdiction and control over the premises where the device is to be located to conduct an investigation and, upon receipt of the various reports, shall approve or disapprove the issuance of the license as the facts warrant. 
B.  The Director shall give immediate notice or certification of such approval or disapproval to the applicant and the City Treasurer. 
C.  The Director may request of any applicant for license hereunder to supply information supplementing the information given on the application. 
D.  On a request of the applicant or upon the Director's own motion, the Director may conduct a hearing to determine whether the license shall be issued. Ten days' notice of the hearing shall be afforded the interested parties who may appear and submit evidence and witnesses in their behalf.  
§ 87-24. - License fee; expiration. 
A.  Fee for the issuance of an operator's license shall be as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges. [8] 
B.  All licenses shall expire on December 31 of each year. 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. 
 
§ 87-25. - Restrictions. 
A.  No person shall be granted a license to install, maintain or operate any device defined herein in a tavern unless such applicant is the holder of the retail plenary consumption license issued for such tavern or has an interest therein. 
B.  No person shall suffer, permit or allow the operation of such music device in a tavern during hours when the tavern is prohibited from operating by the rules and regulations of the Board of Alcoholic Beverage Control, the State Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control or the laws of the State of New Jersey. 
C.  It shall be solely within the discretion of the Director as to the number of licenses which may be issued for the operation of any music device at any one premises. 
D.  The Director, for good cause shown and in the manner hereinafter set forth, may revoke the license of any operator of a music device if the Director finds that its continued operation is not in the best interests of the public health, safety or morals. The licensee shall forthwith, upon the order of the Director, remove from any premises any device upon a determination of the Director that it is to be withdrawn from operation. 
E.  Upon application to the Director, the Director may, in his or her discretion, permit a licensee to transfer an operator's license from one premises to another when the operator is moving his or her business to a new location. 
F.  If an operator sells his or her business, the operator's license may be transferred to a new owner upon the payment of a transfer fee as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges, provided the application of the new owner is approved by the Director. [9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. 
 
§ 87-26. - Suspension or revocation; hearing. 
A.  The Director shall have the power to suspend the license of any operator if the licensee directly or indirectly permits the operation of any device contrary to the provisions of this Article, the ordinances of the city and the laws of the State of New Jersey. 
B.  After hearing, the Director may revoke the license if the Director believes there is sufficient grounds for such action. 
C.  Before a hearing, every operator holding a license issued under this Article and who is the subject of disciplinary proceedings shall be served with a written specification of the charges preferred against the operator and shall have at least 10 days' notice of the hearing on the charges. At the hearing the licensee may be represented by counsel and present and submit evidence and witnesses in his or her defense.  
Chapter 90 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
History— Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City as indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable. 
Cross reference— Division of Environmental Health, § 3-105; public assemblies, Ch. 122; fees and charges, Ch. 160; health and sanitation, Ch. 182; noise, Ch. 222; parks and recreation areas, Ch. 239; zoning, Ch. 345. 
 
ARTICLE I - Animals and Animal Facilities Generally 
[Adopted 5-4-1971 as Ch. 6, Art. I, of the 1971 Jersey City Code, as readopted 9-19-1978 by Ord. No. S-128] 
 
§ 90-1. - Dangerous animals in public places. 
No person shall permit any bear or other noxious or dangerous animal to run at large nor lead such animal, muzzled or unmuzzled, with a chain or rope or other appliance through any street, public place or public way of the city. This provision shall not apply to lawfully conducted circus or carnival parades or theatrical performances.  
§ 90-2. - Animals and animal facilities constituting nuisances. [Added 9-8-1988 by Ord. No. C-789; amended 9-13-2000 by Ord. No. 00-115] 
A.  No person may keep an animal, whether licensed or exempted from licensing, in any dwelling unit, structure or outdoor area if the Division of Health finds that such animals or the conditions in such facilities constitute a public health nuisance. 
B.  Whenever the Division of Health finds that any animals kept on private property constitute a nuisance to public health, it may direct the owner or persons responsible for the property or animals to abate the nuisance within a specified time. The Division of Health may direct the owner to remove one or more animals from the property, or to take any other action reasonably calculated to abate the nuisance. 
C.  If, after notification as provided for in Subsection B, the owner of the animals or the property harboring such animals shall not comply with such notice or order within the time specified, the Division of Health shall proceed to abate the nuisance and remove such animals or take other action in accordance with N.J.S.A. 26:3-50. The Division of Health, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-54, may bring a civil action to recover any and all costs incurred as a result of the abatement. 
D.  In the event that the Division of Health determines that the nuisance is an imminent danger to animals or public health, it may direct that the owner or persons responsible for the property or animals take immediate action to abate the conditions constituting the imminent danger. If the owner or persons responsible fail to take such immediate action, the Division of Health shall abate the imminent danger. If the owner or persons responsible for the property or animals are not available, the Division of Health may abate the imminent danger and provide notice immediately thereafter. The Division of Health, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-54, may bring a civil action to recover any and all costs incurred as a result of the abatement.  
§ 90-3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 19-034 , adopted April 24, 2019, amended the Code by repealing former § 90-3 in its entirety. Former § 90-3 pertained to cruelty to animals, and derived from Ord. No. C-789, adopted September 8, 1988.  
§ 90-4. - Animals running at large; impoundment. 
Any animal led or permitted to run at large in violation of this article shall be impounded at the owner's expense until the penalty for the violation is paid.  
ARTICLE II - Birds and Poultry 
[Adopted 5-4-1971 as Ch. 5, Art. II, of the 1971 Jersey City Code, as readopted 9-19-1978 by Ord. No. S-128] 
 
§ 90-5. - Keeping of pigeons; consent of nearby occupants. 
No person shall keep any pigeons unless there is filed with the Health Officer the written consent of a majority of the occupants of the premises in the block and square in which pigeons are to be kept.  
§ 90-6. - Location; number restricted. 
No pigeons, chickens or other poultry shall be kept within 25 feet of any structure owned by another and used for human habitation, occupation or assembly, provided that in no case shall any person or persons be permitted to keep more than 50 chickens, ducks or other poultry, including pigeons. No pigeons, chickens or other poultry shall be permitted to run, fly or stray within 25 feet of such structure, provided that this shall not apply to homing pigeons.  
§ 90-7. - License required; fee; expiration. [Amended 4-12-1988 by Ord. No. C-730][2] 
No person shall keep pigeons, chickens or other poultry without having first obtained a license from the license issuing authority. The annual fee shall be as set forth in Ch. 160, Fees and Charges, and licenses shall expire on April 30 of each year. 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. 
 
§ 90-8. - Requirements for housing or coops. 
The following regulations and conditions for the keeping and housing of pigeons, chickens and other poultry shall be complied with. 
A.  The house or coop shall be dry and well ventilated, with windows so placed, if possible, as to admit sunlight. 
B.  The house or coop shall be well whitewashed or painted therein. 
C.  The house or coop shall be cleaned at least once a week between November 1 and May 1, twice a week between May 1 and November 1 and, if necessary, to be cleaned more often and to be disinfected. 
D.  Perches shall be removable and kept clean. 
E.  Chicken nests shall be removable, cleaned, aired and sunned at frequent intervals. 
F.  Drinking fountains in the area where the house or coop is located shall be cleaned and supplied at all times with clean water. 
G.  The yard in the area where the house or coop is located shall be clean and free from odors.  
§ 90-9. - Revocation of license. 
If the above conditions and regulations are not complied with the license shall be revoked, provided that nothing herein shall apply to the pigeons, chickens or other poultry confined in coops in regular licensed markets or stores for the sale, slaughter and plucking of poultry.  
§ 90-10. - Revocation due to environmental changes. 
Whenever, in the opinion of the Division of Health, the environment in an area has changed since granting the license to keep and maintain pigeons, chickens or other poultry therein to such an extent that the maintenance thereof may constitute a nuisance, such license may be revoked by the Health Officer.  
§ 90-11. - Procedure for revocation or suspension; hearing. 
The Health Officer is hereby empowered to suspend or revoke the license held by any person who violates any of the provisions of this Article. No license shall be suspended or revoked until after a hearing. A notice of five days, in writing, stating the time and place of such hearing, shall be served upon the licensee.  
ARTICLE III - Dogs and Other Animals 
[Adopted 5-4-1971 as Ch. 6, Art. III, of the 1971 Jersey City Code, as readopted 9-19-1978 by Ord. No. S-128] 
 
§ 90-12. - Definitions. 
[Amended 12-23-1987 by Ord. No. C-651] 
As used herein, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
AT LARGE - Off the premises of the owner and not under the control of the owner, or the owner's agent or servant, by leash. 
DANGEROUS DOG - Any dog: 
A.  Which, unprovoked, chases or approaches a person or a domestic animal in a threatening manner; 
B.  Which has propensity to attack or cause injury unprovoked or threaten humans or domestic animals; 
C.  Which possesses physical characteristics when unprovoked will inflict harm or create a reasonable apprehension of such harm in a person; 
D.  Which is owned or kept primarily or in part for the purpose of dog fighting or is trained for dog fighting; or 
E.  Not licensed according to law. 
DOG — Any dog, bitch or spayed bitch. 
DOG OF LICENSING AGE — Any dog which has attained the age of seven months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth. 
KENNEL/DOG DAYCARE — Any establishment wherein or whereon the business of boarding, selling dogs or breeding dogs for sale is carried on, except a pet shop. 
[Added 1-26-2011 by Ord. No. 11-003] 
OWNER — Every person having a right of property in a dog and every person who has such in his or her keeping. 
PARK — Any property dedicated for recreational use by the public that also appears on the City's Recreation and Open Space Inventory under Chapter 239-18C. 
[Added 11-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-167 ] 
PET SHOP — Any room or group of rooms, cage or exhibition pen, not part of a kennel, wherein dogs for sale are kept or displayed. 
[Added 1-26-2011 by Ord. No. 11-003] 
POUND — An establishment for the confinement of dogs seized either under the provisions of this chapter or otherwise. 
[Added 1-26-2011 by Ord. No. 11-003] 
PROPER ENCLOSURE OF A VICIOUS OR DANGEROUS DOG — While on the owner's property, a vicious or dangerous dog shall be securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen or structure, suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent the animal from escaping from the enclosure. Such pen or structure shall have secure sides and a secure top and shall also provide protection from the elements for the dog. 
PUBLIC PLACE — Includes every sidewalk, gutter, street, park or any other place within the city which is accessible to the general public. 
SERVICE DOG — Any guide dog, signal dog, or other dog individually trained to do work or perform tasks for the benefit of a person with a disability, including but not limited to guiding people with impaired vision, alerting people with impaired hearing to intruders or sounds, providing minimal protection or rescue work, pulling a wheelchair or retrieving dropped items, that qualifies for access to public accommodations under State or Federal law. 
[Added 11-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-167 ] 
SERVICE DOG TRAINER — Any person who is employed by an organization generally recognized as reputable and competent to provide service dog training, and who is actually involved in the training process. 
[Added 11-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-167 ] 
VICIOUS DOG — Any dog which, unprovoked, bites or causes physical injury to a human or a domestic animal.  
§ 90-12.1. - Prohibition against dogs in certain parks. 
[Added 11-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-167 ] 
All dogs, whether leashed or unleashed, shall be strictly prohibited from the following parks: 
A.  First Street Park; and 
B.  Paulus Hook Park. 
Only a service dog accompanied by its owner or a service dog trainer shall be permitted in First Street Park or Paulus Hook Park and be exempt from the within prohibition. The restriction does not apply to dogs on leashes on public sidewalks.  
§ 90-13. - License and registration tag required; removal of registration tags. [Amended 1-26-2011 by Ord. No. 11-003] 
A.  Every owner of a dog of licensing age shall obtain a license and official registration tag for such dog and shall place upon such dog a collar or harness with the registration tag securely fastened thereto; provided, however, that any dog licensed in another state may be kept in the City of Jersey City for a period of ninety (90) days: thereafter, the owner or custodian of such dog shall obtain a license and registration tag in accordance with this section. 
B.  Every owner of any newly acquired dog of licensing age or of a dog which attains licensing age shall obtain a license and registration tag for such dog within 10 days after such acquisition or age attainment. 
C.  Applications for licenses shall state the following information: 
(1)  Breed. 
(2)  Sex. 
(3)  Age. 
(4)  Color and markings. 
(5)  Whether the dog to be licensed is of a long- or short-haired variety. 
(6)  Name and address of the person who shall keep such dog if different from the owner. 
(7)  Any other pertinent information required by the Division of Health, including certificate of rabies vaccine inoculation from a licensed veterinarian, or a certificate of exemption to the rabies inoculation from a licensed veterinarian as provided by the State Department of Health regulations. 
D.  No person, except an officer in the performance of his duties, shall remove a registration tag from the collar of any dog without the consent of the owner, nor shall any person attach a registration tag to a dog for which it was not issued.  
§ 90-14. - License and registration fees; expiration; license required for animal facilities; compliance with State Department of Health; exemption from individual dog license requirement. [Amended 12-4-1979 by Ord. No. S-315; 1-26-2011 by Ord. No. 11-003]* 
A.  Dogs may be registered annually or for a three-year period as authorized by N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.12. The annual license and three-year license and registration tag fees shall be as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges, for each license and each registration tag. For each annual or three-year renewal, the fee for the license and registration tag shall be the same as for the original. The license and registration tag, and renewals thereof, shall expire on April 30 in each year or every third year. Such additional fee as established by the state and forwarded to the Department of Health shall also apply. 
B.  Any person who fails to apply for and procure a dog license or registration or renewal on or before May 31 of each year or every third year shall be subject to a late fee, which late fee shall be separate and apart from any penalties which may otherwise be imposed by this section or according to law. 
C.  Any person who keeps or operates or proposes to keep or operate a kennel, dog day care facility, pet shop, shelter or a pound shall apply to the Health Officer for a license to keep or operate such establishment. 
D.  The application shall describe the premises where the establishment is located or is proposed to be located, the purpose or purpose for which it is to be maintained, showing compliance with the local and state regulations governing location of and sanitation at such establishments. 
E.  All licenses issued for a kennel, dog day care facility, pet shop, shelter or pound shall state the purpose for which the establishment is maintained and all such licenses shall expire on June 30 of each year and be subject to revocation by the City on recommendations of the State Department of Health or the Division of Health of the municipality for failure to comply with the regulations of the State Department or the Jersey City Division of Health after the owner has been afforded a hearing by either the State Department or the Division of Health. 
F.  Any person holding a kennel, dog day care facility, pet shop, shelter or pound license shall not be required to secure individual licenses for dogs owned by such licensee and kept at such establishments; and such license shall not be transferable to another owner or different premises. 
* Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.  
§ 90-15. - Exceptions from fee provisions.* 
Dogs used as guides for blind persons and commonly known as "seeing eye" dogs, dogs used to assist handicapped persons and commonly known as "service dogs" and dogs used to assist deaf persons and commonly known as "hearing ear" dogs shall be licensed and registered as other dogs, but no fee shall be required therefor. 
* Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.  
§ 90-16. - Use of leash in public places; leash required off premises. [Amended 10-24-2007 by Ord. No. 07-168; 1-26-2011 by Ord. No. 11-003] 
A.  Except in an area designated as a dog run by the City of Jersey City Division of Parks and Forestry with official signage erected clearly indicating such dog run, no person who owns, keeps or harbors any dog shall suffer or permit it to be upon the public streets or in any of the public places of the city unless such dog is accompanied by a responsible person and is securely confined and controlled by one adequate leash not more than six feet long. 
B.  No dog kept in a kennel, dog day care facility, pet shop, shelter or pound shall be permitted off such premises, except on leash or in a crate or other safe control.  
§ 90-17. - Duties of vicious or dangerous dog owners. [Amended 12-23-1987 by Ord. No. C-651] 
Ownership of a vicious or dangerous dog is subject to the following regulations at all times: 
A.  A vicious or dangerous dog shall not be owned by any person under the age of 18 years of age. 
B.  The owner of a vicious or dangerous dog must provide a proper enclosure to confine a vicious or dangerous dog together with the posting on the premises of a clearly visible warning sign that there is a vicious or dangerous dog on the property. Further, the owner shall conspicuously display a sign with a warning symbol that informs children of the presence of a vicious or dangerous dog. 
C.  No owner of any vicious dog shall allow such dog outside of the dwelling of the owner or outside the enclosure unless the dog is securely and humanely muzzled so that it shall be impossible for it to tear or otherwise wound with its teeth any human being or animals and shall be in the charge of a competent person over the age of 18 and securely held by a chain or leash not more than six feet long. 
D.  No owner of any dangerous dog shall allow such dog outside of the dwelling of the owner or outside the enclosure unless the dog is in the charge of competent person over the age of 18 and securely held by a chain or leash not more than six feet long so that it shall be impossible for it to tear or otherwise wound with its teeth any human being or animals. 
E.  Dogs shall not be declared vicious or dangerous if the threat, injury or damage was sustained by a person who at the time was committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner of the dog or was tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog or has, in the past, been observed or reported to have tormented, abused or assaulted the dog or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. 
F.  Any vicious or dangerous dog shall be immediately taken into custody and impounded or caused to be taken into custody and impounded by an animal control authority pursuant to § 90-21 if the owner of the vicious or dangerous dog is in violation of this section. Thereafter, the dog may be destroyed or disposed of as provided by § 90-21. 
G.  Any person who violates this section shall be subject to a fine of $1,000 or imprisonment for a period up to six months, or both.  
§ 90-18. - Rabies testing. 
Whenever it has been reported that a dog has bitten or mutilated any person, the dog shall be confined at a place selected by the Division of Health and placed under the observation of a veterinarian, at the expense of the owner, for a period of 10 days, to determine whether the dog has rabies. The veterinarian shall make at least two examinations of said dog, the first at the time the dog is placed under the veterinarian's care and the next 10 days thereafter. The owner of such dog, at the end of the observation period, shall present to the Division of Health, upon a form furnished by it, the findings of the veterinarian, the form to be signed by the veterinarian. If the dog is found to be suffering from rabies, it shall be destroyed forthwith. If the owner of a dog which has bitten or mutilated any person refuses to surrender it, the Division of Health, or any person or persons authorized by it, may lawfully enter upon any premises where the dog is found and may seize and impound the dog for the purpose set forth in this section.  
§ 90-19. - Noisy dogs. 
No dog shall be allowed to unnecessarily disturb the peace or rest of persons residing in the neighborhood wherein it is kept or harbored or otherwise become a nuisance.  
§ 90-20. - Removal and disposal of animal feces; animals not permitted access nor permitted to urinate or defecate within designated pet-free zone(s) within public parks. [Amended 1-2-1980 by Ord. No. 5-123; 10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 00-150] 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person having control or custody of any animal within a city park to permit the animal to be present within any designated pet-free zone(s) or to permit the animal to urinate or defecate within any such zone(s); however, nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prohibit the presence of animals on pedestrian pathways adjacent to or within any pet-free zone(s) or to prohibit urination or defecation on such pedestrian pathways, provided that the person having custody or control of any animal complies with Subsection C of this section. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having control or custody of any animal to permit the animal to defecate or urinate upon the public property of the city or upon the private property of another unless the person immediately removes the feces and properly disposes of it; provided, however, nothing herein contained authorizes such person to enter upon the property of another without permission. 
C.  It shall be unlawful for any person to walk any animal on public property of the city or upon the private property of another without carrying at all times a suitable container or other suitable instrument for the removal and disposal of animal feces. 
D.  Handicapped persons who use Seeing Eye dogs are exempt from this section. Persons whose dogs are participating in dog shows or direct command obedience classes are also exempt from this section while their animals are actually participating in such shows or classes, but all feces must be removed and disposed of immediately upon the conclusion of the show or class. 
E.  The Director of Public Works shall have the authority, to designate any pet-free zone(s) within city parks; provided, however, that not more than 50% of the area of any city park shall be designated as pet-free without prior approval of the Municipal Council via resolution. 
F.  Prior to designating any pet-free zone(s) within any city park, the Director of Public Works shall hold a public meeting to solicit the comments of residents on the proposed location of such zone(s). The Director of Public Works shall provide written notice of the meeting to the City Clerk and two newspapers of general circulation within Jersey City of the time and place of said meeting at least 14 days prior to its occurrence. 
G.  Areas within parks where pets are permitted and pet-free zones may be designated by appropriate signs, fences, and other devices consistent with the design and aesthetics of the park and the use and enjoyment of the park by all members of the public.  
§ 90-21. - Enforcement. [Amended 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050] 
A.  The Division of Health or any person or persons authorized by it or any person authorized by this Code shall be charged with enforcing the provisions of this article. 
B.  The Division of Health shall appoint dog wardens with full power to enforce the provisions of this article. In addition, such dog wardens shall take into custody and impound or cause to be taken into custody and impounded and thereafter destroyed or offered for adoption as provided in this section: 
(1)  Any dog off the premises of the owner or of the person keeping or harboring said dog which said warden has reason to believe is a stray dog; 
(2)  Any dog off the premises of the owner or of the person keeping or harboring said dog without a current registration tag on the dog's collar; and 
(3)  Any female dog in season off the premises of the owner or of the person keeping or harboring said dog. 
C.  If any dog so seized wears a collar or harness having inscribed thereon or attached thereto the name and address of any person or a registration tag or the owner or the person keeping or harboring said dog is known, said warden shall forthwith serve on the person whose address is given on the collar, or on the owner or the person keeping or harboring said dog, if known, a notice in writing stating that the dog has been seized and will be liable to be offered for adoption or destroyed if not claimed within seven days after service of the notice. 
D.  A notice under this section may be served either by delivering it to the person on whom it is to be served or by leaving it at the person's usual or last known place of abode or at the address given on the collar or by forwarding it by post in a prepaid letter addressed to that person at that person's usual or last known place of abode or to the address given on the collar. 
E.  When any dog so seized has been detained for seven days after notice, when notice can be given as above set forth, or has been detained for seven days after seizure, when no notice has been given as above set forth and if the owner or person keeping or harboring said dog has not claimed said dog and paid all expenses incurred by reason of its detention, including maintenance, and if the dog shall be unlicensed at the time of the seizure and the owner or person keeping or harboring said dog has not produced a license and registration tag for said dog, said warden may cause the dog to be destroyed in a manner causing as little pain as possible. (See N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.16).  
§ 90-22. - Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-21-1984 by Ord. No. MC-733; 2-27-1986 by Ord. No. C-184; 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050] 
A.  Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall fail to procure a license shall be punishable as provided in N.J.S.A. 4:10-14. 
B.  Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate any other provision of this article shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25. 
C.  Penalties for violations of this article shall be enforced and recovered pursuant to the Penalty Enforcement Law. (See N.J.S.A. 2A:58-1 et seq.)  
ARTICLE IV - Exotic, Non-Game and Potentially Dangerous Wildlife [Adopted 4-28-1988 as Sec. 12-396 of Ord. No. C-730] 
 
§ 90-23. - Registration required; fee. 
[Amended 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050] 
No person shall possess any exotic, nongame or potentially dangerous species of wildlife [3] in the City of Jersey City unless issued a permit for such wildlife by the New Jersey State Department of Environmental Protection pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:25-4 et seq. and unless such wildlife is registered with the Jersey City Division of Health. The annual fee for registration shall be as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges. 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's Note: Terms shall be as defined in N.J.A.C. 7:25-4 et seq. 
 
§ 90-24. - Exotic animal acts, rides, performances, and traveling exhibitions prohibited. 
[Added 9-14-2016 by Ord. No. 16-138 ]. 
A.  The purpose of this article is to protect exotic animals from cruel and inhumane treatment, and to protect the public from dangers inherent in traveling exhibitions and acts featuring exotic animals. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or provide a performance of any exotic animal on any public or private properly within the City of Jersey City.  
§ 90-25. - Definitions. 
[Added 9-14-2016 by Ord. No. 16-138 ]. 
For purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
DOMESTIC COMPANION ANIMAL — means any animal that is commonly kept as a pet in family households in New Jersey, such as domestic dogs, domestic cats, guinea pigs, rabbits, and hamsters, and includes service animals and working dogs. This term excludes exotic animals and wild animals. 
DOMESTIC LIVESTOCK — means cattle, horses, donkeys, swine, sheep, goats, rabbits, poultry, fowl, llama, alpaca, and farm-raised cervidae. This term excludes exotic animals and wild animals. 
EXOTIC ANIMAL — means any non-game species, mammal, bird, reptile, or amphibian not indigenous to New Jersey, and hybrids of such animals, whether wild-borne or captive-bred, including but not limited to the following: nonhuman primates, ursidae, felidae (nondomestic cats), elephantidae (African and Asian), cetacea, crocodilia, marsupialia, perissodactyla (rhinoceroses, tapirs, zebras, but not horses, donkeys, or mules), artiodactlya (hippopotamuses, giraffes, camels, but not cattle, swine, sheep, llama, or goats), hyaenidae, procynidae (coatis), edentate (anteaters, sloths), viverridae (mongooses, civets, genets), and pinnipedia (seals, sea lions, walruses). This term does not include domestic companion animals or agricultural livestock. 
PERFORMANCE — means any public showing, presentation, display, exposition, fair, act, circus, ride, trade show, petting zoo, carnival, parade, race, exhibition, or similar undertaking in which exotic animals are required to perform tricks, fight, give rides, or participate as accompaniments for the entertainment, amusement, or benefit of an audience. 
WILD ANIMAL — means any wild mammal indigenous to New Jersey, and hybrids of such animals, whether wild-borne or captive-bred. This term does not include domestic companion animals or domestic livestock  
§ 90-26. - Exemptions. 
[Added 9-14-2016 by Ord. No. 16-138 ]. 
The following are exempt from the prohibition: 
A.  Exhibitions at a non-mobile, permanent institution or facility accredited by the Association of Zoos and Aquariums or the Global Federation of Animal Sanctuaries. 
B.  Outreach programs for educational or conservation purposes by a facility accredited by the Association of Zoos and Aquariums or the Global Federation of Animal Sanctuaries, if the exotic animal used for such purposes is not kept in a mobile or traveling housing facility for more than 12 hours a day. 
C.  University, college, laboratory, or other research facilities registered by the United States Secretary of Agriculture. 
D.  All accredited educational associations. 
E.  Any exemptions approved in writing by the City's animal control officer for religious and/or cultural ceremonies.  
§ 90-27. - Implementation and enforcement. 
[Added 9-14-2016 by Ord. No. 16-138 ]. 
Section 90-24 shall be implemented and enforced by Jersey City Department of Health and Human Services with the support of other City departments as appropriate.  
§ 90-28. - Violations and penalties. 
[Added 9-14-2016 by Ord. No. 16-138 ]. 
Any person who violates the provisions of this Article shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25.  
Chapter 93 - AUCTIONEERS 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City 5-4-1971 as Ch. 8, Art. I, of the 1971 Jersey City Code, as readopted 9-19-1978 by Ord. No. S-128. Amendments noted where applicable.] 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Fees and charges — See Ch. 160. 
 
§ 93-1. - License required. 
No person other than an auctioneer, licensed as hereafter provided, shall sell or offer for sale by auction any real estate, goods or other thing whatsoever.  
§ 93-2. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
GOODS - Any goods, wares, works of art, commodities, compound or thing, chattels, merchandise or other personal property which may be carefully kept or offered for sale.  
§ 93-3. - License fee; bond; expiration. 
A.  The Municipal Council shall have the authority to grant an auctioneer license to any person being a citizen of the United States to engage in and carry on the business and occupation of auctioneer, or desiring to be so engaged, upon the payment of the sum as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges, per year or for a fraction of a year, and such person filing a bond with two good sureties in the penal sum of $5,000, or a surety company bond in like sum to be approved by the Council conditioned upon the faithful performance of the terms of this chapter. 
[Amended 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050] 
B.  All licenses shall expire on May 31 of each year. The initial license fee following the change in expiration date will be subject to proration by the Division of Licenses and Fees. 
[Amended 2-11-1998 by Ord. No. 98-004]  
§ 93-4. - Application; verification; sureties. 
No auctioneer license shall be granted to any person unless he or she shall present to the Council an application in writing, verified by the oath of such applicant, made before any person resident of Jersey City authorized to administer oaths or affirmations, setting forth that such applicant is a citizen of the United States and the name and addresses of his or her sureties or the name and address of the surety company who will execute his or her surety bond.  
§ 93-5. - Use of fees; license issuance. 
A.  The auctioneer license fees paid under and by virtue of this chapter shall be paid into the treasury of the city for the use of the city. 
B.  The license issuing authority of the city shall issue auctioneer licenses and affix the seal of the city thereto and shall keep a record of the licenses so issued in a book to be provided for that purpose.  
§ 93-6. - Complaints; hearings; revocation or suspension. [ ] 
The Municipal Council, or upon its designation the Director of the Department of Public Safety, on complaint of any person having been defrauded by an auctioneer or by the clerk, agent or assignee of such auctioneer, doing business in the city, is authorized to hold a hearing upon the complaint, and if the charge shall, in their opinion, be sustained the Municipal Council shall revoke the license granted to such auctioneer and direct his or her bond to be forfeited; or upon the complaint of any person that any auctioneer has been guilty of misconduct relating to the business transacted under such auctioneer's license, is authorized to hold a hearing thereon and if the charge shall, in its opinion, be sustained the Council may suspend for a term not to exceed six months the license granted to such auctioneer.  
§ 93-7. - Revoked licenses not reissued. 
No person whose auctioneer license has been revoked for cause shall again be licensed to carry on the business of an auctioneer in the city.  
§ 93-8. - Auctioneer record book.[1] 
A.  Every auctioneer or person engaged in the business of selling goods at auction, whether acting in his or her own behalf or as the officer, agent or representative of another, shall upon the receipt or acceptance by him or her of any goods for the purpose of sale at auction, and before offering the same or any part thereof for sale at auction, write or cause to be written in an auctioneer record book to be kept by him or her for the purpose: 
(1)  The name and address of the person who employed him or her to sell such goods at auction. 
(2)  The name and address of the person for whose benefit, behalf or account such goods are to be sold at auction. 
(3)  The name and address of the person from whom such auctioneer received or accepted such goods. 
(4)  The name and address of the person who was the owner, the authorized agent of the owner or the consignor of such goods immediately prior to the receipt of acceptance for the purpose of sale at auction of the same by such auctioneer. 
(5)  The location, with street and number, if any, of such goods immediately prior to the receipt or acceptance of the same by such auctioneer for the purpose of sale at auction. 
(6)  The date of the receipt or acceptance by such auctioneer of such goods for the purpose of sale at auction. 
(7)  The place, with street and number, if any, in which such goods are to be held, kept or stored until sold or offered for sale at auction. 
(8)  The place, with street and number, if any, in which such goods are to be sold or offered for sale at auction. 
(9)  A description of such goods, the quantity thereof and the distinctive marks thereof, if any. 
(10)   The terms and conditions upon which such auctioneer receives or accepts such goods for sale at auction. 
B.  Nothing herein stated shall apply to the sale of real property at auction. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's Note: For statutory provisions relating to this topic, see N.J.S.A. 45:17-1. 
 
§ 93-9. - Inspection of record book. [ ] [2] 
The auctioneer record book and the entries therein shall at all reasonable times be open to the inspection of the Director of the Department of Public Safety and any person who shall be duly authorized for that purpose by him or her. 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's Note: For statutory provisions relating to this topic, see N.J.S.A. 45:17-2. 
 
§ 93-10. - Advertising by licensed persons only. 
No person shall represent or circulate or place before the public any announcement, nor insert or cause to be inserted in any city business or telephone directory any notice that such person conducts the business of an auctioneer, without having first obtained a license as herein provided.  
§ 93-11. - List of sale goods to be filed. 
Every auctioneer or person engaged in the business of selling goods at auction, whether acting in his or her own behalf or as an official agent or representative of another, shall, prior to the holding of an auction sale, file with the licensing issuing authority a description of the goods to be sold, the quantity thereof and the distinctive marks thereon, if any, and no goods shall be added to the stock of goods described in the list filed with the license issuing authority, nor shall any goods be offered for sale by the auctioneer, unless the goods are described in the list as filed.  
§ 93-12. - Newspaper notice of auction sale; copies to be filed. 
A.  Every auctioneer shall, under his or her own proper name, give previous notice in one or more of the public newspapers printed in this city of every auction sale that he or she is about to conduct, and, in the event that he or she shall be connected with any person or firm, his or her name shall in all cases precede separately and individually the name of such person or the Title of the firm under which he or she transacts business. 
B.  Copies of said newspaper notice shall be filed with the license issuing authority with, and at the time of filing, the description of the goods provided in the preceding section of this chapter.  
§ 93-13. - Hours of sale. 
All sales of goods by public auction by an auctioneer shall be made between 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.  
§ 93-14. - Information to be displayed. 
Every auctioneer shall cause his or her name and license number to be conspicuously displayed at the time and place where an auction sale is held.  
§ 93-15. - Use of signs or flags unlawful. 
No means of attracting the attention of purchasers, other than a sign or flag, shall be exposed or suffered to be permitted to be used at or near any place of sale, auction room, residence of an auctioneer or at or near any auction sale whatsoever.  
§ 93-16. - Sales on streets or public places prohibited. 
No auctioneer shall sell or expose for sale at public auction or venue any goods upon any street or public place or sell or expose for sale such goods to any person or persons who, at the time of bidding, shall be upon the sidewalk of any street.  
§ 93-17. - Sale of certain items restricted. 
On the sale of diamonds, precious stones or other jewelry, silver, silver-plated ware or optical goods at public auction the auctioneer shall cause to be delivered to any purchaser a signed document containing a description of the article sold and the representations made in regard thereto at the time of the sale. There shall be a tag on each article on which shall be printed or written a correct description of the article, and the purchaser shall have the right to return any of the goods mentioned in this section to the auctioneer at any time within five days from the date of sale of such goods which shall not be of the quality represented to such purchaser, and the auctioneer shall forthwith return to the purchaser the price paid for the goods.  
§ 93-18. - Seller or agent not to bid; exceptions. 
At public auctions, it shall not be lawful for the seller himself or herself to bid or to employ or induce any person to bid at such sale on his or her behalf or for the auctioneer to employ or induce any person to bid at such sale on behalf of the seller or knowingly to take any bid from the seller or any person employed by him or her; provided that this section shall not apply to any sale by or on behalf of any bank or trust company incorporated under the laws of the United States or any state or territory of stocks, bonds or other securities or obligations held by or for it as collateral security either for its own account or in any fiduciary or representative capacity, where the published notice includes a statement that the sale is subject to a right to bid on behalf of such bank or trust company.  
§ 93-19. - Exempt sales. 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to affect sales by auction by any public official or officer who conducts sales by virtue of any legal proceeding or under a statute.  
§ 93-20. - Violations and penalties.[3] 
A violation of any of the provisions contained in this Article shall, upon conviction by a court of competent jurisdiction, subject the violator to a fine or imprisonment, or both, as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25, and shall be cause for the revocation of his or her license. 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. 
 
Chapter 99 - BARBERSHOPS AND BEAUTY PARLORS 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City: Art. I, 5-4-1971 as Ch. 8, Art. II, of the 1971 Jersey City Code, as readopted 9-19-1978 by Ord. No. S-128; Art. II, 5-4-1971 as Ch. 8, Art. III, of the 1971 Jersey City Code, as readopted 9-19-1978 by Ord. No. S-128; 8-10-2005 by Ord. 05-102. Amendments noted where applicable.] 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Fees and charges - See Ch. 160. 
Health and sanitation - See Ch. 182.  
ARTICLE I - Barbershops 
[Adopted 5-4-1971 as Ch. 8, Art. II, of the 1971 Jersey City Code, as readopted 9-19-1978 by Ord. No. S-128] 
 
§ 99-1. - Definitions. 
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
BARBERSHOP - As defined in the Cosmetology and Hairstyling Act of 1984 ( N.J.S.A. 45:5B-1 et seq.) [1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. 
 
§ 99-2. - License required. 
No person shall use or maintain any premises as a barbershop unless he or she shall first obtain a barbershop license from the license issuing authority.  
§ 99-3. - License application. 
A.  Any person desiring to open a barbershop as herein defined shall first file with the City Treasurer a written notice of intention to make application for a license therefor, and said person, hereinafter referred to as the "applicant," shall deposit with the City Treasurer the sum as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges, to pay for advertising fees as hereinafter prescribed and the incidental expense connected therewith. 
B.  The City Treasurer shall thereupon cause the following notice to be published two days in succession in two newspapers published in the County of Hudson: 
"Please take notice that (name and address of applicant) has filed a notice of intention to open a barbershop located at (street number); any person or persons having objections to the issuance of a license therefor shall file same with the Health Officer of the City of Jersey City within five (5) days of the last date of publication of the herein notice." 
C.  Any person or persons having any objection to the applicant being granted a license shall file the same in writing with the Health Officer within fivedays of the last date of publication of the aforesaid notice, and the objector shall include his or her name and address therein. 
D.  Within five days of the date of filing the notice of intention with the City Treasurer as aforesaid, the applicant shall file with the Health Officer an application setting forth his or her qualifications upon a printed form to be supplied by the Health Officer. 
E.  No person shall be eligible to operate a barbershop and secure a license therefor who is not a registered barber under the laws of the State of New Jersey; who is not a resident of Jersey City for one year prior to said application; or who suffers from a contagious, infectious or skin disease; or who has been twice convicted of violating the Sanitary Code within a period of two years. 
F.  If objections are filed, in writing, as aforesaid, to the issuance of the license, the Health Officer shall fix a date for a public hearing upon the application, and the Health Officer shall notify all interested persons of the date thereof. 
G.  If no objections are filed to the issuance of the license or the Health Officer, following the public hearing, overrules such objections as may be filed, the Health Officer, in his or her discretion, may grant or reject the application for a license. 
H.  Before any certificate of license shall be issued to open a barbershop, the barbershop shall be completely equipped and furnished pursuant to specifications to be compiled and furnished by the Health Officer, for which the applicant shall pay a fee as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges, to the Health Officer to pay for the costs of preparing the specifications. [2] 
I.  No specifications for the installation of equipment shall be furnished by the Health Officer until the Health Officer has passed upon the eligibility of the applicant for a license hereunder. 
J.  The applicant, upon receiving a certificate from the Health Officer that the barbershop has been equipped pursuant to the aforesaid specifications, shall pay the current year's license in full. 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. 
 
§ 99-4. - Expiration of license; renewal; posting. 
A barbershop license shall be issued for the period from May 1 of one year to April 30 of the following year and shall be renewed annually. It shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the barbershop at all times.  
§ 99-5. - Eligibility for renewal. 
No renewal of a barbershop license shall be granted to a person who would not be eligible under the provisions of this Article for the issuance of an original license.  
§ 99-6. - License fee. 
[Amended 4-28-1988 by Ord. No. C-730] [3] 
The fee for a barbershop license shall be as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges, per annum or any fraction thereof. 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. 
 
§ 99-7. - Compliance with additional regulations. 
Before a barbershop license shall be issued, the licensing issuing authority shall be satisfied that the applicant and the premises to be licensed meet the requirements of the license issuing authority regarding barbershops and barbershop operators.  
§ 99-8. - License nontransferable. 
A barbershop license shall not be transferable.  
§ 99-9. - Movement of equipment. 
A.  No licensee shall move his or her equipment from one location to another without first filing with the City Treasurer a written notice of intention thereof and depositing with the City Treasurer a fee as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges, to pay for advertising, as herein provided for, and an inspection of the new premises. 
B.  The City Treasurer shall thereupon cause the following notice to be published for one day in two newspapers published in the County of Hudson. 
"Please take notice that (name of licensee) desires to move barbershop now located at (street number) to a new location at (street number)." 
C.  Before granting permission for the removal of a shop from one location to another, the Health Officer shall cause the new premises to be inspected to determine whether or not it complies with the terms and requirements of this Article.  
§ 99-10. - Suspension or revocation of license; hearing. 
The license issuing authority or the Health Officer reserves the right to suspend or revoke a license to conduct a barbershop after a hearing and may suspend the operation of a barbershop pending a hearing when in the judgment of the Health Officer such suspension is necessary for the protection of the public health.  
§ 99-11. - Days and hours of operation. 
[Amended 8-10-2005 by Ord. 05-102] [4] 
A.  Barbershops shall operate only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9.00 p.m., seven days a week. 
B.  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25. 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. 
 
§ 99-12. - Window and interior view to remain unobstructed. 
Neither the window space nor clear interior view of any barbershop shall be obstructed at any time, including Sunday, by a sign, screen, nontransparent glass, shade, blind, door, shutter, merchandise or other article.  
§ 99-13. - Certificate of registration required. 
No person shall practice or attempt to practice barbering without a certificate of registration from the New Jersey State Department of Health.  
§ 99-14. - Sanitary regulations to be posted. 
A copy of the sanitary regulations shall be kept posted conspicuously in every place licensed under this Article. [5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Former Sec. 8-35, entitled "Sanitary regulations for barbershops," which immediately followed this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. For current statutory provisions, see the State Sanitary Code. 
 
§ 99-15. - Enforcement; right of entry. 
All authorized representatives of the Division of Health are vested with the authority to enforce this Article and shall have the right to enter upon and inspect any barbershop at any time during business hours. All persons are hereby forbidden to interfere with or obstruct in any way such representatives of the Division of Health while making an inspection, examination or survey of a barbershop.  
ARTICLE II - Beauty Shops 
[Adopted 5-4-1971 as Ch. 8, Art. III, of the 1971 Jersey City Code, as readopted 9-19-1978 by Ord. No. S-128] 
 
§ 99-16. - Definitions. 
[Amended 8-16-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068; 8-10-2005 by Ord. 05-102] 
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
BEAUTY CULTURE - Any or all work performed by any person usually called hairdressers, cosmetologists, cosmeticians, beauticians or beauty culturists in so-called hairdressing or beauty shops. Such work is for the cleanliness and beautification of the hair, such as arranging, modeling, dressing, brushing, beautifying, curling, waving, straightening, dyeing, tinting, permanent waving, cleansing, cutting, styling, singeing, bleaching or coloring. Such work also includes massaging, cleansing, stimulating, exercising or similar work upon the scalp, face, arms, hands or neck with the hands or by the use of mechanical or electrical appliances, with or without cosmetic preparations, external application of creams, tonics and soothing lotions and antiseptics for use with instruments or with the hands, and of the manicuring or pedicuring of fingernails or toenails and beautifying the hands or feet of males or females. Beauty culture also includes adding, removing, or otherwise utilizing hair extensions. 
BEAUTY SHOP, BEAUTY SALON or HAIRDRESSING ESTABLISHMENT - Any place where the practice of beauty culture is engaged in or carried on. 
MECHANICAL OR ELECTRICAL APPLIANCES - The use of vibrators, electric clippers, permanent wave machines, hair driers and electrical manicuring machines. 
NAIL SALON - Any place where the primary business is the manicure or pedicure of finger or toe nails and beautification of the hands or feet of males or females. 
TANNING SALON - Any establishment which has on its premises mechanical or electrical devices used for the tanning of the skin of males or females by artificial light. [6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Former Sec. 8-38, entitled "Beauty shops, days and hours of operation," and Sec. 8-39, entitled "Beauty shops; operation on Sundays and certain holidays prohibited," which immediately followed this section, were deleted at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. 
 
§ 99-17. - Enforcement. 
The Director of the Division of Health or his or her designated agents are hereby authorized and directed to enforce this Article.  
§ 99-18. - Inspection fee. 
[Added 4-28-1988 by Ord. No. C-730; amended 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050] 
The fee for inspection of a beauty shop, beauty salon, hairdressing establishment or other establishment offering the practice of beauty culture as defined in § 99-16 shall be as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges, for each inspection. [7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Former Sec. 8-41, entitled "Beauty shops; penalties for violations," which immediately followed this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. 
 
§ 99-19. - Days and hours of operation. 
Beauty shops shall operate only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. seven days a week.  
ARTICLE III - Massage, Bodywork and Somatic Therapy Establishments 
 
§ 99-20. - Purpose. 
[Added 3-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-041 ] 
The City of Jersey City acknowledges that massage, bodywork and somatic therapy is a legitimate professional field that provides health benefits and that the Massage and Bodywork Therapist Licensing Act, N.J.S.A. 45:11-53 et seq. requires licenses for all those who engage in the practice of massage, bodywork and somatic therapy. The City nevertheless finds that the practice of such therapy by untrained and unlicensed practitioners can both cause injury and illness to clients and can encourage and foster prostitution. The purpose of this article is to provide standards to help assure that the practice of massage, bodywork and somatic therapy does not cause injury or disease to clients and does not degenerate into prostitution.  
§ 99-21. - Definitions. 
[Added 3-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-041 ] 
As used in this article, the terms "massage, bodywork and somatic therapies," "massage, bodywork and somatic therapist" and "massage, bodywork and somatic therapy establishment" shall be defined in accordance with their definitions in the Massage and Bodywork Therapist Licensing Act, N.J.S.A. 45:11-53 et seq.  
§ 99-22. - Employment of unlicensed message, bodywork and somatic therapists prohibited; display of license. 
[Added 3-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-041 ] 
A.  No person shall practice massage or related therapies as a massage, bodywork, or somatic therapist employee or otherwise in the City of Jersey City unless he or she has a valid and subsisting massage, bodywork and somatic therapist's license pursuant to the Massage and Bodywork Therapist Licensing Act, N.J.S.A. 45:11-53 et seq. 
B.  No person shall employ anyone as a massage, bodywork, or somatic therapist in the City of Jersey City unless he or she has a valid and subsisting massage, bodywork and somatic therapist's license pursuant to the Massage and Bodywork Therapist Licensing Act, N.J.S.A. 45:11-53 et seq. 
C.  The massage, bodywork or somatic therapy establishment shall display the licenses of each and every massage, bodywork and somatic therapist employed in the establishment in an open and conspicuous place on the premises of the establishment.  
§ 99-23. - Massage and somatic therapy establishments to comply with health codes of the City of Jersey City; prices and standards for establishments to be posted; sanitary requirements for establishments. 
[Added 3-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-041 ] 
A.  Every massage, bodywork and somatic therapy establishment shall comply with the following: 
1.  Every portion of the massage, bodywork and somatic therapy establishment, including appliances and apparatus, shall be kept clean and operated in a sanitary condition. 
2.  Price rates for all services shall be prominently posted in the reception area in a location available to all prospective customers. 
3.  All employees, including massage, bodywork and somatic therapists, shall be clean and wear clean, non-transparent outer garments. Dressing rooms must be available on the premises. Doors to such dressing rooms shall open inward and shall be self-closing. 
4.  All massage, bodywork and somatic therapy establishments shall be provided with clean laundered sheets and towels in sufficient quantity which shall be laundered after each use thereof and stored in a sanitary manner. 
5.  All massage tables shall be disinfected after each use. 
6.  All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms and all other physical facilities and surfaces shall be in good repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms or steam or vapor cabinets and shower compartments and toilet rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned each day the business is in operation. Bathtubs and showers shall be thoroughly cleaned after each use. When carpeting is used on the floors, it shall be kept dry, clean and sanitary. 
7.  All tables, tubs, shower stalls and floors, except reception and administrative areas shall be made of nonporous materials, which may be readily disinfected. Closed containers shall be provided for used towels and waste materials. 
8.  Oils, creams, lotions and other preparations used in administering massage, bodywork and somatic therapies shall be kept in clean closed containers or cabinets. 
9.  Animals, except for seeing eye dogs, shall not be permitted in the massage work area. 
10.  Each massage, bodywork and somatic therapist shall wash his or her hands in hot running water, using property soap or disinfectant before administering a massage, bodywork or somatic therapy to a patron. 
11.  A copy of this section shall be posted in every massage or somatic therapy establishment in a conspicuous location visible to clients of fire establishment.  
Sec. 99-24. - Conduct of massage, bodywork and somatic therapy. 
[Added 3-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-041 ] 
A.  It shall be unlawful for an person knowingly, in a massage, bodywork and somatic therapy establishment to place his or her hand upon or touch with any part of his or her body, to fondle in any manner or to massage the buttocks, genital area or female breasts of any other person, unless such massage has been ordered by a prescription signed by a licensed medical doctor, chiropractor or doctor of osteopathic medicine. No massage, bodywork and somatic therapist, employee or operator shall perform or offer to perform any act which would require the touching of the patron's buttocks, genital area or female breasts. 
B.  The buttocks, genital area and female breasts of patrons must be covered by towels, cloths or undergarment when in the presence of an employee or massage, bodywork or somatic therapist. 
C.  No massage, bodywork or somatic therapist shall engage in any activity which would lead a reasonable person to conclude that the activity serves the prurient interests of the client or therapist or which is for the sexual arousal or sexual gratification of the therapist or client.  
§ 99-25. - Minor patrons. 
[Added 3-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-041 ] 
Any patron under the age of eighteen (18) years of age must be accompanied by a parent or guardian or adult with written permission of the parent or guardian.  
§ 99-26. - Alcoholic beverages or controlled dangerous substances prohibited. 
[Added 3-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-041 ] 
A.  Alcoholic beverages shall not be distributed or consumed on the premises of any massage, bodywork and somatic therapy establishment certified under this chapter. 
B.  Controlled dangerous substances, as defined by tire laws of the State of New Jersey shall not be distributed or consumed on the premises of any massage, bodywork and somatic therapy establishment certified pursuant to this Chapter.  
§ 99-27. - Sleeping quarters. 
[Added 3-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-041 ] 
No part of the quarters of any massage, bodywork and somatic therapy establishment shall be used for or connected with any bedroom or sleeping quarters nor shall any person sleep in such massage, bodywork and somatic therapy establishment except for limited periods incidental to and directly related to a massage, bodywork or somatic therapy treatment or bath. This provision shall not preclude the location of massage, bodywork and somatic therapy establishments in separately demised quarters of a building housing a hotel or other separate businesses or clubs.  
§ 99-28. - Exceptions. 
[Added 3-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-041 ] 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to massage, bodywork or somatic therapies given: 
A.  In the office of a licensed physician, chiropractor or physical therapist; or 
B.  By a regularly established medical center, hospital or sanatorium having a staff which includes licensed physicians, chiropractors and/or physical therapists; 
C.  By any licensed physician, chiropractor or physical therapist in the residence of his or her patient; or 
D.  By a licensed barber or cosmetologist/hairstylist limited to the areas of the face, neck, scalp or upper part of the body as set forth in the Cosmetology and Hairstyling Act of 1984, N.J.S.A. 45:5B-1 et seq.  
§ 99-29. - Violations and penalties. 
[Added 3-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-041 ] 
In addition to the revocation or suspension of the certificate granted under this chapter, any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) no more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days, or by a period of community service not exceeding ninety (90) days, or any combination thereof, at the discretion of the court. Each day a particular violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense.  
Chapter 102 - BINGO AND RAFFLES 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City 5-4-1971 as Ch. 5, Art. I, of the 1971 Jersey City Code, as readopted 9-19-1978 by Ord. No. S-128. Amendments noted where applicable.] 
 
§ 102-1. - License issuance; enforcement. 
The license issuing authority shall issue all licenses and enforce all rules and regulations, ordinances and statutes involving bingo and raffles, including the provisions of Chapter 5 and 6 of the Laws of 1954, N.J.S.A. 5:8-1 et seq., which were adopted by referendum on April 20, 1954.  
§ 102-2. - Duties of license issuing authority. 
The license issuing authority shall perform all the duties imposed by all rules and regulations, ordinances and statutes involving bingo and raffles, including the Bingo Licensing Law and Raffles Licensing Law adopted April 20, 1954. [1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 5:8-1 et seq. 
 
§ 102-3. - Conduct on Sundays. 
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 5:8-31 and 5:8-58, the license issuing authority may issue licenses for the holding, operating and conducting on Sunday of such games of chance as are authorized by the Bingo Licensing Law and the Raffles Licensing Law pursuant to N.J.S.A. 5:8-24 and 5:8-50.  
Chapter 105 - BUILDING DEMOLITION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18-032 , adopted April 25, 2018, amended the Code by repealing former Ch. 105, §§ 105-1—105-14, and adding a new Ch. 105. Former Ch. 105 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. S-200, adopted September 3, 1979; Ord. No. S-452, adopted September 9, 1980; Ord. No. McC-335, adopted June 26, 1991; Ord. No. 93-030, adopted March 24, 1993; Ord. No. 95-050, adopted June 14, 1995; Ord. No. 97-052, adopted August 13, 1997; and Ord. No. 16-069 , adopted May 11, 2016. Subsequently, Ord. No. 18-036 , adopted May 9, 2018, repealed the Ch. 105 added by Ord. No. 18-032 , and added a new Ch. 105. 
Cross reference— Construction Codes, Uniform, Ch. 131. 
 
§ 105-1. - Findings and purpose. 
[Added 5-9-2018 by Ord. No. 18-036 ] 
A.  The Municipal Council finds that: 
1.  A significant percentage of the City's building stock is older than 50 years of age; 
2.  The architectural surveys of all of the City's Wards conducted by Dr. Joseph Brooks, (known as the Phase One Survey of the City of Jersey City] Mary B. Dierickx, and James W. Foss (known as the Phase Two Survey of the City of Jersey City) as well as the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection - Historic Preservation Office: List of New Jersey and National Registers of Historic Places, reveal that there are many buildings and structures throughout the City that are culturally, historically, and architecturally significant and worthy of preservation; 
3.  The need to redevelop the City often requires demolition of older buildings and structures to make way for new construction, but over the years, countless buildings and structures which possess cultural, historical and/or architectural significance have been lost because they were demolished without holistic review of their cultural, historical or architectural value; 
4.  It is in the City's best interest to balance the need to redevelop the City with the need to ensure that buildings and structures which possess cultural, historical and/or architectural significance are preserved for future generations to enjoy; and 
5.  It is in the City's best interest to mandate that all applications for demolition permits be reviewed by its Historic Preservation Officer prior to issuance of a demolition permit to ensure that that buildings and structures which possess cultural, historical and/or architectural significance are preserved whenever possible. 
B.  The purpose of this Chapter is to: 
1.  Ensure the safety and preservation of buildings and/or structures immediately adjacent to a building or structure proposed for demolition; 
2.  Safeguard the cultural and historical heritage of the City of Jersey City by preserving buildings and structures that reflect elements of its cultural, architectural and/or historical heritage; and 
3.  Encourage the continued use, and/or rehabilitation of culturally, historically, and architecturally significant historic buildings and structures and to prevent the unnecessary demolition of culturally, historically, and architecturally significant buildings and structures.  
§ 105-2. - Scope. 
[Added 5-9-2018 by Ord. No. 18-036 ] 
This Chapter shall apply to applications to demolish all buildings and/or structures under the Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23-1.1 et seq.) and all applications for partial demolition of a building or structure under the Rehabilitation Subcode of the Uniform Construction Code, (N.J.A.C. 5:23-6) including any application to remove or substantially deconstruct of the front facade of a building and/or structure. "Substantial deconstruction of the front facade" is defined as any alteration to the fenestration, entranceway, porch or stoop, cornice, roofline or the material, historic or architectural components of facades which are visible from any public right-of-way.  
§ 105-3. - Permit procedures. 
[Added 5-9-2018 by Ord. No. 18-036 ] 
Applications seeking a permit to demolish any building and/or structure shall be reviewed by the Historic Preservation Officer for a prior approval. Applications seeking a permit to partially demolish any building and/or structure or to remove and/or substantially deconstruct the front facade of a building and/or structure and reconstruct same shall be reviewed by the Zoning Official who may refer the application to the Historic Preservation Officer for a prior approval. 
Upon receipt of the appropriate prior approval, an application for a permit may be submitted to the Office of the Construction Official.  
§ 105-4. - Formal opinion on a building or structure's eligibility for demolition available upon request. 
[Added 5-9-2018 by Ord. No. 18-036 ] 
Prior to, or in the absence of, an application for a demolition permit, any individual may apply to the Historic Preservation Officer for a formal opinion detailing whether or not the subject building or structure warrants preservation in accordance with § 105-7. 
Applications for a formal opinion, known as a determination of significance, shall include payment of all relevant fees, a completed application form, and submission of all documents required with the application. Determinations of significance shall be provided within 45 days of application.  
§ 105-5. - Powers of Construction Code Official. 
[Added 5-9-2018 by Ord. No. 18-036 ] 
Consistent with N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.9, in order to effectuate the purposes of this Chapter, the Construction Code Official is authorized to: 
1.  Investigate the condition of a building or structure in order to determine if it is fit for human habitation or occupancy or use; 
2.  Enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations, provided that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
3.  Appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees as the Construction Code Official deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this Chapter; 
4.  Delegate any functions and powers under this Chapter to such officers and agents as the Construction Code Official may designate.  
§ 105-6. - Contents of demolition permit application, as submitted to the Historic Preservation Officer. 
In addition to the information required on the standard permit application form prescribed by the Commissioner of the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs, an application for demolition shall include the following: 
1.  A map, site plan or survey showing the location of the structure on its property with reference to neighboring properties; 
2.  Photographs of all street facade elevations and significant features on that block's frontage; 
3.  The demolition permit application for staff signature (obtained at the Building Department); 
4.  The demolition permit application jacket for staff signature (obtained at the Building Department); 
5.  Any and all other documents required by the Construction Code Official and as specified in the application. 
A complete demolition permit application shall include the payment of all relevant fees as set forth in Chapter 160, a completed application form, and all documents stated above. Within ten business days of the submission, the Historic Preservation Officer shall certify that the application is complete and the applicant, Construction Code Official, and the Zoning Official shall be so notified in writing. If the application is found to be deficient, the Historic Preservation Officer shall provide written or verbal notice of the deficiency to the applicant. No utilities shall be disconnected or asbestos abatement conducted, until all prior approvals have been received.  
§ 105-7. - All permit applications to be reviewed by the City's Historic Preservation Officer and Zoning Officer. 
Prior to the issuance of a permit to demolish any building and/or structure, the Historic Preservation Officer must review the permit application and certify to the Construction Code Official that the subject building or structure possesses no cultural, historical or architectural significance which would merit its preservation consistent with the standards set forth in 36 C.F.R. 60.4, entitled "Criteria for Evaluation" as promulgated by the U.S. Secretary of the Interior, and which is adopted and incorporated by reference herein. This shall also apply to any application to partially demolish any building or structure, or to remove or substantially deconstruct any facade of a building or structure which is visible from the public right-of-way that is referred to the Historic Preservation Officer by the Zoning Officer. 
The Historic Preservation Officer shall present his or her certification in a written report within 45 days. The report shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
1.  A description of the age (noting if the building and/or structure was constructed more than 50 years ago), architectural style, historical associations and significance of the building or structure; 
2.  Certification that the building or structure is not included in Phase 1 or Phase 2 Surveys of the City of Jersey City produced by Dr. Joseph Brooks (Phase 1) and Mary B. Dierickx, Architectural Preservation Consultants [Wards A - E) and James W. Foss, Architectural Preservation Consultant [Ward F) (Phase 2) or New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection Environmental Protection - Historic Preservation Office: List of New Jersey and National Registers of Historic Places; 
3.  Certification that the building or structure is not associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the broad patterns of our local, state, and/or national history; or 
4.  Certification that the building or structure was not associated with the life of a person who made a significant contribution to local, state and/or national history; 
5.  Certification that the building or structure does not the embody the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of construction, or that represents the work of a master, or that possess high artistic value, or that represent a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction; most especially if no other, or very few, buildings or structures with the same association has survived; 
6.  Certification that the building or structure has not yielded, or may not be reasonably likely to yield, information important in prehistory or history; 
7.  Certification that the building or structure no longer maintains integrity of: 
i.  Location: the place where the historic property was constructed or the place where the historic event occurred; and/or 
ii.  Design: the combination of elements that create the form, plan, space, structure, and style of a property; and/or 
iii.  Setting: the physical environment of a historic properly; and/or 
iv.  Materials: the physical elements that were combined or deposited during a particular period of time and in a particular pattern or configuration to form a historic property; and/or 
v.  Workmanship: the physical evidence of the crafts of a particular culture or people during any given period in history or prehistory; and/or 
vi.  Feeling: the property's expression of the historic sense of a particular period of time; and/or 
vii.  Association: the property's direct link between an important historic event or person and a historic property. 
If, after the consideration of the above, the Historic Preservation Officer concludes that the building or structure possesses no cultural, historical or architectural significance which would merit its preservation, or if the Historic Preservation Officer fails to file his or her findings within 45 days, the Construction Official may issue a demolition permit. 
If, after the consideration of the above, the Historic Preservation Officer concludes that the subject building and/or structure does possesses sufficient cultural, historical or architectural significance which merits its preservation, and the Historic Preservation Officer files his or her report containing his or her findings and recommendation for denial within the required 45-day period, then the Zoning Officer shall deny the permit application request. 
The applicant may appeal the Historic Preservation Officer's decision to the Zoning Board of Adjustment, who may then refer the application to the Historic Preservation Commission for review. Should the Zoning Board and/or Commission uphold the Historic Preservation Officer's recommendation, the applicant may appeal to a court of competent jurisdiction as permitted by law. 
It shall be unlawful for the applicant to intentionally remove, destroy or deface historic components of the building and/or structure, or to make such changes to the building so as to render it unfit prior to applying for a demolition permit, or while an application is p ending, in order to render it historically insignificant and/or structurally unsound and therefore more suitable for demolition. Doing so shall constitute a violation of this Chapter and subject the applicant and/or owner of the property to the penalties, as enforced by the Zoning Officer, set forth in § 1-25 and/or § 345 of the Municipal Code.  
§ 105-8. - Unsafe Structures and Imminent Hazard. 
[Added 5-9-2018 by Ord. No. 18-036 ] 
Shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.32.  
§ 105-9. - Service of complaints and orders. 
[Added 5-9-2018 by Ord. No. 18-036 ] 
Shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.33.  
§ 105-10. - Order to repair or demolish unsafe buildings or structures. 
[Added 5-9-2018 by Ord. No. 18-036 ] 
Covered under N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.32 and if the structure is demolished the matter is referred to Public Works for demolition and Public Works charges a lien on the property.  
§ 105-11. - City empowered to repair or demolish unfit buildings or structures in lieu of owner. 
[Added 5-9-2018 by Ord. No. 18-036 ] 
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.5a, the Construction Code Official may order the repair or demolition any building(s) or structure(s) or parts thereof, which have fallen into a state of disrepair.  
§ 105-12. - Emergency Demolition Fund created. 
[Added 5-9-2018 by Ord. No. 18-036 ] 
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.5b, the City may create an Emergency Demolition Fund to be used by the City solely to fund the demolition of unsafe buildings or structures. Should the Construction Code Official order an unsafe building or structure to be demolished but the owner fails to comply, the City is empowered to draw from the Emergency Demolition Fund and demolish the building or structure itself. The Construction Code Official has sole discretion in determining the time and manner of all expenditures necessary to carry out the purposes of this provision.  
§ 105-13. - Expenses related to the repair or demolition of unsafe buildings or structures; liens. 
[Added 5-9-2018 by Ord. No. 18-036 ] 
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.5, if the Construction Code Official elects to repair or demolish a privately owned building or structure, the City is entitled to recoup the following expenses: 
1.  The cost of the filing of legal papers, expert witnesses' fees, search fees and advertising charges, incurred in the course of any proceeding taken under this act determined in favor of the City, and 
2.  The cost of such repairs, alterations or improvements, or vacating and closing, or removal or demolition, if any, or the amount of the balance thereof remaining after deduction of the sum, if any, realized from the sale of materials derived from such building or from any contract for removal or demolition thereof, shall be a municipal lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred.  
§ 105-14. - Use of City water for demolition. 
[Added 5-9-2018 by Ord. No. 18-036 ] 
If an applicant has been granted a demolition permit and wishes to use water from a fire hydrant during the demolition, the applicant must make a separate application to do so and must pay the fee for the use of City water, as provided in Chapter 160. After the demolition work is complete and the use of City water is no longer needed, the applicant shall close, recap and secure the fire hydrant in the same condition it was prior to said use. Failure to do so shall constitute a violation of this Chapter and subject the applicant to the penalties set forth in § 1-25 of the Municipal Code.  
Chapter 108 - BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
History— Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City May 4, 1971 as Ch. 13, Art. XIX, of the 1971 Jersey City Code, as readopted September 19, 1978 by Ord. No. S-128. Amendments noted where applicable. 
Cross reference— Construction Codes, Uniform, Ch. 131. 
 
§ 108-1. - Record to be kept. 
The Municipal Council or an agency designated by the Council shall provide by map or otherwise a correct record of the location of every building in the city. A building number shall be assigned to all buildings which are now, or may be hereafter erected, upon any public street or way.  
§ 108-2. - Map and record to be filed. 
The map and the record of street numbers shall be filed in the City Clerk's Office and shall at all times be open to public inspection.  
§ 108-3. - Assignment of numbers. 
[Amended 4-9-2008 by Ord. No. 08-042] 
The Tax Assessor is empowered and authorized to designate, for any building or other premises where a building number is missing or where the building owner applies for a new building number, a building number, which will conform with the sequence of numbers heretofore existing upon the street where such building is located.  
§ 108-4. - Existing numbers to continue. 
[Amended 4-9-2008 by Ord. No. 08-042] 
All existing numbers upon buildings and properties shall be continued, unless a change is ordered by the Tax Assessor.  
§ 108-5. - Display of numbers. 
Every owner of a house, private dwelling, apartment, office building, store or any building whatsoever or any lot used for business purposes shall display thereon a building number as herein provided.  
§ 108-6. - Order to exhibit number. 
[Amended 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050; 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052; 4-9-2008 by Ord. No. 08-042] 
The Tax Assessor may order and direct any property owner to exhibit a building number or change an existing building number by a written notice mailed to the last known address of the owner, as appears upon the record of addresses of water consumers in the Office of Utility Management, and unless the owner within five days from the date of said notice exhibits a building number as directed, then the owner shall be chargeable with a violation of this chapter.  
§ 108-7. - Record of number changes. 
[Amended 4-9-2008 by Ord. No. 08-042] 
The Tax Assessor shall keep a record of all building number changes and of all owners directed by him or her to display building numbers.  
§ 108-8. - Size of numbers; visibility; placement. 
[Amended 11-10-1982 by Ord. No. MC-278] 
Each numeral comprising an assigned or ordered building number shall measure not less than three inches in length and be of such width as to conform with the accepted standards of lettering so that the number is plainly visible to the public. Such building number shall be erected over the main entrance and over any rear entrances to the building or upon either side of the main and rear entrances, within two feet of the door frame; provided, however, that private dwellings may exhibit such building numbers on any steps leading to the main and rear entrances or porches connected therewith.  
Chapter 116 - CABLE TELEVISION 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City 6-23-1993 as Ord. No. 93-067. Amendments noted where applicable.] 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 131. 	Multiple dwellings — See Ch. 218. 
Housing accommodations — See Ch. 188. 	
 
_____
 
§ 116-1. - Use in multiple-unit dwellings. 
No person owning, managing or operating a multiple-unit dwelling in the City of Jersey City shall deny the residents of the multiple dwelling cable television services from the franchise cable television operator. Such person shall not deny the franchise cable television operator permission to place cable television wiring and equipment in the multiple dwelling and, except as provided under N.J.S.A. 48:5A-49a or other applicable law, shall not demand or accept payment in any form either from the cable television company or from any resident as a condition of permitting the installation of cable television services in the dwelling or portion thereof occupied by such tenant.  
§ 116-2. - Agreement required prior to building permit issuance. 
No building permit for the erection of a multiple-unit dwelling shall be issued until the applicant has provided a written agreement with the franchise cable television company granting such company access into the multiple-unit dwelling for the purpose of delivering cable television services to any resident of the multiple-unit dwelling. Such written agreement shall be required prior to approval of the building permit.  
§ 116-3. - Theft of services on premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
No licensee holding a license to sell or distribute alcoholic beverages in the City of Jersey City shall permit the theft of cable television services on the licensed premises. [1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Note— See also Ch. 84, Alcoholic Beverages. 
 
§ 116-4. - Introduction. [Added 4-28-2010 by Ord. No. 10-052] 
JC1TV is a cable channel granted to the City for the purpose of cable casting government television programming, including but not limited to coverage of the City Council meetings and relevant public board meetings.  
§ 116-5. - Purpose. [Added 4-28-2010 by Ord. No. 10-052] 
JC1TV exists to provide citizens of Jersey City with local government information and community information and to assist the City departments with video production services. Specific objectives include: 
(a)  provide information about programs and services offered by City departments, agencies, boards, commissions and government supported agencies. 
(b)  expand citizens' awareness of government and its decision-making processes by exposing them to government meetings and civic events. 
(c)  enhance existing public information materials by using cable television as a public information tool. 
(d)  provide and distribute programming of interest to the residents that will inform, educate and enlighten, as well as encourage participation in government services, activities and decision making.  
§ 116-6. - Channel policies. [Added 4-28-2010 by Ord. No. 10-052] 
JC1TV shall be guided by the following policies: 
A.  Non-editorial: the channel shall provide direct, non-editorial information concerning the operations, services and deliberations of government to the citizens of Jersey City; 
B.  Non-political: the channel is not intended as a mechanism for building support for a particular ballot issue or candidate for public office. This provision does not preclude the cable casting of non-partisan programs sponsored by a neutral third party designed to inform the citizens of election issues and candidates. Declared candidates for any elective office and persons advocating any cause, viewpoint or proposed policy of a partisan nature will not be eligible to appear on the channel ninety (90) days prior to an election, unless they appear in a forum in which all candidates or sides of an issue are given equal time. For purposes of policy, a person is considered to be a candidate from the time of announcing publicly for any public office until the election has been held. This policy does not apply to persons who receive incidental air time as part of a public meeting being televised, nor to officials acting as part of the regular duties when such actions do not involve partisan policies; 
C.  Neutrality: in any program concerning subjects that may be interpreted to be materially controversial, JC1TV will maintain a position of neutrality, providing unbiased information. Requests for presentation of an opposing viewpoint during a legislative meeting will be directed to the appropriate agency for action on their agenda; 
D.  Non-commercial: JC1TV will not televise any paid advertising or any program that depicts a product, business and/or service that has the purpose of benefitting a profit-making enterprise; 
E.  Non-discriminatory: JC1 TV shall not discriminate in the delivery of its services on the basis of race, color, creed, national origination, sex, sexual orientation or mental or physical ability or any other protected category; 
F.  Non-sectarian Programming: JC1 TV will not televise any program that exposes or promotes any particular religious group or belief.  
§ 116-7. - Coverage of city council meetings and caucus meetings. [Added 4-28-2010 by Ord. No. 10-052] 
A.  Coverage of City Council Meetings: City Council meetings shall be recorded using the digital recording system currently present in the City Council Chambers. The entire meeting shall be recorded and re-aired in its entirety at least four times before the next City Council meeting and with two showings beginning between the times of 6 p.m. and 9 p.m. Council meetings will take priority over other regular scheduled programming; 
B.  Coverage of City Council Caucus Meetings: In consultation with Comcast, which televises City Council meetings, City Council caucus coverage will be televised at least twice between the time of the caucus and time of the regularly scheduled subsequent Council meeting. One caucus showing will be aired during the times of 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. and subsequent showing beginning between the times of 6 p.m. to 9 p.m.  
§ 116-8. - Programming restrictions. [Added 4-28-2010 by Ord. No. 10-052] 
The following programming is restricted: 
A.  any obscene or salacious material; 
B.  any material which violates Federal, State or Local laws  
§ 116-9. - Copyright of programs. [Added 4-28-2010 by Ord. No. 10-052] 
Programs containing copyrighted materials will be used only if copyright clearance has been obtained. The ownership and copyright for any program produced by the City of Jersey City shall be held by the City.  
Chapter 119 - CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City: Art. I, 10-2-1979 as Ord. No. S-293; Art. II, 4-26-1984 as Ord. No. MC-573. Amendments noted where applicable.] 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Condominium conversions — See Ch. 128. 	Housing accommodations — See Ch. 188. 
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 131. 	Multiple dwellings — See Ch. 218. 
Fees and charges — See Ch. 160. 	Water — See Ch. 337. 
  
ARTICLE I - Requirements for Issuance 
[Adopted 10-2-1979 as Ord. No. S-293] 
 
§ 119-1. - Requirements established. 
A.  No certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the city unless an approved water meter in proper working order is installed upon the premises. When more than one (1) such water meter is required, then no certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless all the water meters required for said premises shall be installed and be in proper working order. 
B.  No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any commercial or nonresidential unit in any building or structure containing residential housing space unless the Construction Official finds that all residential units within the same building or structure are in compliance with applicable provisions of the Municipal Construction Code, Zoning Code, Housing Code, Plumbing Code, Electrical Code and all other municipal ordinances relating to building construction and maintenance. The Director of Housing Code Enforcement shall conduct an inspection of all such buildings or structures before any certificate of occupancy is issued for any commercial or nonresidential use of such structures and certify that all residential units are fit for human habitation in accordance with Chapter 254, Property Maintenance, of the Jersey City Code. If an inspection by the Director discloses any noncompliance to any applicable code, he or she shall issue a noncompliance notice setting forth the areas of noncompliance and stating that the premises shall be brought into compliance within a reasonable time thereafter but no later than sixty (60) days of the date of issuing the notice. The Construction Official may issue a temporary certificate of occupancy for use of the commercial space. Such temporary certificate shall remain in effect for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days or until such time as all residential units are brought into compliance with applicable codes. If there is continuing noncompliance after the time period established, no occupancy of any commercial unit in the building or structure will be permitted. [Added 4-28-1993 by Ord. No. 93-043; amended 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050]  
§ 119-2. - Report of water meter installation. [Amended 11-9-1979 by Ord. No. S-301; 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050] 
It shall be the duty of all plumbing inspectors and all personnel of the Division of Water Supply and Division of Water Accounting to report to the Construction Official when the proper approved water meter is installed on any property. It shall also be the duty of all the aforesaid officials to notify the Division of Water Supply, Construction Official and Division of Water Accounting when any approved water meter is not installed in any building or not in proper working order wherever water is to be consumed.  
ARTICLE II - Certificates and Searches 
[Adopted 4-26-1984 as Ord. No. MC-573] 
 
§ 119-3. - Certificates and searches issued by Construction Code Official. 
The Construction Official shall upon request: 
A.  Furnish a letter stating whether a certificate of occupancy is required for any structure. 
B.  Search the records of the Division of Construction Code Official to ascertain whether Construction Code violations exist in any structure. [Amended 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050]  
§ 119-4. - Fees. [Amended 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050] 
The Construction Official shall receive for each certificate and search a total fee as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges.  
Chapter 122 - PUBLIC ASSEMBLIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-044, adopted April 26, 2017, amended the Code by repealing former Ch. 122, §§ 122-1—122-8, and adding a new Ch. 122. Former Ch. 122 pertained to circuses, carnivals and public assemblages, and was adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City May 4, 1971 as Ch. 5, Art. II, of the 1971 Jersey City Code, and readopted by Ord. No. S-128 on September 19, 1978; and subsequently amended by Ord. No. 95-050, adopted June 14, 1995; Ord. No. 98-122, adopted September 9, 1998; Ord. No. 99-049, adopted April 14, 1999; Ord. No. 08-066, adopted May 28, 2008; and Ord. No. 13-081 , adopted September 11, 2013. 
Cross reference— Animals, Ch. 90; fees and charges, Ch. 160; itinerant eating and drinking establishments, § 175-8 et seq. 
 
§ 122-1. - Definitions. 
[Added 4-26-2017 by Ord. No. 17-044 ] 
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
BLOCK PARTY means an event sponsored by a non-profit block association registered with the Resident Response Center, organized for the purpose of stimulating civic pride and involving the closure of a single block of a street, or a portion thereof, for a single day. 
CARNIVAL means a temporary outdoor event, open to the general public, featuring mechanical amusement rides, games of skill, vendors selling food and amplified and/or live music. 
COMMUNITY CLEAN-UP means an event held by a non-profit organization, community group or an individual with a pre-existing relationship with the proposed event location, held for the purpose of improving the neighborhood/event location. 
FARMERS' MARKET means a temporary market as defined in § 175-18, established in a public space where farmers/growers sell a variety of farm products directly to consumers. 
FESTIVAL means a public event requiring the use of public space, such as a City park or street featuring entertainment and in which the general public can purchase food and goods provided by vendors who may pay a fee to participate. Such events may be for one day or may last several days and may include amplified or live music. 
FLEA MARKET means a temporary outdoor market featuring vendors who sell or trade used nonfood products. Food products may be available for sale at flea markets on a limited basis at the discretion of the Department of Health and Human Services. 
NOT-FOR-PROFIT CORPORATION means a Federal tax exempt, non-profit corporation incorporated in New Jersey. A New Jersey corporation which can demonstrate proof of pending Federal tax exempt status shall also be deemed a non-profit corporation for the purposes of this Chapter. 
OFFICE OF CULTURAL AFFAIRS means the Office, under the Office of the Mayor, which serves as the primary point of intake for all applications for public assemblies. 
OUTDOOR MARKET means a temporary commercial event hosted by either a community group or a non-profit organization requiring a street closure of one block or more or the use of public space in which the general public can purchase newly-made goods or services provided by vendors who pay a fee to participate. Outdoor markets may feature amplified and/or live music. 
PARADE means a procession of people, organized along a street, typically spanning more than one block. 
PERSON means an individual or an organization defined as a person under New Jersey law. 
PROMOTIONAL EVENT means an event, open to the public, which is intended to promote, advertise or introduce a product, corporation or company or the goods or services of a corporation, company. Such an event may require a concession agreement approved the Municipal Council. 
PUBLIC ASSEMBLY means a group of people gathered together in one place for a common purpose making temporary, exclusive use of a public space, street or sidewalk. Public assemblies include, but are not limited to, block parties, carnivals, community clean-up events, festivals/fairs, farmers' markets, flea markets, outdoor markets, parades and promotional events. Impromptu gatherings such as protests and vigils which involve the closing of streets must be arranged through the Department of Public Safety. 
SPECIAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT shall mean the Management Corporation for a Special Improvement District designated by Chapter 69 of this Title. 
[Added 1-24-2019 by Ord. No. 19-001 ]  
§ 122-2. - Permission required; hours and conditions of operation. 
[Added 4-26-2017 by Ord. No. 17-044 ] 
A.  It shall be unlawful to host a public assembly without first obtaining a permit from the Office of Cultural Affairs. Once an application has been submitted, officials from the Office of Cultural Affairs will circulate the application to the various other City departments necessary for the application's final approval. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or cause to be erected any temporary structure larger than 900 square feet to be used for any public assembly whatsoever within the City without first obtaining a permit from the Office of Cultural Affairs. 
C.  Any permit approved under § 122-2.A shall be subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Hours of operation, 10:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. on Sunday through Thursday and from 10:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. on Friday and Saturday, and all musical activity shall cease one hour before closing time. 
(2)  Sale of Alcohol. If any special permit has been issued for the sale of alcoholic beverages, all sales, offers for sale and serving of alcoholic beverages shall cease 1/2 hour before closing time unless the Chief of Police or a representative of the Chief directs an earlier cessation.  
§ 122-3. - Special restrictions. 
[Added 4-26-2017 by Ord. No. 17-044 ] 
The following restrictions shall apply to the following public assemblies: 
(1)  Block Parties. Block parties are organized for the purpose of stimulating civic pride and must not be for private affairs, e.g., family reunions, birthday parties, and weddings. The sale of food, goods or beverages (alcoholic or otherwise) is expressly forbidden at a block party. Block associations may apply for up to two block parties per year and the hours, days, and months of operation for block parties shall be limited to 12:00 noon to 6:00 p.m. on Saturdays and Sundays during the months of May through October. 
[Amended by 9-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-120 ] 
(2)  Community Clean Ups. No sales of goods or services are permitted at community clean-up events. 
(3)  Farmers' Markets. These markets may only operate during farmers' market season, April through December and permits will only be issued to not-for-profit corporations as defined by Section 175-18. 
(4)  Flea Markets. These markets are barred from Pershing Field and J. Owen Grundy Pier.  
§ 122-4. - Application for permits; insurance requirements; fees; temporary structures; bond requirements. 
[Added 4-26-2017 by Ord. No. 17-044 ] 
A.  Permits. The applicant for such permission shall file an application in writing with the Office of Cultural Affairs on the forms prescribed by the Office in the manner set forth below: 
EVENT TYPE 	APPLICATION DEADLINE 
Block party 	30 days 
Carnival 	90 days 
Community clean-up 	30 days 
Farmers' market 	60 days 
Festival/fair 	60 days 
Flea market 	60 days 
Outdoor market 	60 days 
Parade 	90 days 
Public assembly 	30 days 
Public assembly with a temporary structure 	90 days 
Promotional event 	30 days 
 
B.  Insurance. All applicants seeking permission for a public assembly shall provide proof of general liability insurance from an A.M. Best-rated insurance company in the amount of $1,000,000.00 and must name the City of Jersey City as an additional insured unless waived by the City's Risk Manager. If the public assembly includes the sale of liquor, the applicant must obtain a permit from Alcoholic Beverage Control and must provide proof of general liability insurance from an A.M. Best-rated insurance company in the amount of $2,000,000.00. 
C.  Fees. The applicant shall pay a fee or fees according to the schedule contained in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges. 
D.  Temporary Structures. Any application which includes the erection of a temporary structure larger than 900 square feet shall include a set of building plans in accordance with the forms prescribed by the Office of Cultural Affairs. All temporary structures are subject to inspection by the Director of Public Safety or his or her designee prior to use. 
E.  Bonds. Applicants shall provide a cash bond in the sum of $1,000.00 conditioned upon holding the City harmless from any and all liabilities or causes of action which might arise by virtue of the granting of a permit to the applicant and conditioned further that no damage shall be done to the streets, sewers, trees or adjoining property and that no dirt, paper, litter or other debris shall be permitted to remain upon the streets or upon any private property by such applicant. Such cash bond shall be returned to the applicant upon certification by the license issuing authority that all conditions of this Chapter have been complied with. This subsection shall not apply to Special Improvement District applicants. 
[Amended 1-24-2019 by Ord. No. 19-001 ] 
F.  Special Improvement Districts. Special Improvement Districts shall agree to hold the City harmless from any and all liabilities or causes of action which might arise by virtue of the granting of a permit to the applicant and conditioned further that no damage shall be done to the streets, sewers, trees or adjoining property and that no dirt, paper, litter or other debris shall be permitted to remain upon the streets or upon any private property by the Special Improvement District. 
[Added 1-24-2019 by Ord. No. 19-001 ]  
§ 122-5. - Health inspection certification. 
[Added 4-26-2017 by Ord. No. 17-044 ] 
Any application for a public assembly which includes the sale of food and beverages, if permitted, shall also be referred to the Health Officer for approval and issuance of a certificate of health inspection in addition to the public assembly permit. The applicant's equipment and practices shall be subject to inspection at the time of application and at periodic intervals thereafter. No public assembly involving the sale of prepared food will be permitted without obtaining permission from the Health Officer.  
§ 122-6. - Sunday operations. 
[Added 4-26-2017 by Ord. No. 17-044 ] 
All public assemblies permitted by and pursuant to this Chapter may conduct such activities on Sundays.  
Chapter 128 - CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City: Art. I, 11-24-1982 as Ord. No. MC-262. Amendments noted where applicable.] 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 131. 	Multiple dwellings — See Ch. 218. 
Contractors — See Ch. 134. 	Rent control — See Ch. 260. 
Housing accommodations — See Ch. 188. 	Taxation — See Ch. 304. 
  
ARTICLE I - Applications for Conversion 
[Adopted 11-24-1982 as Ord. No. MC-262] 
 
§ 128-1. - Administration and enforcement. 
The Rent Leveling Administrator shall administer and enforce the regulations of the Senior Citizens and Disabled Protected Tenancy Act, as delineated in N.J.S.A. 2A:18-61.22 et seq.  
§ 128-2. - Notices of intent to file applications. 
The Rent Leveling Administrator shall, in accordance with N.J.S.A. 2A:18-61.27, accept from owners of apartment buildings within the city notices of intent to file an application for registration of conversion with the Department of Community Affairs in accordance with the Planned Real Estate Development Full Disclosure Act, N.J.S.A. 45:22A-21 et seq. The Rent Leveling Administrator shall determine the eligibility for protected status of each tenant within a building.  
§ 128-3. - Application fee.[1] 
A fee as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges, per tenant shall accompany each application. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. 
 
§ 128-4. - Appeals. 
Any tenant or owner aggrieved by a decision of the Rent Leveling Administrator as to the eligibility of a tenant for protected status may appeal the administrator's decision within twenty (20) days of receipt to a formal review officer appointed by the Director of Housing and Economic Development.  
§ 128-5. - Appeal application fee.[2] 
A fee as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges, shall accompany each appeal application. 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. 
 
Chapter 131 - CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
History— Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City May 4, 1971 as Ch. 7, Art. I, of the 1971 Jersey City Code, as readopted September 19, 1978 by Ord. No. S-128. Amendments noted where applicable. 
Cross reference— Department of Housing, Economic Development and Commerce, Ch. 3; Demolition of buildings, Ch. 105; Numbering of buildings, Ch. 108; Certificates of occupancy, Ch. 119; condominium conversions, Ch. 128; contractors, Ch. 134; elevators, Ch. 155; fees and charges, Ch. 160; flood damage prevention, See Ch. 172; housing accommodations, Ch. 188; multiple dwellings, Ch. 218; zoning, Ch. 345. 
 
§ 131-1. - Enforcing agency established. 
[Amended 9-26-2018 by Ord. No. 18-106 ; 3-13-2019 by Ord. No. 19-014 ] 
A.  There is hereby established in the City of Jersey City a State Uniform Construction Code Enforcing Agency, consisting of a Construction Official, Building Subcode Official, Plumbing Subcode Official, Electrical Subcode Official, Fire Protection Subcode Official and such other subcode officials for such additional subcodes as the Commissioner of the Department of Community Affairs, State of New Jersey, shall hereafter adopt as part of the State Uniform Construction Code. The Construction Official shall be the chief administrator of the Enforcing Agency. 
Cross reference— Division of Construction Code Official, § 3-75.A. 
B.  The Construction Official and Subcode Officials of the Enforcing Agency shall be appointed by the Director of the Department of Housing, Economic Development and Commerce and such positions shall be filled by a person qualified for such position pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217, as amended [2] and N.J.A.C. 5:23; provided that, in lieu of any particular Subcode Official, an on-site inspection agency may be retained by contract pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23. More than one such official position may be held by the same person, provided that such person is qualified pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217 and N.J.A.C. 5:23 to hold each such position. 
[Amended 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050; 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
C.  The public shall have the right to do business with the Enforcing Agency at one office location except for emergencies and unforeseen or unavoidable circumstances. 
D.  The City hereby adopts the 2019 Edition of the Construction Site Safety Manual, as amended, which is on file in the Office of the City Clerk. The 2019 Edition of the Construction Site Safety Manual replaces and supersedes all previous version of the Construction Site Safety Manual. 
[Added 8-6-2008 by Ord. No. 08-100 ] 
E.  The Construction Official may enforce and amend the 2019 Edition of the Construction Site Safety Manual as necessary. 
[Added 8-6-2008 by Ord. No. 08-100 ] 
F.  The regulations contained in the 2019 Edition of the Construction Site Safety Manual are made a part of Chapter 131 of the Municipal Code and are hereby incorporated by reference. 
G.  In addition to any power conferred upon the Construction Official pursuant to the New Jersey Administrative Code, the Construction Official and any subcode official may enforce compliance with the Construction Site Safety Manual by issuing complaint/summons under authority of the Jersey City Code and the Penalty Enforcement Law, N.J.S.A. 2A:58-10 et seq. 
[Added 8-6-2008 by Ord. No. 08-100 ] 
H.  A certified copy of the 2019 Edition of the Construction Site Safety Manual shall be on file and available for review online and at the offices of the Construction Official and the City Clerk. Photocopies may be obtained for a fee, pursuant to the City Code provision for fees. 
[Added 8-6-2008 by Ord. No. 08-100 ] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq. 
 
§ 131-2. - Construction Board of Appeals. 
A.  [Amended 2-25-1988 by Ord. No. C-655] There is hereby established a Construction Board of Appeals, which shall have the following powers: 
(1)  To hear appeals from decisions of the Uniform Construction Code Enforcing Agency; and 
(2)  To hear and decide charges against building contractors pursuant to Chapter 134, Contractors, of this Code. 
B.  The Board shall consist of five members. At least one member shall be a registered architect or professional engineer of building construction experience; at least one member shall be qualified as a Plumbing Subcode Official; and one qualified as an Electrical Subcode Official. No more than two members shall be selected from the same business or profession. Each member shall have had at least three years' experience in construction, design or supervision as a licensed engineer or registered architect; or, in the alternative, five years' experience in construction, design or supervision as an architect or engineer with a bachelor's degree in architecture of higher education; or, as a further alternative, 10 years' experience in construction, design or supervision as a journeyman in a construction trade or as a construction contractor, subcontractor or inspector. 
[Amended 2-25-1988 by Ord. No. C-655] 
C.  The Mayor shall appoint the Board members and any alternate members. For the members first appointed, the Mayor shall designate the appointees' terms so that one shall be appointed for a term of one year, one for a term of two years, one for a term of three years, and two for a term of four years. At the expiration of such terms and thereafter, appointments shall be made for terms of four years. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term. 
D.  The Mayor shall appoint such number of alternates, as may be appropriate, for terms not to exceed four years; or may in the alternative appoint alternates on a case by case basis. No regular or alternate Board member may be a member of the Enforcing Agency, the decisions of which are subject to the review of the Board. 
E.  Neither regular nor alternate members of the Construction Board of Appeals shall be compensated for serving thereon.  
§ 131-3. - Chairman of Board. 
The Board shall select one of its members to serve as Chairman.  
§ 131-4. - Exemption from voting. 
No member of the Board shall pass on any question in which he or she is engaged as contractor or material dealer or in the preparation of plans or specifications or in which he or she has any personal interest.  
§ 131-5. - Appeal procedure. 
A.  All appeals from decisions of the Construction Official or any Subcode Official shall be made to the Construction Board of Appeals pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-127b; provided, however, that the Board shall have no jurisdiction to hear appeals from the action of the Historic District Commission in disapproving or modifying any plans for the alteration, renovation, repair or demolition of any historic site. All appeals from decisions of the Historic Preservation Commission disapproving, modifying or approving any plans for the alteration, renovation, repair or demolition of any historic site shall be made to the Municipal Council within 10 days of the receipt of a written communication from the Commission setting forth its decision. Said appeal shall be made in writing addressed to the City Clerk with a copy filed with the Commission. The Commission, upon receiving such notice of appeal, shall forthwith file 10 copies of the record with the City Clerk. Upon receipt of the records, the Municipal Council shall thereupon set a date at either a special or regular council meeting and render its decision either affirming, denying or modifying the actions of the Commission. Any decision made by the Municipal Council shall be subject and consistent with all federal and state laws and regulations pertaining to historic sites. 
[Amended 10-14-1980 by Ord. No. S-477; 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050] 
B.  Where the City Enforcing Agency refuses to grant an application or refuses to act upon an application for a construction permit or when the Enforcing Agency makes any other decision, pursuant or related to the State Act ( N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.) or the Uniform Construction Code, an owner or his or her authorized agent may appeal in writing to the City Construction Board of Appeals. 
C.  The Board shall hear the appeal, render a decision thereon and file its decision with a statement of the reasons therefor with the Enforcing Agency from which the appeal has been taken not later than 10 business days following the submission of the appeal, unless such period of time has been extended with the consent of the applicant. 
D.  The Board may affirm, reverse or modify the decision of the Enforcing Agency or remand the matter to the Enforcing Agency for further action. 
E.  The Board shall forward a copy of its decision by certified or registered mail to the party taking the appeal. 
F.  Failure by the Board to hear an appeal and render and file a decision thereon within the time limits prescribed in this section shall be deemed a denial of the appeal for purposes of a complaint, application or appeal to a court of competent jurisdiction. 
G.  The Board shall make and keep a record of all its decisions properly indexed. Said record shall be kept by the Enforcing Agency and shall be subject to public inspection during business hours.  
§ 131-6. - Rules of procedure. 
The Board shall promulgate rules for its procedures in accordance with N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq. and the regulations established by the New Jersey Commissioner of Community Affairs. Said rules, when adopted by the Board, shall become effective upon filing the same with the City Clerk and/or the Commissioner of Community Affairs if the same is required to be filed with that state agency.  
§ 131-7. - Number of members required; voting. 
Where less than five qualified members of the Board are present to consider an appeal, the applicant may request a postponement until such time as five members can be present. If no such request is made, then those members present may consider the appeal, and any decision made shall be binding as though the full Board were present; provided, however, that no hearings shall be held unless there are at least three members of the Board present. No less than three concurring votes are required to adopt any decision of the Board. Failure of the Board to adopt a decision shall be deemed to be denial of the appeal, and the appellant may then appeal to a court of competent jurisdiction.  
§ 131-8. - Enforcement of decisions. 
The City Enforcing Agency shall take immediate action to enforce the decision of the Board if there is no decision of the Board to enforce the decision of the Enforcing Agency. [3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's Note: Former Sec. 7-9, entitled "Automatic amendment of Chapter 7," which immediately followed this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. 
 
§ 131-9. - Fees. 
[Amended 1-28-1982 by Ord. No. MC-103; 4-23-1986 by Ord. No. C-29; 2-27-1991 by Ord. No. McC-243; 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050] 
Fees for permits shall be as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges.  
§ 131-10. - Exemption from fees. 
[Added 5-1-1979 by Ord. No. S-210; amended 4-22-1982 by Ord. No. MC-171; 9-22-1983 by Ord. No. MC-471; 3-10-1988 by Ord. No. C-694] 
A.  All nonprofit hospitals, nursing homes and building contractors hired by the City of Jersey City and the State of New Jersey are exempted from the payment of any fees for any type of construction permit. 
B.  The Jersey City Housing Authority shall be exempt from payment of elevator inspection fees provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges. 
C.  All nonprofit entities having as one of their purposes the development of housing certified in writing by the Director of the Department of Housing, Economic Development and Commerce as affordable to low- and moderate-income individuals and families according to the definitions and affordability controls contained in the Fair Housing Act of 1985, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq., and in the regulations of the Council on Affordable Housing, N.J.A.C. 5:91 and 5:92, specifically Subchapter 12 of N.J.A.C. 5:92, shall pay the sum as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges, for any type of construction permit for each certified affordable residential dwelling unit. 
[Amended 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050; 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
D.  All developers of housing certified in writing by the Director of the Department of Housing, Economic Development and Commerce as affordable to low- and moderate-income individuals and families according to the definitions and affordability controls contained in the Fair Housing Act of 1985, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq., and in the regulations of the Council on Affordable Housing, N.J.A.C. 5:91 and 5:92, specifically N.J.A.C. 5:92, shall pay the sum as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges, for any type of construction permit for each certified affordable residential dwelling unit. 
[Amended 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050; 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
E.  Developers of affordable housing which has been certified as affordable to low- and moderate-income persons or families by the Director of the Department of Housing, Economic Development and Commerce pursuant to Subsections C and D of this section, and was initiated after July 2, 1985, when the Fair Housing Act of 1985, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq., became operative, shall be reimbursed for all construction permit fees paid after July 2, 1985, for the construction of affordable housing in Jersey City except for the sum as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges, for any type of construction permit for each certified affordable residential dwelling unit. 
[Amended 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050; 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
F.  Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-126e, there shall be no fee for construction permits for any construction, reconstruction, alteration or improvement designed and undertaken solely to promote accessibility by the disabled to public or private structures or any facilities contained therein. 
[Added 2-26-1992 by Ord. No. McC-415]  
§ 131-11. - Report by Construction Official regarding fees. 
[Added 2-27-1991 by Ord. No. McC-243] 
The Construction Official shall, with the advice of the Subcode Officials, prepare and submit to the City of Jersey City annually a report recommending a fee schedule based on the operating expenses of the agency and any other expenses of the municipality fairly attributable to the enforcement of the State Uniform Construction Code Act. [4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq. 
 
§ 131-12. - Surcharge fee for training, certification and technical support programs. 
[Added 2-27-1991 by Ord. No. McC-243; 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050] 
In order to provide for the training, certification and technical support programs required by the Uniform Construction Code Act and the regulations, the Enforcing Agency shall collect, in addition to the fees specified above, a surcharge fee per cubic foot of volume of new construction in the amount set by the state. Said surcharge fee shall be remitted to the Bureau of Housing Inspection, Department of Community Affairs, on a quarterly basis for the fiscal quarter ending September 30, December 31, March 31 and June 30 and not later than one month next succeeding the end of the quarter for which it is due. In the fiscal year in which the regulations first become effective, said fee shall be collected and remitted for the third and fourth quarters only.  
§ 131-13. - Historic sites. 
[Added 10-14-1980 by Ord. No. S-477; 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050] 
A.  No permits shall be issued for the alteration, renovation, repair or demolition of a building or structure officially designated and approved as a historic site until such plans are approved by the Historic Preservation Commission. 
B.  The Building Superintendent and/or Construction Official or Enforcing Agency shall maintain a file of all historic sites certified and filed by the Historic Preservation Commission. Said file shall be checked whenever an application for a permit is received. If the application pertains to a historic site, the application and plans accompanying the same shall be submitted to the Historic Preservation Commission for review and determination. No permit pursuant to such application shall be issued until the Historic Preservation Commission approves the plans.  
Chapter 134 - CONTRACTORS AND PERMIT PROCESSORS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The title of Ch. 134 was amended July 18, 2018 by Ord. No. 18-075 
History— Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City 1-26-1994 as Ord. No. 94-001. Amendments noted where applicable. 
Cross reference— Uniform construction codes, Ch. 131; fees and charges, Ch. 160. 
 
§ 134-1. - Findings; purpose. 
[Amended 7-18-2018 by Ord. No. 18-075 ] 
The Municipal Council finds that there are persons and companies engaged in the building contracting business in the City of Jersey City who lack the resources, skill, equipment and integrity to competently perform the work for which they are engaged. The purpose of this chapter is to collect the necessary information for those engaging the services of a contractor or permit processor and to require those processing building and construction permits to register with the City to assure that only registered persons are allowed to perform building contracting services and permit processing services in the City of Jersey City. The consumer utilizing these services should be made aware that the people that they are hiring are properly registered with the City.  
§ 134-2. - Definitions and word usage. 
[Amended 7-18-2018 by Ord. No. 18-075 ] 
A.  For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the definitions given in this section. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural include the singular number and words in the singular include the plural. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
B.  As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
AGENT—a person authorized to act in a legal capacity on behalf of an owner. 
BUILDING CONTRACTOR or CONTRACTOR - Any person engaged in the constructing, erecting, reconstructing, altering, converting, demolishing, removing or repairing a building or structure of any kind or installing any improvement of any kind upon such a building or structure. The term "building contractor" or "contractor" also includes any person engaged in the business of excavating, paving, altering, grading, landscaping the land or installing any facility or appurtenance in, on or above the ground. 
BUSINESS - Every occupation, profession, establishment and every other activity together with all the devices, machines, vehicles and appurtenances used therein, any of which are conducted for private profit or benefit, either directly or indirectly on any premises in this city. 
CITY - The City of Jersey City. 
CONSTRUCTION OFFICIAL - The official of the City of Jersey City authorized to enforce the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code. 
LICENCED PROFESSIONAL—Persons licensed and regulated by the State of New Jersey. 
OWNER—the owner in fee of the lot, piece or parcel of land, and any building thereon, located within the City of Jersey City, which is the subject of business before the City. 
PERMIT PROCESSOR—Any person not listed on the construction permit application (CP-1) as an owner, contractor, licensed professional or agent who is engaged in the business of submitting, completing, processing, and/or filing of any construction, renovation or demolition permit application on behalf of an owner or contractor. A permit processor may not own, lease, sublease or otherwise hold an interest in any property or contracting company that the permit processor has been retained to work on or with, nor may a permit processor represent any owner or contractor in a legal capacity as an agent, unless the permit processor has submitted a power of attorney giving his/her such authority and placed such power of attorney on file with the City. 
PERSON—Any individual person, partnership, joint venture, association or corporation.  
§ 134-3. - Registration required. 
[Amended 7-18-2018 by Ord. No. 18-075 ] 
A.  No person shall engage in the business of a contractor or work as a permit processor in the City of Jersey City without first having registered with the Construction Official as provided in this chapter. Registration shall not constitute an endorsement of the competence, financial ability or business practices of the contractor or permit processor. 
B.  A registered contractor or permit processor may not delegate or assign to any other person or entity the right to conduct business in the City of Jersey City. 
C.  A single act or transaction shall constitute engaging in the business of building contracting within the meaning of this chapter. 
D.  Licensed professionals are exempted from the requirements of this chapter; provided, however, that such state licensees shall provide the construction official with their applicable license number and proof of a valid New Jersey license.  
§ 134-4. - Registration application. 
[Amended 7-18-2018 by Ord. No. 18-075 ] 
A.  Every contractor and permit processor required to register under this chapter shall provide the following information in writing, under oath, to the Construction Official: 
(1)  Name and address. 
(2)  If the contractor or permit processor is a partnership or business association, the name and address of every member. 
(3)  If a corporation, the names and addresses of each officer and director. 
(4)  The address from which business is to be conducted. 
B.  If the contractor or permit processor is a natural person, the registration form shall be signed and sworn to by the contractor or permit processor; if a partnership or other business association, it shall be signed and sworn to by all natural persons comprising such partnership or business association; if the contractor or permit processor is a corporation, the registration form shall be signed and sworn to by the president and secretary.  
§ 134-5. - Registration fee; expiration. 
[Amended 7-18-2018 by Ord. No. 18-075 ] 
A.  Each contractor and permit processor shall pay to the Construction Official a registration fee as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges, at the time of registration and annually thereafter upon renewal of registration. [2] 
B.  All registrations shall expire one year from the date of issuance. 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. 
 
§ 134-6. - Permit processor disclosure and authorization form. 
[Added 7-18-2018 by Ord. No. 18-075 ] 
In addition to registration under this Chapter, permit processors shall be required to submit a disclosure and authorization form, promulgated by the Office of the Construction Code Official, and executed by the owner or contractor who has retained the permit processor, to all departments, offices and or agencies of the City with whom the permit processor conducts business. The form shall include the name, address, telephone number, and pertinent professional licensure information (if any), and shall be completed for each project for which the permit processor has been retained. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18-075 , adopted July 18, 2018, amended the Code by repealing former §§ 134-6—134-11, adding a new § 134-6, and renumbering former §§ 134-12—134-14 as new §;§ 134-7—134-9. Former §§ 134-6—134-11 pertained to bonds; charges and hearings; grounds for debarment; right to hearing; power of attorney; and amended bond, respectively; and all sections derived from Ord. No. 94-001, adopted January 26, 1994.  
§ 134-7. - Changes of address. 
[Amended 7-18-2018 by Ord. No. 18-075 ] 
All registered contractors and permit processors shall promptly notify the Construction Official of any change of address by completing a new registration form. 
Note— Former § 134-12. See editor's note, § 134-6.  
§ 134-8. - Violations and penalties. 
[Amended 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050; 7-18-2018 by Ord. No. 18-075 ] 
A person or corporation, including an officer, director or employee of a corporation who engages in the business of a contractor or a permit processor, or solicits or attempts to solicit business as a contractor or a permit processor without first having registered shall be liable to a penalty as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25, and shall be guilty of a separate offense for each day that he or she engages in any act in violation of this section. 
Note— Former § 134-13. See editor's note, § 134-6.  
§ 134-9. - Compliance with other provisions. 
[Amended 7-18-2018 by Ord. No. 18-075 ] 
The possession of a registration under this chapter shall not exempt a contractor or a permit processor from any state or local law regulating, or pertaining to, building construction. 
Note— Former § 134-14. See editor's note, § 134-6.  
§ 134-10. - Reserved.  
§ 134-11. - Pre-application conference. 
[Added 7-18-2018 by Ord. No. 18-075 ] 
Contractors and permit processors may request to meet with the Construction Code Official or his or her representative(s) prior to any permit application. Attendees at the pre-application conferences shall complete attendance forms as required bv the City and attendance shall be limited to City staff and the contractor(s) and/or permit processor(s) who requested the conference. Representatives from the Office of the Construction Code Official reserve the right to require a subsequent conference to discuss matters related to a permit at anytime.  
Chapter 137 - CURFEW 
[PRIOR HISTORY: 7-18-1978 by Ord. No. S-103.] 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City 1-22-1987 as Ord. No. C-361 (this ordinance was vetoed by the Mayor and overridden by Council 2-26-1987); amended in its entirety 9-11-1996 by Ord. No. 96-084. Subsequent amendments noted where applicable.] 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Peace and good order — See Ch. 242. 
 
§ 137-1. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
CHILD - Any person under the age of 17 years. 
GUARDIAN - A person, other than a parent, to whom legal custody of a child has been given by court order or who is acting in the place of a parent or is responsible for the care and welfare of a child. 
OPERATOR OF A BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT - Any person who operates, manages or controls any place of amusement or entertainment, any store or shop, any tavern, saloon, cafe or restaurant or any other commercial or business establishment or place. 
PUBLIC PLACES - Any place to which the public has access, including but not limited to a public street, road, thoroughfare, sidewalk, bridge, alley, plaza, park, recreation or shopping area, public transportation facility, vehicle used for public transportation, parking lot or any other public building, structure or area. This definition includes restaurants, taverns, cafes, stores and any other place that has business invitees.  
§ 137-2. - Duties of children. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any child to be in any public place between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day unless such child is accompanied by a parent or guardian or unless such child is engaged in, or traveling to or from, a business or occupation which the laws of this state authorize children to perform. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any child under the age of 17 years to be in any public place on any school day during the hours in which such child's school is in session, unless such child is accompanied by a parent or guardian or unless he or she has been excused from school by school authorities.  
§ 137-3. - Duties of parents, guardians and operators of business establishments. 
A.  Duties of parents and guardians. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian of a child to permit the minor to be in any public place between 10:30 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the following day unless the minor is accompanied by a parent or guardian. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian to allow or permit any child under the age of 17 years to be in or upon any public place at any time during the hours in which said child's school is in session, unless such child is accompanied by a parent or guardian or unless said child has been officially excused from attendance at such school by the school authorities. 
B.  Duties of operators of business establishments. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any operator of a business establishment or the agent or employees of the operator to knowingly permit any child to remain upon the premises of the establishment between 10:30 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the following day unless such child is accompanied by a parent or guardian. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any operator of a business establishment to allow or permit any child under the age of 17 years to be in or upon such business establishment at any time during the hours in which such child's school is in session, unless such child is accompanied by a parent or guardian or unless such child has been officially excused from attendance at such school by the school authorities.  
§ 137-4. - Enforcement. [ ] 
A.  Any police officer upon finding a child in violation of § 137-2 shall take the child into protective custody and transport the child to the Curfew Center. Once at the Center, the child's parent or guardian will be contacted to allow the child to be taken home. Both the child and the parent will be counseled at the Curfew Center by community leaders and police officers concerning the provisions of the Jersey City curfew as it relates to the protection of children. The child and the parent will also be advised that a second violation of the Curfew Ordinance will make the parent and child also liable for a minimum fine of $100, a maximum fine as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25. Before releasing the child, the Department of Public Safety may request the parent or guardian to submit an appropriate form of identification and sign an appropriate authorization. 
B.  If the Curfew Center is full or otherwise unavailable, any police officer upon finding a child in violation of § 137-2 may ascertain the name and address of such child and warn the child that he or she is in violation of the curfew and shall direct the child to proceed at once to his or her home or usual place of abode. The police officer shall report such action to the Juvenile Division of the Department of Public Safety which shall in the case of the first violation by a child send by certified mail to the parents or guardians of the child written notice of the violation with a warning that a second violation will result in the parent and child being liable for community service and that, for a subsequent violation, the parent and child will also be liable for a minimum fine of $100, a maximum fine as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25, as well as community service. 
C.  The provisions of this section shall not limit the power of the Department of Public Safety to charge parents, guardians or the operators of business establishments with violations of this chapter pursuant to § 137-3.  
§ 137-5. - Violations and penalties. 
A.  Any parent or guardian found guilty of violating this chapter after receiving a warning in accordance with § 137-4 shall be liable for community service. Any subsequent violation of the provisions of this chapter shall also make the parent and child liable for a minimum fine of $100 and a maximum fine as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25. If both a child and a child's parent or guardian violate this chapter, they shall be required to perform community service together. 
B.  Any operator of a business found guilty of violating the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to: 
(1)  A minimum fine of $100 and a maximum fine as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25; 
(2)  Community service; or 
(3)  Both a fine and community service. 
C.  Names of parents, guardians or business operators who defiantly violate the provisions of this chapter may be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the City of Jersey City. A parent, guardian or business operator shall be considered a defiant violator if he or she is found guilty of three or more violations of this chapter.  
§ 137-6. - Exceptions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply in the following situations: 
A.  If a child is engaged in errands involving medical emergencies or attending extracurricular school activities or other cultural, educational and social events sponsored by religious or community-based organizations after 10:30 p.m. and before 6:00 a.m. 
B.  If the child is accompanied by an adult authorized by a parent to accompany the minor for a designated period of time and specific purpose within a specific area. 
C.  If the child is on the sidewalk of his or her residence or on the sidewalk of a next-door neighbor, so long as the neighbor does not object to the minor's presence on the sidewalk. 
D.  (Reserved) 
E.  (Reserved) 
F.  (Reserved) 
G.  The minor carries a certified card of employment or is on the way to or from a place of employment. 
H.  The minor is in a motor vehicle with parental consent from normal travel, either intra- or interstate, through the City of Jersey City. 
I.  The minor carries on his or her person a special permit from the Chief of Police authorized as follows: when necessary nighttime activities of a minor may be inadequately provided for by other provisions of this chapter recourse may be had to the Chief of Police, either for a regulation as provided in Subsection J or for a special permit as the circumstances warrant: upon the findings of necessity for the use of the streets to the extent warranted by a written application signed by a minor and by a parent of the minor, if feasible, stating the name, age and address of the minor; the name, address and telephone number of a parent thereof; the height, weight, sex, color of eyes and hair and other physical characteristics of the minor; the necessity which requires the minor to be present on the public streets; and the beginning and ending of the period of time involved by date and hour. The Chief of Police may grant a permit in writing for the use by the minor of streets at such hours as in the opinion of the Chief of Police may reasonably be necessary. In an emergency this may be accomplished by telephone or other effective communication, with a corresponding record being made contemporaneously by the Chief of Police or to the person designated by the Chief of Police to act on his or her behalf in an emergency, at the police station. 
J.  There exists a regulation issued by the Chief of Police in other similar cases of reasonable necessity, similarly handled but adapted to necessary nighttime activities of more minors than can readily be dealt with on an individual special permit basis. Such regulation by the Chief of Police permitting use of the streets should be issued sufficiently in advance to permit appropriate publicity through news media and through other agencies such as the schools. It shall define the activity, the scope of the use of the streets permitted, the period of time involved, not to extend more than thirty (30) minutes beyond the time for termination of the activity, and the reason for finding that the regulation is reasonably necessary and is consistent with the purposes of this chapter.  
§ 137-7. - Severability. [ ] 
Severability is intended throughout and within the provisions of the Curfew Ordinance. If any provision, including any exemption, part, phrase or term or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, is held invalid, the application to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby and the validity of the Curfew Ordinance in any and all other respects shall not be affected thereby. Additional exemptions to be included under § 137-6 will be considered by City Council as warranted by future experience illuminated by the views of student government associations, school personnel, citizens, associations, parents, officers and persons in authority concerned positively with minors as well as with juvenile delinquency. The Department of Public Safety shall be responsible to make periodic reviews of the practical aspects of enforcement and interpretation of this chapter, including the need for clarification or relaxation of any term or provision contained herein as well as the need for continued or discontinued curfew regulations. Whenever, in the opinion of the City Attorney or of any court, the application of this chapter to a particular act or activity of a minor is unclear or ambiguous, the less restrictive interpretation shall be deemed to be the intent of the chapter.  
Chapter 148 - DISCRIMINATION 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City 5-26-1981 as Ord. No. S-619; amended in its entirety 9-8-1981 by Ord. No. MC-14. Subsequent amendments noted where applicable.] 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Human Rights Commission — See Ch. 3, § 3-107. 	Multiple dwellings — See Ch. 218. 
Housing accommodations — See Ch. 188. 	Rent control — See Ch. 260. 
 
 
§ 148-1. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Fair Housing and Public Accommodation Ordinance."  
§ 148-2. - Findings. 
The Mayor and City Council of the City of Jersey City find that: 
A.  The population of the City of Jersey City consists of people of every race, color, religion and national origin, many of whom are discriminated against in public accommodations and in obtaining adequate housing facilities. 
B.  Discrimination in housing results in overcrowding, segregated areas and substandard, unsafe, unsanitary living conditions. 
C.  Discrimination in places of public accommodation causes embarrassment and inconvenience to citizens and visitors to the city, creates breaches of the peace and is otherwise detrimental to the welfare and economic growth of the City of Jersey City. 
D.  In order to assure that all persons, regardless of race, color or creed enjoy the full benefits of citizenship and are afforded equal opportunities for housing and the use of public accommodations, it is necessary that appropriate legislation be enacted.  
§ 148-3. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
COMMISSION - The Human Rights Commission. 
DIRECTOR - The Executive Director of the Human Rights Commission. 
[Amended 12-11-1986 by Ord. No. C-298] 
LIABILITY FOR SERVICE IN THE ARMED FORCES OF THE UNITED STATES - Subject to being ordered as an individual or member in the National Guard or subject to being inducted into such armed forces through a system of national selective service. 
PERSON - Includes one (1) or more individuals, partnerships, associations, organizations, corporations, legal representatives, trustees, trustee in bankruptcy, receivers and fiduciaries. 
PLACE OF PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION - Includes but is not limited to: any tavern, roadhouse, hotel, motel, trailer camp, summer camp, day camp or resort camp, whether for entertainment of transient guests or accommodation of those seeking health, recreation or rest; any producer, manufacturer, wholesaler, distributor, retail shop, store, establishment or concession dealing with goods or services of any kind; any restaurant, eating house or place maintained for the sale of ice cream, ice and fruit preparations or their derivatives, soda water or confections or where any beverages of any kind are retailed for consumption on the premises; any garage, any public conveyance operating on land or water or in the air, any stations and terminals thereof; any bathhouse, boardwalk or seashore accommodation; any auditorium, meeting place or hall; any theater, motion-picture house, music hall, roof garden, skating rink, swimming pool, amusement and recreation park, fair, bowling alley, gymnasium, shooting gallery, billiard and pool parlor or other place of amusement; any comfort station; any dispensary, clinic or hospital; any public library; and kindergarten, primary and secondary school, trade or business school, high school, academy, college and university. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to include or to apply to any institution, bona fide club or place of accommodation, which is in its nature distinctly private; nor shall anything herein contained apply to any educational facility operated or maintained by a bona fide religious or sectarian institution; and the right of a natural parent or one in loco parentis to direct the education and upbringing of a child under his control is hereby affirmed; nor shall anything herein contained be construed to bar any private, secondary or post-secondary school from using in good faith criteria other than race, creed, color, national origin or ancestry, age, liability of service in the Armed Forces of the United States, sex and marital status in the admission of students. 
REAL ESTATE BROKER - Includes a person, firm or corporation who, for a fee, commission or other valuable consideration or by reason of promise or reasonable expectation thereof, lists for sale, sells, exchanges, buys or rents, or offers or attempts to offer a sale, exchange, purchase or rental of real estate, or solicits for prospective purchasers or assists or directs in the procuring of prospects or the negotiation or closing of any transaction which does or is contemplated to result in the sale, exchange, leasing, renting or auctioning of any real estate, or negotiates or offers or attempts or agrees to negotiate a loan secured or to be secured by mortgage or other encumbrance upon or transfer of any real estate for others or any person who, for pecuniary gain or expectation of pecuniary gain, conducts a public or private competitive sale of lands or any interest in lands. In the sale of lots, the term "real estate broker" shall also include any person, partnership, association or corporation employed by or on behalf of the owner or owners of lots or other parcels and who shall sell or exchange or offer or attempt or agree to negotiate the sale or exchange of any such lot or parcel of real estate. 
REAL ESTATE SALESMAN - Includes any person who, for compensation, valuable consideration or commission or other thing of value or by reason of a promise or reasonable expectation thereof, is employed by and operates under the supervision of a licensed real estate broker to sell or offer to sell, buy or offer to buy or negotiate the purchase, sale or exchange of real estate, or offers or attempts to negotiate a loan secured or to be secured by a mortgage or other encumbrance upon or transfer of real estate or to lease or rent, or offer to lease or rent, any real estate for others, to collect rents for the use or other encumbrance upon or transfer of real estate, or to lease or rent, or who is employed by a licensed real estate broker to sell or offer to sell lots or other parcels of real estate, at a stated salary or upon a commission, or upon a salary and commission, or otherwise to sell real estate, or any parts thereof, in lots or other parcels. 
REAL PROPERTY - Includes real estate, lands, tenements and hereditaments, corporeal and incorporeal, and leaseholds; provided, however, that the provisions of this Article shall not apply to the rental of a single apartment or flat in a two-family dwelling, the other occupancy unit of which is occupied by the owner as his residence or the household of his or her family at the time of such rental, or of a room or rooms to another person or persons by the owner or occupant of a one-family dwelling occupied by him or her as his or her residence or the household of his or her family at the time of such rental. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to bar any religious or denominational institution or organization, or any organization operated for charitable or education purposes, which is operated, supervised or controlled by or in connection with a religious organization, in the sale, lease or rental of real property, from limiting admission to or giving preference to persons of the same religion or denomination or from making such selection as is calculated by such organization to promote the religious principles for which it is established or maintained.  
§ 148-4. - Unlawful practices. 
It shall be an unlawful practice: 
A.  For any owner, lessee, proprietor, manager, superintendent, agent or employee of any place of public accommodation directly or indirectly to refuse, withhold from or deny to any person any of the accommodations, advantages, facilities or privileges thereof, or to discriminate against any person in the furnishing thereof, or directly or indirectly to publicize, circulate, issue, display, post or mail any written or printed communications, notice or advertisement to the effect that any of the accommodations, advantages, facilities or privileges of any such place will be refused, withheld from or denied to any person on account of the race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry, age, liability for service in the Armed Forces of the United States, sex or marital status or that such person is unwelcome, objectionable or not acceptable, desired or solicited; and the production of any such written or printed communication, notice or advertisement, purporting to relate to any such place and to be made by any owner, lessee, proprietor, superintendent or manager thereof, shall be presumptive evidence in any action that the same was authorized by such person. 
B.  For the owner, lessee, sublessee, assignee or managing agent of or other person having the right of ownership or possession of or the right to sell, rent, lease, assign or sublease any real property or part or portion thereof, or any agent or employee of any of these: 
(1)  To refuse to sell, rent, lease, assign or sublease or otherwise deny to or withhold from any person or group of persons any real property or part or portion thereof because of the race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry, age, liability to the Armed Forces of the United States, sex or marital status of such person or group of persons; 
(2)  To discriminate against any person or group of persons because of the race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry, age, liability for service in the Armed Forces of the United States, sex or marital status of such person or group of persons in the terms, conditions or privileges of the sale, rental or lease of any real property or part or portion thereof or in the furnishing of facilities or services in connection therewith; or 
(3)  To print, publish, circulate, issue, display, post or mail, or cause to be printed, published, circulated, issued, displayed, posted or mailed, any statement, advertisement, publication or sign or to use any form or application for the purchase, rental, lease, assignment or sublease of any real property, or part or portion thereof, which expresses, directly or indirectly, any limitation, specification or discrimination as to race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry, age, liability to service in the Armed Forces of the United States, sex, marital status or any intent to make such limitation, specification or discrimination, and the production of any such statement, advertisement, publicity, sign, form of application, record or inquiry purporting to be made by any such person shall be presumptive evidence in any action that the same was authorized by such person. 
C.  For any real estate broker, real estate salesman or employee or agent thereof: 
(1)  To refuse to sell, assign, lease or sublease or offer for sale, rental, lease, assignment or sublease any real property or part or portion thereof to any person or group of persons or to refuse to negotiate for the sale, rental, lease, assignment or sublease of any real property or part or portion thereof to any person or group of persons because of the race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry, age, liability to the Armed Services of the United States, sex or marital status of such person or group of persons, or to represent that any real property or portion thereof is not available for inspection, sale, rental, lease, assignment or sublease when in fact it is so available, or otherwise to deny or withhold any real property or any part or portion of facilities thereof to or from any person or group of persons because of the race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry, age, liability or service in the Armed Forces of the United States, sex, marital status of such person or group of persons; 
(2)  To discriminate against any person because of his race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry, age, liability to service in the Armed Forces of the United States, sex or marital status in the terms, conditions or privileges of the sale, rental, lease, assignment or sublease of any real property or part or portion thereof or in the furnishing of facilities or services in connection therewith; or 
(3)  To print, publish, circulate, issue, display, post or mail, or cause to be printed, published, circulated, issued, displayed, posted or mailed, any statement, advertisement, publication or sign or to use any form of application for the purchase, rental, lease, assignment or sublease of any real property or part or portion thereof or to make any record or inquiry in connection with the prospective purchase, rental, lease, assignment or sublease of any real property or portion thereof which expresses, directly or indirectly, any limitation, specification or discrimination as to race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry, age, liability to service in the Armed Forces of the United States, sex or marital status, or any intent to make such limitation, specification or discrimination, and the production of any such statement, advertisement, publicity, sign, form of application, record or inquiry purporting to be made by any such person shall be presumptive evidence in any action that the same was authorized by such person. 
D.  For any real estate broker, real estate salesman or employee or agent thereof: 
(1)  To refuse to sell, assign, lease or sublease or offer for sale, rental, lease, assignment or sublease any real property or part or portion thereof to any person or group of persons because of their race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry, age, liability to the Armed Services of the United States, sex or marital status of such persons or group of persons or to represent that any real property or portion thereof is not available for inspection, sale, rental, lease assignment or sublease when in fact it is so available or otherwise to deny or withhold any real property or any part or portion or facilities thereof to or from any person or group of persons because of the race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry, age, liability to service in the Armed Forces of the United States, sex or marital status of such person or group of persons; 
(2)  To discriminate against any person because of his race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry, age, liability to service in the Armed Forces of the United States, sex or marital status in the terms, conditions or privileges of the sale, rental, lease, assignment or sublease of any real property or part or portion thereof or in the furnishing of facilities or services in connection therewith; or 
(3)  To print, publish, circulate, issue, display, post or mail, or cause to be printed, published, circulated, issued, displayed, posted or mailed, any statement, advertisement, publication or sign or to use any form of application for the purchase, rental, lease, assignment or sublease of any real property or part or portion thereof or to make any record or inquiry in connection with the prospective purchase, rental, lease, assignment or sublease of any real property or portion thereof which expresses, directly or indirectly, any limitation, specification or discrimination as to race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry, age, liability to service in the Armed Forces of the United States, sex or marital status or any intent to make such statement, advertisement, publicity, sign, form or application, record or inquiry purporting to be made by any such person shall be presumptive evidence in any action that the same was authorized by such person. 
E.  For any person, bank, banking organization, mortgage company, insurance company or other financial institution or lender to whom application is made for financial assistance for the purchase, acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair or maintenance of any real property or part or portion thereof or any agent or employee thereof: 
(1)  To discriminate against any person or group of persons because of the race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry, age, liability to service in the Armed Forces of the United States, sex or marital status of such person or group of persons or of the prospective occupants or tenants of such real property or part or portion thereof, in the granting, withholding, extending, modifying or renewing or in the fixing of the rates, terms, conditions or provisions of any such financial assistance or in the extension of services in connection therewith; or 
(2)  To use any form of application for such financial assistance or to make any record or inquiry in connection with applications for such financial assistance which expresses, directly or indirectly, any limitation, specification or discrimination as to race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry, age, liability to service in the Armed Forces of the United States, sex or marital status or any intent to make such limitation, specification or discrimination.  
§ 148-5. - Enforcement. 
The Jersey City Human Rights Commission is hereby vested with the authority to administer and enforce this chapter and in conjunction therewith may promulgate and issue regulations.  
§ 148-6. - Complaints; investigations; hearings. [Amended 12-11-1986 by Ord. No. C-298] 
A.  Any person claiming to be aggrieved by an alleged unlawful housing practice or an alleged unlawful public accommodation practice forbidden by this chapter may by himself or herself or by his attorney at law make, sign and file with the Office of the Human Rights Commission a verified complaint in writing which shall state the name and address of the person or persons alleged to have committed the unlawful practice complained of and which shall set forth the particulars thereof and contain such other information as may be reasonably required by the Office of the Human Rights Commission. The Commission, upon its own initiative, may in like manner sign and file a complaint. The Commission, however, shall not accept a complaint from any person who has filed a complaint with the New Jersey State Division of Civil Rights with respect to the same grievance. The complainant shall have the power to reasonably and fairly amend any complaint, and the respondents shall have the power to amend their answer. 
B.  After the filing of a complaint, the office and staff of the Human Rights Commission shall cause a prompt investigation to be made of the alleged unlawful practice; filing a complaint with the Commission shall not preclude the complainant from filing a complaint with the New Jersey Division of Civil Rights or with any other agency or commission. 
C.  If, after such an investigation, the Executive Director of the Human Rights Commission determines that no probable cause exists for crediting the allegations of the complaint, he or she shall within ten (10) days from such determination cause to be issued and served upon the complainant written notice of such determination. The notice shall also state that the complaint will be dismissed unless within ten (10) days after such service the complainant or his attorney file, with the office of the Human Rights Commission, a request for a review hearing. The Office of the Human Rights Commission shall upon request for such a hearing provide the complainant or his attorney, if any, an opportunity to appear before the Executive Director of the Human Rights Commission or a member of the Human Rights Commission or a staff representative of the Commission, at the election of the Commission, to present such additional information as may be available to support the allegations of the complaint. If after such a hearing the hearing agent determines that there is no basis for the allegation, the complaint shall be dismissed. There shall be no appeal from a decision of dismissal. A dismissal shall not be a bar to the filing of a complaint with the New Jersey Division of Civil Rights. 
D.  If, after such investigation, the Executive Director of the Human Rights Commission shall determine that probable cause exists for the allegations of the complaint, he or she may elect to: 
(1)  Eliminate the unlawful practice complained of by conference and conciliation. Such conference shall be opened to the public unless otherwise requested by one (1) or both of the parties to the conference; 
(2)  Sign a complaint against the alleged offending person for trial before the Municipal Court; or 
(3)  Refer the entire file to the City Prosecutor for such action as he or she may deem proper or necessary in the circumstances. 
E.  A person claiming to be aggrieved as set forth in this chapter may elect to file a complaint directly to the Municipal Court and prosecute the same on his or her own behalf or to pursue any other proper procedure that he or she may elect. 
F.  No complaint shall be considered unless it is filed with the Office of the Human Rights Commission within one hundred eighty (180) days after the alleged act of the discrimination.  
§ 148-7. - Failure to comply. 
In the event that the respondent refuses or fails to comply with any order of the Commission or violates any provisions of this chapter, the Commission shall cause to have a complaint filed in the Municipal Court for violation of the provisions of this chapter against the respondent.  
§ 148-8. - Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-11-1986 by Ord. No. C-298][1] 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, after conviction, be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Art. I, § 1-25. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. 
 
Chapter 151 - DRUG-FREE SCHOOL ZONES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
History— Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City 9-22-1988 as Ord. No. C-804. Amendments noted where applicable. 
Cross reference— Peace and good order, Ch. 242. 
 
ARTICLE I - Drug-Free School Zones 
[Adopted 10-23-2002 by Ord. No. 02-114; amended 4-13-2011 by Ord. No. 11-036] 
 
§ 151.1. - Map adopted; official record; changes; copies. 
A.  In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7 and N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.1, the map consisting of one (1) overall key map at one (1) inch equivalent to one thousand (1,000) feet and eight (8) enlarged scale maps at one (1) inch equivalent to four hundred (400) feet as produced by the Municipal Engineer of the City of Jersey City on December 9, 2009 and revised on March 1, 2011, is hereby approved and adopted as an official finding and record of the location and areas on or within one thousand (1,000) feet of school property as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7. and also is hereby approved and adopted as an official finding and record of the location in, on and/or within five hundred (500) feet of the real property comprising a public park defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.1. hereinafter Drug-Free Zone Map. 
B.  The Drug-Free Zone Map adopted by this Ordinance, pursuant to Section 151-1 of the Jersey City Municipal Code, shall continue to constitute an official finding and record of the location and boundaries of the area or areas on or within one thousand (1,000) feet of school property pursuant to Section 151-1. 
The Drug-Free Zone Map shall also continue to constitute an official finding and record of the location and boundaries of the area or areas in. on or within five hundred (5001 feet of the real property comprising a public park pursuant to Section 151-1 of the Jersey City Municipal Code. 
C.  The School Board, or the Chief Administrative Officer in the case of any private or parochial school, shall promptly notify the Municipal Engineer and the Corporation Counsel of the City of Jersey City of any changes or contemplated changes in the location and boundaries of any property owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or school board and used for school purposes pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7. The appropriate parks department in the case of a "Public Park" shall notify the Municipal Engineer and the Corporation Counsel of the City of Jersey City of any changes or contemplated changes in the location and boundaries of any "Public Park" pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:3 5-7.1. 
D.  The City Clerk shall provide certified copies of the Drug-Free Zone Map: 
(1)  At a reasonable cost to any person, agency or court which may from time to time request such a copy, along with a certification that such copy is a true copy of the map approved and adopted herein and kept on file; and 
(2)  Without cost to the Hudson County Clerk and to the Office of the Hudson County Prosecutor. 
E.  Nothing in the within Section shall be construed to preclude the Prosecution from introducing or relying upon any other evidence or testimony to establish any element of this offense, nor shall the within Section be construed to preclude the use or admissibility of any map or any diagram other than one which has been approved by the Governing Body of the City of Jersey City provided that the map or diagram is otherwise admissible pursuant to Rules of Evidence.  
§ 151-2. - Legislative findings; failure to depict property; additional requirements. 
A.  It is understood that the map approved and adopted pursuant to § 151-1 of this chapter was prepared and is intended to be used as evidence in prosecutions arising under the criminal laws of this state and that pursuant to state law, such map shall constitute prima facie evidence of the following: 
(1)  The location of elementary and secondary schools within the City of Jersey City. 
(2)  The boundaries of the real property which is owned by or leased to such schools or a school board. 
(3)  That such school property is and continues to be used for school purposes. 
(4)  The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within one thousand (1,000) feet of such school property. 
(5)  Except as is otherwise expressly noted on the face of the adopted map, all of the property depicted as school property was owned by a school or school board and was being used for school purposes as of July 9, 1987, that being the effective date of L. 1987, c. 101 ( N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7). 
B.  Pursuant to the provisions of L. 1988, c. 44, a prosecutor is not precluded from introducing or relying upon any other evidence or testimony to establish a violation of the offense defined in that statute, including use of a map or diagram other than the one approved and adopted pursuant to § 151-1 of this chapter. The failure of the map approved herein to depict the location and boundaries of any property which is, in fact, used for school purposes and which is owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or school board, whether the absence of such depiction is the result of inadvertent omission or the result of any changes in the location and boundaries of such property which have not yet been incorporated into a revised approved map, shall not be deemed to be an official finding and record that such property is not owned by or leased to a school or school board or that such property is not used for school purposes. 
C.  All of the requirements set forth in L. 1988, c. 44, concerning the preparation, approval and adoption of a Drug-Free School Zone Map have been complied with.  
ARTICLE II - Public School Properties 
[Adopted 10-23-2002 by Ord. No. 02-114] 
 
§ 151-3. - Public school properties; alcoholic beverages; intoxicating substances; loitering; soliciting alms; gambling. 
No person on, within, or upon the sidewalks or public rights-of-way abutting any elementary or secondary public school properties shall: 
A.  Possess or drink alcoholic beverages, except where approved by appropriate school authorities and in accordance with applicable laws. 
B.  Enter on, within, or upon such properties when under the influence of an alcoholic beverage or other intoxicating substance. 
C.  Loiter or in any manger stay on, within, or upon such properties without an appropriate purpose. 
D.  Solicit alms or contributions for any purpose, whether public or private, except where approved by appropriate school authorities and in accordance with applicable laws. 
E.  Enter an area posted as closed to the public, nor shall any person use or abet the use of any area in violation of posted notices. 
F.  Gamble or participate or abet any game of chance. 
G.  Engage in loud, boisterous, threatening, abusive, insulting or indecent language or engage in any disorderly conduct or behavior tending to breach the public peace. 
H.  Destroy, damage, or otherwise interfere with real or personal property. 
I.  Litter, write upon, post flyers, or otherwise disturb or diminish the appearance of any such properties.  
§ 151-4. - Enforcement. 
A.  The police, school security personnel, and any other persons authorized by law shall have the authority to eject from on, within, and upon school properties any person acting in violation of § 151-3. 
B.  The police, school security personnel, and any other persons authorizing by law shall have the authority to seize and confiscate any property, item or device used in violation of § 151-3.  
ARTICLE III - Municipal Alliance Committee to Combat Drug and Alcohol Abuse 
 
§ 151-5. - Establishment of the Committee. 
[Added 10-11-2017 by Ord. No. 17-138 ] 
The Municipal Council authorizes the creation of the Jersey City Municipal Alliance Committee to Combat Drug and Alcohol Abuse pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:2BB-9.  
§ 151-6. - Purpose. 
[Added 10-11-2017 by Ord. No. 17-138 ] 
The purpose of the Committee is to coordinate with the State to ameliorate and combat the problems that arise from untreated substance abuse and its detrimental impact upon society as well as a detrimental fiscal impact on local government.  
§ 151-7. - Powers of the Committee. 
[Added 10-11-2017 by Ord. No. 17-138 ] 
A.  The Committee may: 
(1)  Develop community-based education and prevention designed to curtail substance abuse; 
(2)  Conduct a yearly needs assessment of the City's existing drug and alcohol prevention measures and produce a report for the Mayor and Municipal Council; 
(3)  Coordinate education and prevention projects to avoid program fragmentation and duplication; 
(4)  Develop education and prevention programs to be implanted at the municipal level or participate in regionally developed prevention programs; 
(5)  Assist the municipality in acquiring funds for substance abuse prevention, education and recovery programs; 
(6)  Assist with the implementation of any state-wide or regional alliance programs formulated pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:2BB-8.  
§ 151-8. - Membership. 
[Added 10-11-2017 by Ord. No. 17-138 ] 
A.  Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:2BB-9, the Committee shall include four ex officio members and seven members of the community to be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Municipal Council. 
Ex officio members: 
(1)  The Chief of Police or his or her designee; 
(2)  The President of the Board of Education or his or her designee; 
(3)  The Superintendent of Schools or his or her designee; 
(4)  The School Substance Abuse Coordinator. 
Community members: 
(1)  A representative from the Parent-Teacher Association; 
(2)  A representative from the Teacher's Union; 
(3)  A representative from the Chamber of Commerce; 
(4)  A municipal court judge; 
(5)  A representative from a civic or neighborhood association; 
(6)  A religious leader; and 
(7)  A private citizen or youth representative. 
At least six of the Committee members shall reside in Jersey City. The community members shall serve for one year, but shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor.  
Chapter 157 - ENTERTAINMENT LICENSES 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City 6-24-1998 by Ord. No. 98-081; amended 6-23-2004 by Ord. No. 04-062; 6-27-2007 by Ord. No. 07-122; 1-25-2012 by Ord. No. 12-001] 
 
§ 157-1. - Purpose and official comments. 
A.  Purpose; official comments. 
(1)  The City of Jersey City has repeatedly experienced serious civil disturbances and other occurrences detrimental to the public's safety, health and welfare associated with entertainment and dance venues (these problems include but are not limited to riots, disorderly groups, public consumption of alcohol, and public urination). Consequently, this chapter is enacted to license and regulate these activities except those directly sponsored and self-regulated by the city itself. 
(2)  Social clubs are expressly regulated by this chapter because recent experience has shown that attempts have been made to circumvent the general regulatory process. (For example, for-profit nightclubs have reorganized as private membership clubs to circumvent the Alcoholic Beverage Law.)* 
* Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq. 
(3)  This chapter also prohibits obscene entertainment and obscene dancing and contains a definition of obscenity and pornography that reflects contemporary community standards as enforceable by relevant judicial decisions. It also explicitly incorporates by reference the prohibitions on pornography and obscenity found in Chapter 251 of the Municipal Code. In enacting this prohibition, the City Council relied on extensive evidence of long-standing community's standards. Testimony was taken from ordinary citizens as well as members of the clergy, teachers, business people and professionals. The Council issued legislative findings that the people of Jersey City are offended by obscenity and pornography: 
(a)  Jersey City seeks to maintain an atmosphere as conducive as possible to families in a densely populated urban setting. 
(b)  Obscenity and pornography have had no place in the public life of Jersey City. Historically, no so-called adult bookstores or adult theaters have operated here. In addition, no erotic dancing venues have ever been allowed to operate here in the city, notwithstanding their presence in adjacent communities. Therefore, these legislative findings support the existence of community standards that allow for the constitutional circumscription of such activity, and the city will continue to enforce these social norms through legal sanctions. 
(4)  The Director of the Division of Commerce is given primary jurisdiction over this chapter. However, given the public safety concerns, the Director of Public Safety also shares in its administration: § 157-9 authorizes the Director of Public Safety, upon a notice and hearing, to suspend licenses on an emergent basis. [Amended 1-25-2012 by Ord. No. 12-001; 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] 
B.  This chapter is to be liberally construed in order to effectuate its purpose.  
§ 157-2. - Definitions.[Amended 1-25-2012 by Ord. No. 12-001] 
The following terms shall have the meanings indicated when used in this chapter: 
AGGRIEVED PARTY — Any person, persons, or entity, whether corporate or private, aggrieved by the sound of entertainment emanating from a Licensed Establishment. 
DECIBEL LEVEL — A unit for measuring the volume of a sound, equal to twenty times the logarithm to the base ten of the ratio of the pressure of the sound measured to the reference pressure, which is twenty micropascals (twenty micronewtons per square meter). 
DECIBEL MEASUREMENT — A measurement taken as follows: 
Indoors - from any point of the room, in the premises of an aggrieved party, most affected by the sound, but not from areas which receive only casual use, e.g., hallways, bathroom and closets. All exterior doors and windows in the premises shall be closed and all sound sources within the premises, e.g., television, radio and stereo, shall be shut off at the time of measurement. 
Outdoors - from any point within the property boundaries of an aggrieved party (excluding City rights-of way; e.g., streets and sidewalks), or the measurement may be taken from any point outside of the Licensed Establishment at the discretion of the City. 
DIRECTOR — The Director of Commerce in the Department of Housing, Economic Development and Commerce. 
ENTERTAINMENT — Any live act, including vocalists, actors, dancers, floor shows, instrumentalists and recorded music played by a D.J. 
ENTERTAINMENT LICENSE — A license issued pursuant to this chapter regulating entertainment. 
ESTABLISHMENT — A premises for which an entertainment license has been issued. 
OBSCENITY AND PORNOGRAPHY — Obscenity and pornography exist when under contemporary standards in the community the entertainment taken as a whole, appeals to prurient interests; and the entertainment describes in a patently offensive way sexual conduct; and when the entertainment taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value. [NOTE: Miller v. California, 413 U.S. 15. 93 S. Ct. 2607, 37 L. Ed. 2d 419 (1973), rehearing denied, 414 U.S. 881, 94 S. Ct. 26, 38 L. Ed. 2d 128 (1973).] This definition incorporates by reference definitions contained in Chapter 251 of the Municipal Code. 
OUTDOOR ENTERTAINMENT — Any entertainment taking place beyond the outside perimeter walls of the licensed premises or any entertainment which is intended to be audible or which is actually audible beyond such perimeter walls. 
PERSON — Any natural person(s), or a partnership, corporation or legal entity. 
VENUE — Any nightclub or restaurant as defined in Chapter 345 of this Code, including but not limited to a social or private club.  
§ 157-3. - License required; types of licenses; restrictions. [Amended 1-25-2012 by Ord. No. 12-001; ] 
A.  A license as described in this chapter is required for any live entertainment taking place in any venue, as defined in § 157-2, in the City of Jersey City except that no such license will be required for events taking place in or on any City-Owned building or property or for any event which is sponsored or co-sponsored by the city. All existing Entertainment License holders must renew in accordance with the regulations herein within 60 days of the enactment of this ordinance. All existing Entertainment License holders, unless qualified for a Nightclub Entertainment License as regulated herein, will be permitted to renew pursuant to the Restaurant Entertainment License. An entertainment license is granted to a specific person to offer entertainment in a specified place. There shall be two Entertainment License categories: Nightclub and Restaurant. 
(1)  Nightclub Entertainment License. This license is available only in zoning districts where a nightclub is permitted pursuant to Jersey City Code Chapter 345 or a duly adopted Redevelopment Plan. A Nightclub Entertainment License shall further be categorized as follows: 
Class 1 - For establishments with a capacity greater than one hundred (100) people; 
Class 2 - For establishments with a capacity of one hundred (100) people or fewer; 
All Nightclub Entertainment Licenses shall be subject to the following: 
(a)  Notwithstanding noise regulation in Chapter 222 of the Jersey City Code to the contrary, any entertainment under this Nightclub Entertainment License shall be restricted to a decibel level of 65 dB from Noon to 10 P.M., and shall be restricted to 50 dB from 10 P.M. to close of entertainment in accordance with § 157-4C(1), seven days per week: 
(b)  Outdoor entertainment shall be prohibited in all establishments, except where specifically requested in the license application for a certain part of the establishment and approved by the Director and specifically indicated on the actual license. Outdoor entertainment shall not be the norm and shall only be granted where the Director is convinced that it would not unreasonably interfere with the quality of life of the surrounding community. In determining whether or not to grant outdoor entertainment, the Director shall consider, but not be limited to, the following criteria: the nature of the establishment; the location of the establishment including its proximity to residential properties; the input of residents of the surrounding area; and the history (if any) of the establishment. Furthermore, the Director shall not permit outdoor entertainment beyond the hours described in § 157-4C(4). 
(c)  The Director may, in consultation with the Department of Public Safety, establish any reasonable conditions deemed necessary for the health, safety, and welfare of the public prior to granting any license. Any such conditions established shall be listed on the license. 
(2)  Restaurant Entertainment License. This license is available only in zoning districts where a Category 1 Restaurant is permitted pursuant to Jersey City Code Chapter 345 or a duly adopted Redevelopment Plan, except that in the Restaurant Row Overlay Zone (ROZ), a category 2 Restaurant shall also be eligible for this license and except that no entertainment license shall be permitted within the lower J.F.K. Boulevard NC Zoning District. 
Class 1 - For Establishments with a capacity greater than one hundred (100) people; 
Class 2 - For establishments with a capacity of one hundred (100) people or fewer: 
All Restaurant Entertainment Licenses shall be subject to the following: 
(a)  Notwithstanding noise regulation in Chapter 222 of the Jersey City Code to the contrary, any entertainment under this Restaurant Entertainment License shall be restricted to a decibel level of 55 dB from Noon to 10 P.M., and shall be restricted to 45 dB from 10 P.M. to close of entertainment in accordance with § 157-4C(1), seven days per week. 
(b)  Outdoor entertainment shall be prohibited in all establishments, except where specifically requested in the license application for a certain part of the establishment and approved by the Director and specifically indicated on the actual license. Outdoor entertainment shall not be the norm and shall only be granted where the Director is convinced that it would not unreasonably interfere with the quality of life of the surrounding community. In determining whether or not to grant outdoor entertainment, the Director shall consider, but not be limited to, the following criteria: the nature of the establishment; the location of the establishment including its proximity to residential properties; the input of residents of the surrounding area; and the history (if any) of the establishment. Furthermore, the Director shall not permit outdoor entertainment beyond the hours described in § 157-4C(4). 
(c)  The Director may, in consultation with the Department of Public Safety, establish any reasonable conditions deemed necessary for the health, safety, and welfare of the public prior to granting any license. Any such conditions established shall be listed on the license. 
(d)  A Restaurant Entertainment Licensee shall not locate or place entertainment within 10 feet of any entrance door or open window existing within the establishment.  
§ 157-4. - Fees; inactive license; surrender; expiration; hours of operations.[Amended 1-25-2012 by Ord. No. 12-001] 
A.  Except as provided in § 157-3, no person shall keep, maintain, or operate any entertainment or dance venue without obtaining a license from the Director. A license shall be issued only if both the venue and the applicant comply with relevant standards. The fee schedule shall be as follows: 
Nightclub Entertainment License Class 1: $1.200 per year or part thereof; 
Nightclub Entertainment License Class 2: $1.000 per year or part thereof; 
Restaurant Entertainment License Class 1: $800 per year or part thereof; 
Restaurant Entertainment License Class 2: $600 per year or part thereof. 
B.  If a licensee fails to conduct entertainment at the licensed premises in a period of three months, the Director may revoke the license after a hearing has been held on ten (10) days' notice. 
C.  The hours of operation for a licensee under this chapter shall be as follows: 
(1)  Permitted hours for entertainment: 
Nightclubs: 	Noon to 2:00 a.m., Sunday—Thursday 
	Noon to 3:00 a.m., Friday—Saturday 
	Noon to 4:00 a.m., New Year's Eve 
Restaurants: 	Noon to 1:00 a.m., Sunday—Thursday 
	Noon to 2:00 a.m., Friday—Saturday 
	Noon to 3:00 a.m., New Year's Eve 
 
(2)  With reference to establishments holding Nightclub Entertainment Licenses, no person whatsoever, except the licensee and the licensee's employees and agents, may be on the licensed premises after closing time until 12:00 p.m. of that day, Monday through Sunday. 
(3)  With reference to establishments holding Nightclub Entertainment Licenses, entertainment must be terminated not later than fifteen (15) minutes prior to the establishment's closing time to assure that patrons are out by the actual closing time. 
(4)  Notwithstanding any later hour permitted in accordance with Section 157-4(c)(1), in venues where Outdoor Entertainment is permitted, it shall cease promptly at 10:00 p.m. on Sunday through Wednesday and 10:30 p.m. on Thursday through Saturday, or such earlier "close of entertainment" hour as mandated by § 157-3A(1)(b); § 157-3A(1)(c); § 157-3A(2)(b); and § 157-3A(2)(c).  
§ 157-5. - Applications; qualifications; procedure for review. 
A.  Applicants shall be of good moral character and shall file an application under oath with Director on forms approved by the Director. All applications shall be reviewed by the Division of Commerce and the Department of Public Safety. The premises shall be inspected by the Department of Public Safety, the Division of Health and the Division of Buildings for compliance with relevant laws and regulations. [ Amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] 
B.  The application shall be made under oath and shall contain the class of license sought, names, residences and citizenship status of all persons financially interested in the business, and the nature and extent of this interest; and, if a corporation, the names, residences and citizenship of the officers, directors and stockholders, and shall disclose whether the applicant has been convicted of any criminal or quasi-criminal offense, and if so, the date and place of such conviction and the nature of the offense. 
C.  The application shall also include a sworn statement signed by the applicants agreeing to comply with the relevant laws, rules and regulations of the United States, the State of New Jersey and the City of Jersey City. 
D.  The application shall have attached a copy of the plans and specifications of the premises sought to be licensed. 
E.  All relevant land use approvals, including approved site plans, together with a valid certificate of occupancy, are conditions precedent for the approval of any application.  
§ 157-6. - Publication of application notice.[Amended 1-25-2012 by Ord. No. 12-001] 
A.  The applicant shall publish once each week for a period of two weeks in a newspaper of general circulation notice of any new application or application for renewal or transfer of a license. Such notice shall be at the applicant's expense and shall be in a form approved by the Director. 
B.  Any objections to the issuance of the proposed license or transfer may be filed with the Director within 20 days from the last date of publication of this notice, and all objections must include the name and address of the person who files the objection and the grounds for the objection. 
C.  If one or more objections are filed, the Director shall hold a hearing no later than 30 days after the last date of publication before approving the license or transfer. All objectors shall receive notice of the time, date and place of the hearing, and it shall be published in the local newspaper and placed upon the City web site. The nonreceipt of such notice shall not void the Director's action.  
§ 157-7. - License renewal or transfer; change of ownership.[Amended 1-25-2012 by Ord. No. 12-001] 
A.  No license shall be renewed without the approval of the Director and payment of the appropriate fee. Applications for annual renewal shall comply with all of the relevant provisions of this chapter, including the filing of all forms in § 157-5 and any additional forms required by the Director. 
B.  The Entertainment License is non-transferable. Upon transfer of a licensed establishment, any existing Entertainment License is automatically voided, and any new Owner/Operator desiring to have entertainment at the venue shall apply for an Entertainment License as required by this Chapter. 
C.  If the owner of a sole proprietorship, the partners of a partnership or the officers, directors or stockholders of a corporation are changed, their successors shall file an affidavit stating their names, residences, citizenship and the nature and extent of their financial interest in the business. Failure to inform the Director of changes of ownership shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of the license. The Director shall review the validity of an existing license upon change in ownership. 
D.  The Director may deny an application for a renewal of a license where the licensed premises has been operating in a manner detrimental to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the City of Jersey City.  
§ 157-8. - Operating requirements. [ ] 
A.  The licensed premises shall be fully accessible to authorized members of the Department of Public Safety and the various departments of the city having regulatory jurisdiction over the premises. 
B.  No licensee may offer obscene or pornographic entertainment (as defined in this chapter and in Chapter 251 of the Jersey City Municipal Code). 
C.  All licenses under this chapter shall be posted securely in a conspicuous place at the main entrance to the licensed premises. 
D.  Any licensee under this chapter must also comply with any other relevant permit requirement such as those required by the Department of Public Safety and Division of Health. 
E.  If a licensee charges patrons for parking, the fifteen-percent parking tax required under §§ 304-1 through 304-3 must be paid to the City. 
F.  The licensee shall designate a person(s) as supervisor(s) of events and shall register his or her name with the Director. A supervisor shall be present during the dance or entertainment to assure that it is conducted in an orderly manner.  
§ 157-9. - Suspension or revocation; Director of Public Safety or the Director of the Division of Commerce authorized. [ ] 
A.  Pursuant to a ten-day notice in writing to the licensee and after a hearing, the Director may suspend or revoke any license if: 
(1)  The owner, partner, or agent has been convicted of a crime under federal or state law; 
(2)  Has violated any of the provisions of this chapter; 
(3)  Has been found responsible for any acts constituting a breach of the peace or a public nuisance; 
(4)  Where the Director finds the operation of the licensed premises detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the people of the city. 
B.  The Director of Commerce or the Director of Public Safety may suspend any license on an emergent basis for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days after a hearing pursuant to two days' notice to the licensee for any of the grounds listed in Subsection A if the Director finds in addition that protection of the public health, safety or welfare requires an immediate suspension.  
§ 157-10. - Interpretative guide. 
A.  Severability. If any provision, or portion of a provision, of this chapter, or its application to any person or circumstances, shall be held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this chapter, or the application of the provision to other persons or circumstances, shall not be affected. 
B.  Preemption. Notwithstanding any other provisions of the Code, the conditions and restrictions placed on entertainment and dance in this Chapter supersede any other provisions found in other chapters of the Jersey City Municipal Code.  
§ 157-10.1. - Variance.[Amended 1-25-2012 by Ord. No. 12-001] 
With the exception of variances from the requirements of Chapter 345 (Zoning) and hours of operation and decibel levels, an applicant or licensee may request a variance from the strict compliance with a specific requirement of this article by requesting same in writing to the Business Administrator. The application should contain all pertinent details, together with documentation, which the applicant or licensee wishes considered. The approval or denial of the application for variance shall be at the discretion of the Business Administrator and shall not be approved absent a showing that strict compliance with the specific requirement would create a practical hardship for the applicant and that the proposed alternative will in no way jeopardize the health, safety, and welfare of the public. The City Council shall be notified of any variance granted by the Business Administrator hereunder.  
§ 157-11. - Mary McLeod Bethune Life Center. [Added 9-22-2004 by Ord. No. 03-163] 
Cross reference— Violations and penalties, § 160-6. 
A.  Permit required. No person or non-profit organization shall be permitted to use any part of the second floor of the Mary McLeod Bethune Life Center also known as, Martin Luther King Drive Community Center [Center], unless it first submits an application, obtains a permit and pays all required fees. 
B.  Organizations and uses permitted. 
1.  Use of the Center is strictly limited to community related social, educational, cultural, and recreational uses. Any political, partisan, sectarian, denominational, religious, commercial, business, trade, manufacturing, retailing or any profit making use of the Center is strictly prohibited. 
2.  Only persons and non-profit organizations may use the Center, on a first come first serve basis. 
3.  No person or non-profit organizations may use the Center for more than six (6) Sessions [each Session being no more than five (5) hours] per calendar year. 
4.  Any transfer or assignment of the permit, in whole or in part, with or without consideration, is strictly prohibited. 
C.  Procedure. 
1.  An application must be completed and filed in the Office of the Business Administrator at the City's office located at the Center, at least fifteen (15) but not more than one hundred eighty (180) days prior to the requested date of the event. Every application shall be date and time stamped at the Center as it is received. 
2.  Within ten (10) business days, the applicant should be called and/or sent a fax of the decision of the Business Administrator which would indicate the City's denial, approval or approval with amendment(s). 
3.  (a)  If denied, the process ends. 
(b)  If approved or approved with conditions, the procedure continues with the applicant planning its event and co-coordinating any logistical needs with the Business Administrator. 
(c)  The Business Administrator will forward all approved and approved with conditions to the City Clerk 
4.  Should the City determine that the proposed use poses a potential threat to the health, safety or welfare of persons or property, the City may deny, cancel or terminate the permit. 
D.  Application. The application shall contain at a minimum, the following information: 
1.  The names, address and telephone numbers of the applicant seeking to use the Center. 
2.  The name, address and telephone number of the person responsible for the event. 
3.  In the case of a nonprofit organization, the responsible officers of the organization. The non-profit organization must also submit proof that is recognized as tax exempt under 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
4.  A detailed description of activities planned. 
5.  The approximate number of persons who will be present (number cannot exceed the maximum permitted under State and local law). 
6.  The requested date of use. 
7.  The hours the event will start and terminate. 
8.  A description of any equipment, sound amplification equipment, banners, signs, or other attention-getting devices to be used in connection with the event. 
9.  If the event is designed to be held by, or on behalf of, any person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall file a letter from that person with the application, authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his behalf. 
10.  Proof of insurance as to type and amount as required by this ordinance or the City's Risk Manager. 
11.  Any additional information that the City finds reasonably necessary or appropriate. 
E.  Fees. 
1.  A non-refundable application fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) to cover administrative costs of reviewing the application and issuing the permit, must be paid at the time the application is filed with the City. 
2.  For each five-hour period [Session] or part thereof for the use of a single room (consisting of approximately one thousand one hundred (1,100) square feet) or any part thereof, the fees shall be calculated on a per room per Session basis in accordance with the following schedule: 
Room Fees* 
Six Rooms 	$600.00 	$300.00 Deposit 
Five Rooms 	$500.00 	$250.00 Deposit 
Four Rooms 	$400.00 	$200.00 Deposit 
Three Rooms 	$300.00 	$150.00 Deposit 
Two Rooms 	$200.00 	$100.00 Deposit 
One Room 	$100.00 	$50.00 Deposit 
Cleaning Fees* 
	$100.00 	[Returned only if room(s) are cleaned] 
Additional Kitchen Fees* 
To Warm Food 	$100.00 	($50.00 returned only if kitchen is cleaned) 
		
To Cook Food 	$150.00 	($50.00 returned only if kitchen is cleaned) 
 
*These fees may be waived for City Events or for events conducted by nonprofit organizations that provide certain community services, upon the recommendation of the Mayor and approval of the Municipal Council, in accordance with criteria to be approved by the City. 
3.  A non-refundable deposit equal to twenty-five percent (25%) of the full amount of the fees shall be due at the time the permit is approved. The balance of the fee and cleaning deposit and, if applicable, the kitchen cleaning deposit, shall be paid in full no later than seven (7) days before the Event. 
4.  The applicant shall be responsible for providing security for its activities. There shall also be a requirement to engage police officers if police services are determined to be required by Martin Luther King Center Director, after consultation with the Department of Public Safety. An applicant determined to need police services shall be required to pay for such costs and submit proof to the City that it has arranged for such police services no later than seven (7) days before the Event. [ Amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] 
F.  Regulations governing the use of the center. 
1.  Event times and duration are to be determined by the Martin Luther King Center Director, in consultation with the Business Administrator. 
2.  No fee may be charged to individuals for admission to the Event. However, if disclosed in the application, fees may be charged by a bona fide fund raiser. 
3.  The applicant must provide general liability insurance naming the City, its agents, servants and employees as an additional insureds in the minimal amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). The applicant shall provide such additional insurance as to type and amount, as may be determined by the City's Risk Manager. A copy of the Certificate of Insurance must be submitted at least seven (7) days prior to the Event. However, if the applicant can demonstrate that they are unable to obtain insurance the Business Administrator and Risk Management may waive the requirement. 
4.  The sale of alcoholic beverages at the Center is strictly prohibited. 
However, there is a limited exception to the prohibition against the sale of alcoholic beverages if the Event is for a bona fide fund raiser and the applicant or its caterer has a liquor license. In that event, then no later than seven (7) days before the Event, the applicant will be required to submit a copy of the liquor license and proof of liquor liability insurance. The liquor liability insurance must specifically insure the City and its agents, servants and employees in an amount to be determined by the City's Risk Manager. 
5.  No sound equipment may be used at decibel levels that exceed the levels imposed by City Ordinance or other law. 
6.  At the conclusion of the event, all tables, chairs, podiums, and any other equipment should be arranged in the way they were prior to the event. 
7.  Any garbage generated should be disposed of in the receptacles provided. 
8.  The property must be left in broom clean condition. 
9.  Failure to abide by any of these regulations will result in the immediate termination of a permit and the denial of any future permit from the applicant for one (1) year.  
Chapter 160 - FEES AND CHARGES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
History— Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City at time of adoption of Code; June 14, 1995 by Ord. No. 95-050; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. Amendments noted where applicable. 
Cross reference— Public assemblies, Ch. 90; Construction Codes, Uniform, Ch. 131; taxicabs, limousines and transportation network company vehicles, Ch. 307. 
 
§ 160-1. - Fee schedule established. 
Fees shall be as follows: 
A.  Chapter 3, Administration of Government, Office of the City Clerk. 
(1)  (a)  Searches of marriage and civil union license records. 
[1]  Certified copy: $15. 
[2]  Certified copy of marriage and civil union license application: $15. 
[3]  Additional copies: $5. 
[4]  Additional fee for each additional year searched: $1. 
(b)  Performance of marriage or civil union ceremony by Mayor, Deputy Mayor, or Municipal Judge, or any City of Jersey City employee authorized by the laws of the State of New Jersey to perform marriages or civil unions. 
[Amended 6-13-2007 by Ord. No. 07-095] 
[1]  Where one or both parties are City of Jersey City residents: $52. 
[2]  Where neither party is a City of Jersey City resident: $72. 
(c)  Searches of death certificate records. 
[1]  Certified copy of death certificate: $15. 
[2]  Additional copies: $5. 
(d)  Searches of birth certificate records. 
[1]  Certified copy of birth certificate: $15. 
[2]  Additional copies: $5. 
(e)  Corrections fee for marriage, death and birth records: $15 per record. [Amended 4-25-2007 by Ord. No. 07-073; 4-14-1999 by Ord. No. 99-047; 1-28-2004 by Ord. No. 04-007; 8-16-2006 by Ord. No. 06-098] 
(2)  Petitions for franchise ordinances or street vacation ordinances: nonrefundable fee of $2500. [Amended 9-27-2006 by Ord. No. 06-108] 
(3)  Fees for special service charges and special charges under the New Jersey Open Public Records Act [Added 10-12-2005 by Ord. No. 05-143 ] : 
(a)  Ordinary requests for information. 
The statutory fee schedule shall apply to routine requests under OPRA. The fees of N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5 are hereby incorporated herein as such fee schedule presently exists or as such fees might appear in future modifications or amendments of the statute. 
(b)  No research or interpretation may be compelled. 
Nothing in this subsection shall require the custodian of documents or any other municipal official to examine, analyze, tabulate, or interpret documents which are subject to production under OPRA. 
(c)  Special service charge/special charges authorized. 
A.  Charges authorized: 
The City Clerk or deputy custodian of documents qualifying for mandatory production as "governmental records" under OPRA shall be entitled to special service charges and/or special charges as set forth in this subsection. 
B.  Requests to be in writing: 
Any requests for documents shall be made to the City Clerk in writing and preferably on the form established by the City Clerk for such purposes. 
C.  Advance notice of fees, special service charges and special charges; deposit: 
Any requestor of government records which may be eligible for the imposition of a fee, special charge or special service charge under this subsection shall receive advance notice of the amount of fees and charges before any work is started. The City Clerk shall require prepayment of such charges before causing the work to begin. 
(d)  Fees, special service charges and special charges when charged; amounts authorized. 
A.  Duplication or other work beyond capability of municipal-in-house work force: 
Whenever the in-house municipal work force or available municipal equipment is insufficient to duplicate or produce government records in a timely fashion, the City Clerk may cause such duplication or production to be accomplished by outside vendors such as copy centers or producers of digital images. If the costs of such duplication or production charged by such vendors exceeds the routine charges set forth in N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5, the actual direct cost of same without any additional surcharge for labor costs shall be paid. 
B.  Special service charge authorized: 
Whenever government records cannot be reproduced by regular copying equipment or fulfillment of the request would involve extraordinary time and effort (for example, where a large number of records must be recovered from storage or substantive staff time is required to review, redact, sort and/or assemble records), charges may be imposed as follows: 
1.  The actual cost (materials and supplies but not staff labor) of duplication or reproduction; plus 
2.  A special service charge of $32.00 per hour or the actual direct cost of labor (if less) shall be imposed for each hour of extraordinary time predicted to be utilized to respond to the request. 
C.  Rates for in-house production of prints or blueprints: 
Any prints or blueprints produced in-house in response to a governmental records request shall be produced for $28.00 per page. 
D.  Digital records: 
If a request for governmental records involves production or conversion of digital or computerized records or film which is: 
1.  In a medium not routinely used by the agency (i.e., electronic or film); 
2.  Not routinely developed or maintained by an agency; or 
3.  Requiring a substantial amount of manipulation or programming of information technology. 
E.  The requestor shall pay fees and special charges incurred by the City if the conversion is done directly by the City as follows: 
1.  Direct costs (no overhead) to comply with the request; plus 
2.  Special charges; the lesser of the cost of technology and labor actually incurred or $45.00 per hour. 
(e)  Notice of requestor of copyright laws. 
A.  The City may be compelled by New Jersey Law to produce or duplicate governmental records but no compliance with these legal obligations shall be deemed to constitute a license, sublicense or waiver of copyright laws. 
B.  The City Clerk shall give the following notice to any requestor of governmental records. 
  NOTICE-COPYRIGHT LAWS 
You must comply with U.S. copyright laws. These laws may restrict your right to use, duplicate or modify the records provided to you by the City of Jersey City. You should consult your own legal counsel on this since severe civil and criminal penalties for violation of copyright laws are provided. 
(f)  Waivers for governmental educational requestor. 
The Mayor, Clerk or City Council (by Resolution may waive the fees or other charges otherwise chargeable if the requestor, of governmental records is a governmental or educational entity. 
(4)  Photocopies, microfilm copies and blueprint obtained from the Division of Engineering, Traffic and Transportation shall be subject to the following fees: 
(a)  Photocopying and microfilm. 
[1]  Up to 99 pages: $0.50 per page. 
[2]  Over 100 pages: $0.25 per page. 
[3]  Bound copies: $5 per copy. 
[4]  Mailed copies (up to 99 pages): $5. 
[5]  Mailed copies (per 500 pages): $10. 
(b)  Blueprints. 
[1]  Blueprints (up to two feet by three feet]: $5 per sheet. 
[2]  Blueprints (larger): $1 per square foot. 
[3]  Standard details: $5 per set. 
[4]  Sewer maps (sets): $50 per set. 
[5]  Mailed prints (per 10 sheets): $10. 
[6]  Mailed prints (per 50 sheets): $25. 
[7]  Bound copies: $5 per set. 
(c)  Documents and records search: $20. 
(d)  The following conditions apply to the above charges: 
[1]  Costs are not to apply to contractors working directly for Jersey City or copies for other Jersey City departments. 
[2]  Reference documents are not to leave City Hall. 
(5)  Service charges and Tax Collector fees. 
[Amended 4-26-1995 by Ord. No. 95-027; 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052; 6-24-2015 by Ord. No. 15-082 ] 
(a)  Service charge for returned checks. Pursuant to the authority granted by N.J.S.A. 40:5-18, the City shall impose a service charge in the amount of twenty dollars ($20.00) for each check or other written instrument which is tendered to the City for payment on account of taxes or any other fee, charge, or indebtedness owed to the City, which check or written instrument was returned for insufficient funds. Further, any future payment to be tendered to the City by the payer of any such check or written instrument which was returned for insufficient funds shall only be made in cash, United States Postal Service money order, bank certified check or bank cashier's check. 
(i)  Tax Collector. The service charge for each item returned shall be applied to the outstanding account balance of any account owed the City for any tax, fee, water and sewer charge, or special assessment, and the service charge authorized by this section shall be included by the Tax Collector on whatever list of delinquent accounts is prepared for the enforcement of the lien. 
(ii)  Treasurer. For fees/charges due to all other Departments and Divisions of the City, the check or written instrument returned for insufficient funds shall be forwarded promptly to the office of the Treasurer. Upon receipt of the replacement funds and service charge, the Treasurer shall forward the fees/charges to the respective Department/Division and the service charge assessed for the returned check or written instrument shall be credited to the appropriate revenue account. 
(iii)  The Business Administrator, at his or her discretion, is authorized to waive the provision above requiring future payments to be tendered in cash, United States Postal Service money order, bank certified check or bank cashier's check on a case by case basis after consideration of all pertinent facts and circumstances. Such waiver shall be communicated in writing. 
(b)  Fees to be imposed by the Tax Collector. 
(i)  For a redemption statement: $20. 
(ii)  For issuance of duplicate tax bills: $5. 
(iii)  For written responses to inquiries regarding tax payments: $5. 
(iv)  For a duplicate certificate of redemption: $10. 
(v)  For issuance of a duplicate tax sale certificate: $100. 
(6)  Fees for documents maintained by the Office of Assessments. 
(a)  Documents requested in person at the office of the Tax Assessor: $0.25 per page. 
(b)  Documents requested in writing: $10 per line item. 
(7)  Fees for the Department of Public Works. 
[Added 9-28-2016 by Ord. No. 16-140 ; 1-25-2017 by Ord. No. 17-004 ] 
(a)  Rental of containers in three sizes: 10 cubic yard (cy), 20 cubic yards, and 30 cubic yards. 
[l]  10cy: $435 includes two tons maximum of solid waste/rubbish. 
[2]  20cy: $530 includes three tons maximum of solid waste/rubbish. 
[3]  30cy: $650 includes five tons maximum of solid waste/rubbish. 
[4]  Containers are rented for a period of three days and include one pick-up and disposal fee. If the container is filled in less time and needs to be returned, a payment is required for a second container and related disposal fee. 
[5]  Additional fees: 
a.  An additional coverage fee of $115 per ton will be assessed for containers exceeding the maximum tonnage; 
b.  An additional fee of approximately one-third of the cost of the container will be assessed for each day a container is kept over the allotted three days: $145 for a 10cy container; $180 for a 20cy container; and $220 for a 30cy container. 
[6]  Reserved. 
[7]  A fee of $32 will be assessed if a check bounces or a credit card is declined when processing payment of overage fees. This fee will also be assessed on all charge-backs. 
[8]  Non-profit organizations are eligible to receive roll-off container service at no charge (contingent upon adequate funding being available in the City budget). The non-profit organizations are block associations and civic associations. The container will be used only for community participation and not personal use. The container will be used only for general clean-up of the event. The container is not to be used for improvements or rehabilitation, or properties and buildings. Any construction and demolition waste found in the container will result in the organization being charged for the disposal rate of $115 per ton and a haulage fee of $225. Qualified organizations are eligible to receive one container per year. 
(b)  Rental of equipment. All organizations are prohibited from using equipment rented from the Department of Public Works to promote and/or advertise political campaigns or candidates being endorsed or elected by voters. The sole purpose of the usage of such equipment is to promote and/or advertise ethnic, cultural and other neighborhood festivities/parades by all organizations on a "first come first serve" basis throughout Jersey City. A minimum rental time of four hours is required and will only be issued pending availability. The equipment rental fees are: 
[1]  Dumpster: $300; 
[2]  Litter patrol - 4 hours: $60; 
[3]  Litter patrol - 8 hours: $120; 
[4]  Mechanical street sweeper - Monday through Friday: $110; 
[5]  Mechanical street sweeper - Saturday: $165; 
[6]  Mechanical street sweeper - Sunday: $220; 
[7]  25cy garbage packer truck - Monday through Friday: $110; 
[8]  25cy garbage packer truck - Saturday: $165; 
[9]  25cy garbage packer truck - Sunday: $220. 
(c)  Rental of floats and bleachers. The floats and bleachers are to be driven only by a City employee with a commercial driver's license (CDL) endorsement. A minimum rental time of four hours is required and will only be issued pending availability. The hourly rate shall commence one hour prior to the event and conclude one hour after the event to allow for set-up and break-down. The rental fees are: 
[1]  Driver: $50 per hour; 
[2]  Small float - Monday through Friday: $200; 
[3]  Small float - Saturday: $250; 
[4]  Small float - Sunday: $325; 
[5]  Tractor trailer float - Monday through Friday: $250; 
[6]  Tractor trailer float - Saturday: $300; 
[7]  Tractor trailer float- Sunday: $375; 
[8]  Bleachers - Monday through Friday: $200; 
[9]  Bleachers - Saturday: $250; 
[10]  Bleachers - Sunday: $325. 
(d)  Rental supplies. The rental of supplies requires a deposit covering the total amount of the supplies. The failure to return all of the supplies within ten days will result in the forfeiture of the deposit or a portion thereof. Prices are subject to change as a result of State contract pricing. The rental fees are: 
[1]  Shovels: $25 each; 
[2]  Barrels: $40 each; 
[3]  Fan rakes: $15 each; 
[4]  Metal rakes: $20 each; 
[5]  Push brooms: $15 each; 
[6]  Garbage bags: $80 per case of 200 or $0.40 each. 
(8)  Photocopying fees and fees for documents on file in the Division of City Planning. 
[Amended 9-13-2000 by Ord. No. 00-113; 4-23-2008 by Ord. No. 08-045; 9-28-2016 by Ord. No. 16-140 ] 
(a)  Photocopying documents on file. 
[1]  One to 10 pages: $0.75 per page. 
[2]  Eleven to 20 pages: $0.50 per page. 
[3]  All pages over 20: $0.25 per page. 
(b)  In lieu of the photocopying fees specified above, the Division of City Planning shall charge the fees listed below for the following documents: 
[1]  Blight reports and/or redevelopment plans 
a.  $10.00 per report or plan; 
b.  $20 cd/DVD of plan or report; 
c.  11? × 17? print of plan or report. 
$20 for a plan of less than 100 pages 
$40 for a plan of 100 - 199 pages 
$60 for a plan of 200 or more pages 
[2]  Land Development Ordinance: $40.00 
[3]  Zoning Map: $20.00. 
[4]  Master Plan: $60.00. 
[5]  Downtown Development Plan: $10.00. 
[6]  Flood Letter: $20.00. 
[7]  Building Age Determination Letter: $40.00. 
(c)  Computer-generated maps and pictures in color or black and white 
Cost 	Paper Size 
$20.00 	C, D, E 
$10.00 	Tabloid 
$ 5.00 	Legal 
$ 5.00 	Letter 
 
(9)  Fees for services extended or materials distributed by the Department of Public Safety. 
[Amended 8-13-2003 by Ord. No. 03-104; 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ; 9-28-2016 by Ord. No. 16-140 ] 
(a)  Photographs. 
[1]  Up to five: $20 each. 
[2]  Each additional: $10. 
(b)  Application processing for and permits to purchase firearms: $10 each. 
(c)  Clearance visas and letters of good conduct, except that no fee shall be charged where application is made by bona fide religious or charitable organizations: $25. 
(d)  Fingerprints for bartender permits or other permits where fingerprints are required: $20. 
(e)  Fingerprinting fee for individuals for any purpose except municipal employment. 
[1]  Up to three cards: $20. 
[2]  Each additional card: $3. 
(f)  Records searching fee: $5. 
(g)  Copies of all records unless otherwise indicated. 
[1]  One to 10 pages, per page: $0.75. 
[2]  Eleven to 20 pages, per page: $0.50. 
[3]  All pages over 20, per page: $0.25. 
(h)  Computer research and production of statistical or historical reports of crimes, offenses, accidents or incidents occurring at a specified place or area over a specified period of time, which reports are not otherwise produced for Departmental purposes or by requirement of law: $75 per hour (plus cost of reports at above rates). 
(i)  Discovery pursuant to New Jersey Court Rules 7:4-2(h) and 3:13-3: $10. 
Accident Reports: 
[1]  Initial Report: $5 
[2]  Each additional page: $1 
(j)  Investigation Reports, Supplemental Investigation Reports, Arrest Reports, Statements: 
[1]  Initial Report: $5 
[2]  Each additional page: $1 
(k)  Mail-in Request: 
[1]  Initial request: $10 (plus stamped self-addressed envelope) 
[2]  Each additional page: $1 
(Applies to both Accident and Investigative Reports) 
(l)  Searches (when no file number is available): $10 
[1]  Each additional page: $1 
(Request form will be filled out). 
The $10 search fee is non-refundable, even if no report is located. 
(m)   Cost of Media: 
See CCTV rates below 
Research fee for all requests: $25 per hour 
(Research fee non-refundable, even if incident is not captured on tape. Research fee does not include Cost of Media.) 
	Cost of Media 
T-120 VHS Video Tapes: ..... 	$3 each 
Zip Disks (100 mb): ..... 	$10 each 
Zip Disks (250 mb): ..... 	$13 each 
CD-R Disks (750 mb) ..... 	$1 each 
DVD-R Disks (4.7 gb): ..... 	$5 each 
 
(10)   Fees for traffic engineering services or materials. 
[Added 5-24-1995 by Ord. No. 95-049; amended 12-9-1998 by Ord. No. 98-163; 9-28-2016 by Ord. No. 16-140 ] 
(a)  The following fees are hereby established for certain services extended and materials distributed by the Division of Engineering and Transportation: 
[1]  A minimum research fee of $25 for compiling, reproducing or preparing documents, memoranda and reports relating to traffic accidents, traffic control devices and other traffic related matters. In addition, the following schedule of fees shall also apply to the preparing of said documents: 
Item 	Photocopying Fee 
99 pages 	$0.50 per page 
Over 100 pages 	$0.25 per page 
Bound copies 	$5. per copy 
Mailed copies, up to 99 pages 	$5. 
Mailed copies, per 500 pages 	$10. 
 
[2]  Painting of standard size driveways up to 12 feet: $20, $1 for each additional foot. 
[3]  Temporary EMERGENCY NO PARKING signs sold over the counter: $2 each. Said signs installed by city forces: $25 each. 
[4]  Promulgation fee for installing and maintaining loading zone signs and curb markings: $150 for each sign/post installation; $75 for sign installation. 
[5]  The application for a permit for any containers, dumpsters and receptacles to be placed on the street shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount of $10 per day. 
(b)  The above fees shall not apply to services or material rendered to any other government agencies (federal, state, county or municipal departments) or any nonprofit organization, nursing home or hospital. 
(c)  The above fees shall not apply to contractors working directly for Jersey City on behalf of the city. 
(d)  The Municipal Engineer is authorized to waive the fee for driveway markings if it is determined that the original driveway markings were eliminated by repaving contracts undertaken by the municipality or utility companies. 
(e)  The Municipal Engineer may recommend to the Municipal Council that the promulgation fee be waived for the installation of loading zone signs if it is determined that the loading zone was established for the sole purpose of improving traffic safety or capacity at said locations. 
(11)   The following fees are as provided by Jersey City amendments to the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code 
[Amended 3-25-2009 by Ord. No. 09-030; 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ; 9-28-2016 by Ord. No. 16-140 ; 2-27-2019 by Ord. No. 19-011 ]: 
a.  Life Hazard Use Fee assessments. The following schedules of fees shall be charged for life hazard use inspections and for permits authorized by the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code on an annual basis. 
	Type 	Fee 
1. 	Aa 	$70 
2. 	Ab 	$103 
3. 	Ac 	$110 
4. 	Ad 	$123 
5. 	Ae 	$138 
6. 	Af 	$166 
7. 	Ag 	$208 
8. 	Ah 	$248 
9. 	Ai 	$331 
10. 	Bj 	$414 
11. 	Ba 	$110 
12. 	Bb 	$208 
13. 	Bc 	$331 
14. 	Bd 	$414 
15. 	Be 	$484 
16. 	Bf 	$591 
17. 	Bg 	$629 
18. 	Bh 	$787 
19. 	Bi 	$947 
20. 	Bj 	$984 
21. 	Bk 	$1,184 
22. 	Bl 	$1,378 
23. 	Bm 	$1,537 
24. 	Bn 	$1,967 
25. 	Bo 	$2,360 
26. 	Bp 	$828 
27. 	Ca 	$787 
28. 	Cb 	$944 
29. 	Cc 	$1,022 
30. 	Cd 	$1,101 
31. 	Ce 	$1,259 
32. 	Cf 	$450 
33. 	Cg 	$1,573 
34. 	Ch 	$1,976 
35. 	Ci 	$2,375 
36. 	Da 	$1,568 
37. 	Db 	$2,375 
38. 	Dc 	$3,088 
 
1.  Where more than one life hazard use exists under one ownership at a given location, the highest life hazard use shall be registered at full fee and subsequent life hazard uses at one-half the scheduled fee. 
2.  No public or private K-12 educational facility shall pay more than one $138.00 life hazard use registration fee, regardless of the number or type of life hazard uses contained within the building. 
3.  No camp facility accommodating six or more children of school age shall pay more than one $123.00 life hazard use registration fee, regardless of the number or type of life hazard uses contained within the premises. 
4.  Each life hazard use that is separately owned shall be registered at full fee. 
b.  Commercial/Industrial Registration fees: 
Includes all buildings of non-residential type not classified as life hazard use by the Uniform Fire Code. 
a. 	Type NBa 	$75.00 	Buildings not exceeding 1,000 square feet, with or without attached dwelling units. 
b. 	Type NBb 	$150.00 	Buildings in excess of 1,000 square feet not exceeding 3,000 square feet, with or without attached dwelling units. 
c. 	Type NBc 	$225.00 	Buildings in excess of 3,000 square feet not exceeding 9,000 square feet. 
d. 	Type NBd 	$300.00 	Buildings in excess of 9,000 square feet not exceeding 15,000 square feet. 
e. 	Type NBe 	$375.00 	Buildings in excess of 15,000 square feet not exceeding 50,000 square feet. 
f. 	Type NBf 	$450.00 	Buildings in excess of 50,000 square feet not exceeding 100,000 square feet. 
g. 	Type NBg 	$525.00 	Buildings in excess of 100,000 square feet not exceeding 200.000 square feet. 
h. 	Type NBh 	$600.00 	Buildings in excess of 200,000 square feet not exceeding 300,000 square feet. 
i. 	Type NBi 	$625.00 	For each additional 100,000 square feet or part thereof beyond 300,000 square feet. 
 
NOTE: For building size, each floor, story or level shall be calculated as separate areas for total square feet of gross building area. 
c.  Permit Fees. 
	
Type 1 Permit ..... 	$125.00 
Type 2 Permit ..... 	$250.00 
Type 3 Permit ..... 	$375.00 
Type 4 Permit ..... 	$500.00 
Type 5 Permit ..... 	$1,500.00 
 
d.  Other fees as follows: 
1.  The delivery of flammable and combustible liquids: 
All tank vehicles delivering flammable or combustible liquids to premises within the City of Jersey City are required to be registered with the Jersey City Fire Prevention Division and shall be subject to inspection at any time; providing that no registration shall be required for deliveries made to bulk plants having suitable fire control equipment. 
Registration fee ..... $100.00 
Fee per tank vehicle ..... $40.00 
2.  Welding and cutting operations: 
All welding and cutting operations shall be required to be registered and obtain a Type 1 Permit per vehicle with the Fire Prevention Division for use throughout the City of Jersey City. 
Registration fee ..... $50.00 
3.  Smoke detector and carbon monoxide alarm compliance: 
a.  If more than ten (10) business days prior to change of occupancy ..... $60.00 
b.  Within four (4) to ten (10) business days prior to change of occupancy ..... $90.00 
c.  Fewer than four (4) business days prior to change of occupancy ..... $125.00 
4.  Property search fee ..... $40.00 
5.  Fire incident report: 
Two (2) pages or less ..... $5.00 
For additional pages over two (2) ..... $2.00 
6.  Fire investigation reports: 
Two (2) pages or less ..... $5.00 
For additional pages over two (2) ..... $2.00 
7.  Fire Code status inspection is as follows: 
a.  One (1) to nine (9) family residential ..... $150.00 
b.  Ten (10) family or more residential ..... $250.00 
c.  Commercial ..... $250.00 
d.  High rise building ..... $350.00 
e.  Hotel, motel, rooming house ..... $350.00 
f.  Factory or industrial complex ..... $350.00 
g.  Condominium (common area) ..... $150.00 
8.  Apparatus stand-by, per hour per piece of apparatus ..... $300.00 
Includes fire apparatus utilized for fireworks, helicopter operations (minimum two apparatus), standpipe flow tests or any other operation deemed necessary by the Fire Official that requires Department of Public Safety monitoring. It shall be the discretion of the Fire Official as to the number of apparatus required. 
9.  Fire suppression costs: 
An owner who has been given notice of a violation shall be responsible for a penalty not exceeding one hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000.00) or the costs of suppressing any fire which directly or indirectly results from the violation, whichever is greater. To create an obligation, the violation need not have been the initial cause of the fire; it is sufficient if the violation's existence has increased the intensity of the fire or the difficulty of its extinguishment. This penalty is independent of any penalty issued in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.12 for failure to abate the violation. Suppression costs may be imposed for a fire which occurs during the period allowed for abatement. 
The suppression costs shall include, but not be limited to, costs of labors, equipment and material incurred by the Department of Public Safety involved in suppressing the fire, as well as any other actual expenses, including attorney fees, incurred for the collection of the penalty. If a compensatory penalty in excess of one hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000.00) is sought, the cost of suppression shall be certified to the Fire Official of the area in which the fire occurred by the chiefs of the suppression units involved. 
The fire official shall serve notice on the owner and order payment. The notice shall state the violations justifying imposition of the penalty. If payment is not received within thirty (30) days, the Fire Official shall pursue collection in the manner specified herein for penalties. The monies collected shall be paid to the City of Jersey City and appropriated in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.12A(b). 
(12)   Commercial/industrial registration fees. 
[Added 9-23-2014 by Ord. No. 14-117 ; 9-28-2016 by Ord. No. 16-140 ; 2-27-2019 by Ord. No. 19-011 ] 
All commercial/industrial locations not registered as life hazard use under the State of New Jersey Uniform Fire Code, shall be registered as a non-life hazard use with the Fire Prevention Bureau, and shall be inspected on an annual basis. The annual fee for this service will be fifty dollars ($50.00) and shall be paid by the business owner. 
Description 	Annual Fee 
Commercial/Industrial 	$50.00 
 
(13)   Fee chart. 
[Added 9-23-2014 by Ord. No. 14-117 ; 9-28-2016 by Ord. No. 16-140 ; 2-27-2019 by Ord. No. 19-011 ] 
Residential Multiple Dwelling: All Multiple Dwellings not registered as a life hazard use under the State of New Jersey Uniform Code, shall be registered as a non-life hazard use with the Fire Prevention Division and shall be inspected on an annual basis. The annual fee for this service will be as listed in the chart below and shall be paid by property owner: 
Number of Residential Units 	Annual Fee 
1—10 units 	$135.00 
11—20 units 	$225.00 
21—30 units 	$325.00 
31—40 units 	$425.00 
41 units and above 	$525.00 
 
Exceptions: one- or two-family homes - owner occupied. 
(14)   Permits and fees. 
[Added 9-23-2014 by Ord. No. 14-117 ; 9-28-2016 by Ord. No. 16-140 ; 2-27-2019 by Ord. No. 19-011 ] 
A.  Type 1A permit - $25.00; 
Type 1 - $125.00; 
Type 2 - $250.00; 
Type 3 - $375.00; 
Type 4 - $500.00; 
Type 5 - $1,500.00. 
B.  Certificate of Smoke Detector and Carbon Monoxide Alarm Compliance (CSDCMAC) - (N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.3) - Fee: $75.00. 
C.  Property search fee: $40.00. 
D.  Fire incident report: Two (2) pages or less, $5.00; for additional pages over two (2), $2.00. 
E.  Fire investigation reports: Two (2) pages or less, $5.00; for additional pages over two (2), $2.00. 
F.  Fire code status inspection: $150.00. 
G.  Apparatus stand-by, per hour per piece of apparatus: $500.00; includes fire apparatus utilized for fireworks, helicopter operations (minimum two (2) apparatus), standpipe flow tests or any other operation deemed necessary by the Fire Official that requires Fire Division monitoring. It shall be the discretion of the Fire Official as to the number of apparatus required. 
H.  Inspector stand-by: Supervisor, $60.00 per hour: Inspector, $50.00 per hour. 
I.  Fire boat stand-by: $500.00 per hour. 
J.  The use of flammable gas cylinders in food vending carts or vehicles in any amount shall require a type 1A permit for a $25.00 fee. 
A.1.   Chapter 5, Filming and Photography Permits. 
[Added 10-23-2013 by Ord. No. 13-116 ; amended 9-12-2018 by Ord. No. 18-101 ] 
(1)  Major film permit: $300.00 non-refundable application fee that shall be payable one time per calendar year; $1,500.00 a day, $1,000.00 expedited permit (fewer than four business days prior to shoot date). 
(2)  Intermediate film permit: $200.00 non-refundable application fee that shall be payable one time per calendar year; $1,000.00 a day, $1,000.00 expedited permit (fewer than four business days prior to shoot date). 
(3)  Minor film permit: $100.00 non-refundable application fee that shall be payable one time per calendar year; $250.00 a day; $1,000.00 expedited permit (fewer than four business days prior to shoot date). 
B.  Chapter 62, Records, Public Access to. The fee for records copied by the person requesting such records, as set forth in § 62-2, shall be $25 per day. 
B.1.   Chapter 83, Alarm Systems. 
[Added 3-22-1995 by Ord. No. 95-020; amended 4-24-1996 by Ord. No. 96-033; 12-15-1999 by Ord. No. 99-181] 
(1)  The annual fee for an alarm system: $20. 
C.  Chapter 84, Alcoholic Beverages. 
[Amended 5-23-2012 by Ord. No. 12-072 ] 
(1)  Annual license fee for plenary retail consumption license: two thousand seventy-three dollars ($2,073.00) effective as of June 1, 2016 for the license year that begins on July 1, 2016. Additionally, this annual license fee for the license year that begins on July 1, 2017 shall be two thousand four hundred eighty-eight dollars ($2,488.00) as of June 1, 2017 and for the license year that begins on July 1, 2018 shall be two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) as of June 1, 2018. 
[Amended 5-9-2012 by Ord. No. 12-057 ; 4-27-2016 by Ord. No. 16-068 ] 
(2)  Annual license fee for plenary retail distribution license: two thousand seventy-three dollars ($2.073.00) effective as of June 1, 2016 for the license year that begins on July 1, 2016. Additionally, this annual license fee for the license year that begins on July 1, 2017 shall be two thousand four hundred eighty-eight dollars ($2,488.00) as of June 1, 2017 and for the license year that begins on July 1, 2018 shall be two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) as of June 1, 2018. 
[Amended 12-15-1999 by Ord. No. 99-181; 5-9-2012 by Ord. No. 12-057 ; 4-27-2016 by Ord. No. 16-068 ] 
(3)  Processing fee for licensees desiring a change in the corporate structure of the corporate licensee (plenary retail consumption or distribution license): $60. 
[Amended 5-9-2012 by Ord. No. 12-057 ] 
(4)  Identification card, for each original issue and renewal: $10. 
[Amended 5-9-2012 by Ord. No. 12-057 ] 
(5)  Application fee for special permit to sell alcoholic beverages: $50. 
[Amended 12-15-1999 by Ord. No. 99-181; 5-9-2012 by Ord. No. 12-057 ] 
(6)  Hotels and motels: A new license may be issued to any person or corporation that operates a hotel or motel containing one hundred (100) guest sleeping rooms or who may hereafter construct and establish a new hotel or motel containing at least one hundred (100) guest sleeping rooms. The initial fee shall be twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) plus fifty dollars ($50.00) per guest room. The annual renewal fee thereafter shall be the same as the annual license fee for plenary retail consumption licenses. 
[Added 6-29-2016 by Ord. No. 16-103 ] 
D.  Chapter 87, Amusement Devices. 
[Amended 12-15-1999 by Ord. No. 99-181] 
(1)  Fee for operator's license: $375 for the first device and $25 for each additional device per year or any part of a year upon new application and $75 for the first device and $25 for each additional device per year or any part of a year upon renewal. 
(2)  Distributor's license: $500 per year or any part of a year. 
(3)  Issuance of a mobile amusement device license: $100. 
(4)  Music device operator's license: $50 per machine per year. 
(5)  Transfer fee for music device operator's license: $1. 
E.  Chapter 90, Animals. 
[Amended 1-26-2011 by Ord. No. 11-003; 4-23-2014 by Ord. No. 14-042 ; 4-8-2015 by Ord. No. 15-045 ] 
(1)  License to keep pigeons, chickens or other poultry: $50.00. 
(2)  Dog license fees shall be as follows: 
a.  Annual licenses: 
Neutered dogs, $10.00 per dog. 
Unneutered dogs, $20.00 per dog. 
b.  Three-year licenses: 
Neutered dogs $25.00 per dog. 
Unneutered dogs $50.00 per dog. 
c.  Late Fee - 30 days over May 1, $5.00. 
d.  Annual license fees - Kennel/dog day care: 
10 dogs or less, $10.00. 
More than 10 dogs, $25.00. 
e.  Annual license fee - Pet shop, $10.00 plus any state fees. 
f.  Shelter or pound, no fee. 
(3)  Registration fee: $1.00. 
(4)  Animal Population Control Fund fee: $3.00 per license. 
(5)  Pilot Clinic Fund fee: $0.20 per license. 
(6)  Registration fee for exotic, nongame or potentially dangerous species of wildlife: $50.00. 
(7)  Dog declared by the municipal court to be a "potentially dangerous dog" as defined in N.J.S.A. 4:19-23: $500.00. 
F.  Chapter 93, Auctioneers. 
(1)  Fee for auctioneer license: $100 per year or a fraction of a year. 
G.  Chapter 99, Barbershops and Beauty Parlors. 
(1)  Article I, Barbershops. 
(a)  Barbershop license application fee: $5. 
(b)  Fee for compiling specifications for barbershop: $10. 
(c)  Fee when equipment is moved from one location to another: $5. 
(d)  Barbershop license fee: $25. 
(2)  Article II, Beauty Shops. Inspection fee: $25 for each inspection. 
H.  Chapter 105, Building Demolition. 
(1)  Permit for use of city water in demolition work: $10. 
I.  Chapter 119, Certificates of Occupancy. 
(1)  Construction Code Official certificate and search fee: $10. 
J.  Chapter 122. Circuses, Carnivals and Public Assemblages. 
[Amended 5-28-2008 by Ord. No. 08-066; Amended 12-15-1999 by Ord. No. 99-181; 9-12-01 by Ord. No. 01-103] 
(1)  License fees for circuses, carnivals, festivals, and public assemblages, including but not limited to, rodeo and wild west shows, menageries, tent shows, parades, shooting galleries, and all other street entertainment, performances, and exhibitions; two hundred ($200) dollars per day, except for not for profit corporations which can provide evidence of a federal tax exemption pursuant to 26 USC 501 (c)(3); or provide a current registration as a non-profit New Jersey Corporation; twenty-five ($25) dollars per day. 
(2)  License fee for all concessions located within any circus, carnival or assemblage listed (1) above: twenty dollars ($20) per day unless it is part of a non-profit corporation paying a twenty-five dollar ($25) per day fee and is smaller than 15' x 15', then there shall be no fee. 
(3)  Block associations may apply for up to two block parties per year. Applications will be available from the Division of Cultural Affairs. In addition to approval by the Division of Cultural Affairs, an application must be approved by the J.C.P.D. District Commander for the district in which the block party is requested. Applications must be made at least three weeks in advance of the anticipated block party date and shall be accompanied by a fifty dollar ($50.00) application fee. 
(4)  Other than the above application fee, the block association shall be exempt from all other municipal fees required for the operation of a block party, e.g., street closing permit fee, but shall not be exempt from obtaining any such required licenses, permits, and approvals. 
K.  [Repealed 6-13-01 by Ord. No. 01-059] 
L.  Chapter 128, Condominium Conversions. 
(1)  Application fee: $30 per tenant. 
(2)  Appeal application fee: $150. 
M.  Chapter 131, Uniform Construction Code fees established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-126a. The fee for a construction permit shall be the sum of the fees for each subcode permit listed in the schedule of fees for building, plumbing, electrical and fire subcodes, plus the fees for miscellaneous permits listed in the schedule of miscellaneous fees. 
(1)  Building subcode schedule of fees. 
(a)  Fees for new construction shall be based upon the volume of the structure. Volume shall be computed in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.28. The new construction fee shall be in the amount of $.027 per cubic foot of volume for buildings and structures of all use groups except that the fee shall be $0.15 per cubic foot of volume for use groups A-1, A-2, A-2, A-4, A-5, F-1, F-2, S-1 and S-2. 
(b)  For renovations, alterations and repairs, for each one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) of estimated cost of work: $15. 
(c)  Minimum fee for short permit for renovations, alterations or repairs: $50. 
(d)  Minimum fee for plan permit for renovations, alterations and repairs: $100. 
(e)  Total fee for combination of new construction, additions to existing structures and repairs, renovations and alterations shall be the sum of the fees computed separately in accordance with Subsections M(1) through (5). 
(f)  Permits update fee and/or amendment to already issued permits to comply to fees M(l)(a) through (d) above, whatever is the case. 
[Added 4-26-1995 by Ord. No. 95-031]* 
* This ordinance also provided for the relettering of former Subsection M(1)(f) as (g). 
(g)  State of New Jersey training fee: $0.00265 per cubic foot volume of new construction. $0.00135 of cost of construction for alterations, renovations, and repairs. 
(h)  [repealed] 
(i)  Permit asbestos for removal: $50.00. 
(j)  Permit for lead paint abatement: $140.00. 
(k)  Exterior hoist ways: $260.00. 
(l)  Above ground swimming pool less than 550 square feet: $50.00, greater than 550 square feet: $100.00. In ground swimming pool less than 550 square feet: $75.00, greater than 550 square feet: $150.00. 
(m)   The fee for tents, in excess of 900 square feet or more than 30 feet in any dimension, shall be $92.00. 
(n)  Signs: $1.50 per square foot. 
(o)  Plan Review Fee shall be 25% of the estimated cost of permits which is nonrefundable. 
(p)  Prototype filing: Master plan pays full permit fees, each additional prototype is 80% of permit value. 
(q)  Emergency/Exit Lights: 
1-10 	$25.00 
Each additional 25 	$25.00 
 
(2)  Plumbing subcode schedule of fees. Plumbing fees for replacement permits, extension permits, new building permits, heating apparatus, cooling apparatus, ventilating and specialty apparatus shall be as follows: 
(a)  Plumbing fixtures: $10.00. Included but not limited to: water closet, urinal, bidet, bathtub, lavatory, shower, floor drain, sink, dishwasher, drinking fountain, washing machine hose bib, closet bend, coffee maker, gas appliance, gas service connection, ice maker, rain leader, roof drain, sprinkler head, sump pump, trap prime, washing machine tray, yard drain. 
(b)    
Water Heater 	$30.00 
Fuel Oil Piping 	$10.00 
Gas Piping 	$10.00 
Steam boiler 	$30.00 
Hot Water Boiler 	$30.00 
Sewer Pump 	$40.00 
Interceptor 	$40.00 
Separator 	$40.00 
Back flow Preventer 	$10.00 (domestic) 
Back flow Preventer 	$75.00 (fire service) 
Grease trap 	$40.00 
Sewer connection 	$40.00 
Water Service 	$30.00 (up to 2?) 
Water Service 	$60.00 (above 2?) 
Stacks 	$40.00 
 
(c)  Other plumbing fixtures which are included but not limited to: 
Closet Bend 	$10.00 	Coffee Maker 	$10.00 
Gas Appliance 	$10.00 	Gas Serv. Connection 	$10.00 
Ice Maker 	$10.00 	Rain Lea 	$10.00 
Roof Drain 	$10.00 	Sprinkler Head 	$10.00 
Sump Pump 	$ 10.00 	Trap Primer 	$10.00 
Wash Machine Tray 	$10.00 	Yard Drain 	$10.00 
A.C. Unit 	$30.00 	Active Solar System 	$35.00 
Catch Basin 	$40.00 	Dental Chair 	$40.00 
Cooling Equipment 	$40.00 	Garbage Disposal 	$15.00 
Fire Hydrant 	$40.00 	Grease Interceptor 	$30.00 
House Drain <10" 	$20.00 	House Drain >10" 	$30.00 
House Sewer 	$40.00 	Sewerage Ejector 	$40.00 
Soil Line Connection 	$40.00 	Fire Sprinkler Main 	$60.00 
Storm Sewer 	$40.00 	Storm Sewer Connec. 	$40.00 
Tankless Heater 	$25.00 	Ventilating Equjp. 	$30.00 
Vent Line 	$40.00 	Water Riser Lines 	$40.00 
 
(d)  Back flow cross connection 
[1]  Three hundred dollars ($300.00), which includes 3 external and 1 internal inspection. 
(3)  Electrical fixtures and devices: The fee shall be as follows: 
(a)  For the first block consisting of one to ten (10) receptacles, fixtures, or devices, the fee shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00); for each additional block consisting of up to twenty-five (25) receptacles, fixtures, or devices, the fee shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00). For the purpose of computing this fee, receptacles, fixtures or devices shall include lighting fixtures, wall switches, convenience receptacles, sensors, dimmers, alarm devices, smoke and heat detectors, communications outlets, light-standards eight feet or less in height including luminaries, emergency lights, electric signs, exit lights or similar electric fixtures and devices rated twenty (20) amperes or less including motors or equipment rated less than one horsepower (hp) or one kilowatt (kw). 
(b)  For each motor or electrical device rated from one hp or one kw to ten (10) hp or for each transformer or generator rated from one kw or one kva to ten (10) kw or ten (10) kva; for each replacement of wiring involving one branch circuit or part thereof; for each storable pool or hydro massage bath tub; for each under-water lighting fixture; for the household electric cooking equipment rated up to ten (10) kw; for each fire, security or burglar alarm control unit; for each receptacle rated from thirty (30) amperes to fifty (50) amperes; for each light standard greater than eight fee in height including luminaries; and for each communications closet, the fee shall be ten dollars ($10.00). 
(c)  For each motor or electrical device rated from greater than ten (10) hp or ten (10) kw to fifty (50) hp or fifty (50) kw for each service equipment, panel board, switch board, switch gear, motor-control-center, or disconnecting means rated two hundred twenty-five (225) amperes or less; for each transformer or generator rated from greater than ten (10) kw or ten (10) kva to forty-five (45) kw or forty-five (45) kva; for each electric sign rated from greater than twenty (20) amperes to two hundred (200) amperes including associated disconnecting means; for each receptacle rated more than fifty (50) amperes; and for each utility load management device, the fee shall be forty-five dollars ($45.00). 
(d)  For each motor or electrical device rated from greater than fifty (50) hp or fifty (50) kw to one hundred (100) hp or one hundred (100) kw; for each service equipment; panel board, switch board, switch gear, motor-control or disconnecting means rated from greater than two hundred twenty-five (225) amperes to one thousand (1,000) amperes; and for each transformer or generator rated from greater than forty-five (45) kw or forty-five (45) kva to one hundred twelve and one-half (112.5) kw or one hundred twelve and one-half (112.5) kva, the fee shall be $85.00. 
(e)  For each motor electrical device rated greater than one hundred (100) hp or one hundred (100) kw; for each service equipment, panel board, switch board, switch gear, motor control center or disconnecting means rated greater than one thousand (1,000) amperes; and for each transformer or generator rated greater than one hundred twelve and one-half (112.5) kw or one hundred twelve and one-half (112.5) kva, the fee shall be four hundred twelve dollars ($412.00). 
(f)  The fee charged for electrical work for each permanently installed private swimming pool as defined in the building subcode, spa, hot tub or fountain shall be a flat fee of forty-six dollars ($46.00) which shall include any required bonding, and associated equipment such as filter pumps, motors, disconnecting means, switches, required receptacles, and heaters, etc., except panel boards and under-water lighting fixtures. For public swimming pools, the fee shall be charged on the basis of number of electrical fixtures and rating of electrical devices involved in accordance with (c)2iii(l) through (5) above. 
(g)  The fee charged for the installation of single and multiple station smoke or heat detectors and fire, burglar or security alarm systems in any one or two-family dwelling shall be a flat fee of twenty-three dollars ($23.00) per dwelling unit. For fire, burglar and security alarm systems and detectors in buildings other than one or two-family dwellings, the fee shall be charged in accordance with (c)2iii (1) and (2) above. 
(h)  For installations consisting of multi-meter stack, the fee shall be based on the ampere rating of the main bus and not upon the number of meters or rating of the main bus and not upon the number of meters or rating of disconnects on the meter stack. Individual load side panel boards shall be charged in accordance with (c)2iii(3), (4), (5) above. There shall be no additional fee charged for the concurrent installation or individual feeder conductors. 
(i)  For motors or similar devices requiring concurrent installation of individual controls, relays and switches, the fee shall be based only upon the rating of the motor or device. There shall be no additional fee charged for the concurrent installation of individual circuit components, for example, controllers, starters, and disconnecting means. 
(j)  For electrical work requiring replacement of service entrance conductors or feeder conductors only, the fee shall be in accordance with (c)2iii(2) through (5) above based on the designated ampere rating of the over current device of the service or feeder. 
(k)  The fee charged for process equipment shall be based on the ampere rating of the over current device protecting the conductor feeding the process equipment or the cutoff device. 
(l)  For the purpose of computing these fees, all electrical and communications devices, utilization equipment and motors which are part of premises wiring, except those which are portable plug-in type, shall be counted. 
(m)  Leak detection system shall be charged one hundred dollars ($100.00) per system. 
(n)  Certificate of compliance for pools, storage pools, spas and hot tubs shall be per twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per year. 
(4)  Fire Subcode of fees. 
(a)  Fees for sprinklers (Dry & Wet) 
1-20 	heads 	$75.00 
20-100 	heads 	125.00 
Over 100 	heads 	$125.00 plus $1.00 for each additional head over 100 
 
(b)  Suppression systems 
Fire pump/Gpm Type 	$150.00 
Dry Pipe/Alarm Valves 	$150.00 
Pre Action Valves 	$150.00 
Standpipe 	$230.00 per riser 
 
(c)  Alarm devices (i.e., smoke, head pulls, water/flow), supervisory devices (i.e. tampers. low/high air), signaling devices (i.e., horn/strobes, bells), duct detectors, other alarm devices. 
1 to 10 devices 	$25.00 
11 to 20 devices 	$60.00 
For each additional device 	$1.00 
In addition to fees above, an additional charge of $100.00 per 10,000 square feet will be charged. 	
 
(d)  Pre-Engineered Systems 
Wet chemical 	$100.00 
Dry chemical 	$100.00 
CO2 Suppression 	$100.00 
Foam Suppression 	$150.00 
Halon Suppression 	$100.00 
Other 	$100.00 
 
(e)  Kitchen Exhaust system: $100.00 
(f)  Gas or oil fired devices: $50.00 
(g)  Tank installation or removal (above or below ground): 
200-600 gallons 	$100.00 
601-1100 gallons 	$150.00 
1101-2000 gallons 	$200.00 
Over 2000 gallons 	$300.00 
 
(h)  Leak Detection System: $100.00 
(i)  Minimum Permit Fee: $75.00 
(j)  Department of Public Safety Connection: $125.00 [ Amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] 
(k)  Incinerators & Crematoriums $365.00 
(5)  Elevator Subcode of Fees (New or Altered) 
(a) 	Traction or winding drum 	
	 1 to 10 floors 	$243.00 
	 Over 10 floors 	$405.00 
	Hydraulic 	$216.00 
	Roped Hydraulic 	$243.00 
	Escalator/Moving Walks 	$216.00 
	Dumbwaiter 	$ 54.00 
	V Stairway chairlift. Inclined & Vertical Wheelchair lifts & Man lifts 	$ 54.00 
	Oil buffers 	$ 43.00 
	Counterweight governor & safety 	$100.00 
	Aux. Power Safety 	$ 81.00 
	Plan review fee 	$260.00 
	Alteration 	$ 60.00 
	Dismantle of elevator 	$100.00 
	Material Lift with transfer devices 	$270.00 
	Sidewalk elevator 	$130.00 
 
(b)  Elevator/device fee schedule. The annual fee for inspection and witnessing of tests for all devices, which shall include a six month routine inspection and which is based on an average of the fees that shall be collected over a five year period and in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-12.6(c)1i through iv and 2i through iii are as follows: 
Transaction or Winding Drum 	
1 to 10 floors 	$400.00 
Over 10 floors 	$486.00 
Hydraulic 	$292.00 
Roped Hydraulic 	$324.00 
Escalator/Moving Walks 	$497.00 
Dumbwaiter 	$ 86.00 
Stairway chairlift, Inclined & Vertical Wheelchair lifts & Man Lifts 	$130.00 
Oil buffers 	$ 43.00 
Counter weight governor & safety 	$ 86.00 
Aux. Power Safety 	$ 54.00 
Sidewalk elevator 	$200.00 
 
(6)  Miscellaneous Fees (Uniform Construction Code Fees) 
(a)  Demolition Permit Fees: 
Use groups R-3& R-5 	$200.00 
All other use groups 	$250.00 
 
(b)  Variations: $200.00 per application 
(c)  Certificates: 
Certificate of Occupancy 	$100.00 each 
Certificate of Continued Occupancy 	$200.00 
Temporary Certificates 	no fee for initial application 
Each subsequent one thereafter for areas not inspected 	$100.00 
Renewal of Temporary Certificate 	$ 50.00 
Final Certificate after Multiple Temporaries 	No charge 
 
(d)  Annual Construction Permit: As per N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.20(c)(5): 
The fee to be charged for an annual construction permit shall be charged annually. This fee shall be a flat fee based upon the number of maintenance workers who are employed by the facility and who are primarily engaged in work that is governed by a subcode. Managers, engineers, and clericals shall not be considered maintenance workers for the purpose of establishing the annual construction permit fee. Annual permits may be issued for building/fire protection, electrical and plumbing. Fees for annual permits shall be as follows: 
1—25 Workers 	$667.00 per worker 
Each additional worker over 25 	$232.00 per worker 
 
(7)  Non Uniform Construction Code Fees: 
(a)  No Certificate of Occupancy letters for real estate transfers provided no Certificate has been issued. $50.00 
(b)  Discharge of Lis Pendens $100.00 
(c)  Returned check fee: $25.00 plus amount either by certified check or money order. 
Please Note: Certain fees described above as charged by the Office of the Construction Official are set by the State of New Jersey. Any changes in those fees by the State of New Jersey will be incorporated herein by reference. [Amended 4-13-2005 by Ord. 04-154] 
N.  Chapter 134, Contractors. Registration fee: $100. 
O.  Chapter 157, Entertainment Licenses. [2] 
1.  Fees - 157-4. Except as provided in § 157-3, no person shall keep, maintain, or operate any entertainment or dance venue without obtaining a license from the Director. A license shall be issued only if both the venue and the applicant comply with relevant standards. The fee schedule shall be as follows: 
Nightclub Entertainment License Class 1: $1,200.00 per year or part thereof; 
Nightclub Entertainment License Class 2: $1,000.00 per year or part thereof; 
Restaurant Entertainment License Class 1: $800.00 per year or part thereof; 
Restaurant Entertainment License Class 2: $600.00 per year or part thereof. 
2.  Mary McLeod Bethune Life Center - 157-11. 
a.  A non-refundable application fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) to cover administrative costs of reviewing the application and issuing the permit, must be paid at the time the application is filed with the City. 
b.  For each five-hour period [Session] or part thereof for the use of a single room (consisting of approximately one thousand one hundred (1,100) square feet) or any part thereof, the fees shall be calculated on a per room per Session basis in accordance with the following schedule: 
Room Fees* 
Six Rooms 	$600.00 	$300.00 Deposit 
Five Rooms 	$500.00 	$250.00 Deposit 
Four Rooms 	$400.00 	$200.00 Deposit 
Three Rooms 	$300.00 	$150.00 Deposit 
Two Rooms 	$200.00 	$100.00 Deposit 
One Room 	$100.00 	$50.00 Deposit 
Cleaning Fees* 
	$100.00 	[Returned only if room(s) are cleaned] 
Additional Kitchen Fees* 
To Warm Food 	$100.00 	($50.00 returned only if kitchen is cleaned) 
To Cook Food 	$150.00 	($50.00 returned only if kitchen is cleaned) 
 
*These fees may be waived for City Events or for events conducted by nonprofit organizations that provide certain community services, upon the recommendation of the Mayor and approval of the Municipal Council, in accordance with criteria to be approved by the City. 
c.  A non-refundable deposit equal to twenty-five percent (25%) of the full amount of the fees shall be due at the time the permit is approved. The balance of the fee and cleaning deposit and, if applicable, the kitchen cleaning deposit, shall be paid in full no later than seven (7) days before the Event. 
d.  The applicant shall be responsible for providing security for its activities. There shall also be a requirement to engage police officers if police services are determined to be required by Martin Luther King Center Director, after consultation with the Department of Public Safety. An applicant determined to need police services shall be required to pay for such costs and submit proof to the City that it has arranged for such police services no later than seven (7) days before the Event. [ Amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] 
O.2.   Chapter 173. Retail Florists. [Adopted 9-12-2002 by Ord. No. 02-096] The license fee shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) a year or any part thereof. 
P.  Chapter 175, Food-Handling Establishments. 
[Amended 2-26-2014 by Ord. No. 14-018 ; 4-23-2014 by Ord. No. 14-042 ] 
(1)  Article I, Dine-Dance Establishments. 
Editor's note— Article I, Dine-Dance Establishments, of Ch. 175, Food-Handling Establishments, was repealed 6-24-1998 by Ord. No. 98-081. See now Ch. 157, Entertainment and Dance Licenses. 
(2)  Article II, Mobile Food Vendors. 
(a)  The license fee for mobile food vendors in 2014 is $500.00. 
(b)  The license fee for mobile food vendors beginning January 1, 2015 is $600.00. 
(3)  Article III, Food Establishments. 
[Amended 8-16-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068; 3-11-2015 by Ord. No. 15-026 ; 9-28-2016 by Ord. No. 16-139 ] 
(a)  License fees shall be as follows. Such license fee shall not be refundable in whole or in part. Such license is not transferable. Such license shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the establishment. 
[1]  Class A food licenses: $600.00. Class A includes supermarket, restaurant/cafeteria (more than 20 persons)/institutional kitchen, caterer/commissary/kitchen and mini-market/minimart. 
[2]  Class B food licenses: $400.00. Class B includes grocery/delicatessen, restaurant/luncheonette/cafe (not more than 20 persons), tavern, and confectionery. 
[3]  Class C food licenses: $250.00. Class C includes bakery, butcher, fish market, agricultural market, frozen dairy and grocery. 
[4]  Class D food licenses: $125.00. Class D includes bar/liquor store, newsstand, pharmacy/drugstore and flavored ice. 
[5]  Miscellaneous. 
[a]  Temporary retail food establishments. 
(i)  Organizer/sponsor fee. 
Number of Days of Operation 	Fee 
1 to 4 	$100.00 
5 or more 	$150.00 
 
(ii)  In addition to the above organizer/sponsor fee, the following fee shall be charged to each food vendor: 
[i]  For foods that are readily perishable or require heating or refrigeration: 
Number of Days of Operation 	Fee 
1 to 3 	$ 25.00 
3 to 5 	$ 50.00 
5 to 7 	$ 75.00 
7 or more 	$150.00 
 
[ii]  For foods that are not readily perishable and do not require heating or refrigeration: 
Number of Days of Operation 	Fee 
1 to 5 	$20.00 
5 or more 	$30.00 
 
(iii)  There shall be no food vendor fee charged to any person already possessing a food establishment license from the City of Jersey City. 
[b]  Flea markets. 
(i)  Seasonal license. 
[i]  May 1 through September 30: $125.00 per location. 
[ii]  October 1 through April 30: $75.00 per location. 
(ii)  In addition to the seasonal license fee, the following fee shall be charged to each food vendor: 
[i]  For foods that are readily perishable or require heating or refrigeration: 
Number of Days of Operation 	Fee 
1 to 3 	$ 25.00 
3 to 5 	$ 50.00 
5 to 7 	$ 75.00 
7 or more 	$150.00 
 
[ii]  For foods that are not readily perishable and do not require heating or refrigeration: 
Number of Days of Operation 	Fee 
1 to 5 	$20.00 
5 or more 	$30.00 
 
(iii)  Charitable institutions sponsoring temporary retail food establishments and/or flea markets shall be exempted from paying the organizer/sponsor fee, provided that no more than three food vendors are present at such event; however, individual food vendor fees shall not be so waived. 
(iv)  There shall be no food vendor fee charged to any person already possessing a food establishment license from the City of Jersey City. 
[c]  Farmers' markets. For each farmers' market season, April 1 through December 31, the following fees shall apply: 
(i)  Seasonal Market License. Any not-for-profit corporation, operating a farmers' market, and whose application satisfies all requirements set forth in Chapter 175, shall be issued a seasonal market license at no cost to the not-for-profit corporation: 
(ii)  Seasonal Vendor License. Each vendor participating in a farmers' market shall be issued a seasonal vendor license for a fee of $150.00 per farmers' market location where such vendor participates, except that any such vendor participating in three (3) or more farmers' markets shall only pay a flat fee of $400.00. No seasonal vendor license fee shall be charged to any non-food vendor or any other person already possessing a food establishment license from the City, pursuant to Chapter 160, Section 160-1, subparagraphs P.(2) or (3) herein. 
(b)  Food handler's course: $25.00.* 
(c)  Food manager's course: $40.00.* 
*Employees of the City of Jersey City whose duties allow or require food handling or food management training are exempt from fees for the food handler's or food manager's course. 
(4)  Annual license fees for nonfood establishments. License fees shall be as follows: 
[Added 8-16-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068] 
(a)  Class A nonfood licenses: $250.00. Class A includes beauty/nail shop/salon, dry cleaner (on premises; includes coin-operated) and laundromat. 
(b)  Class B nonfood licenses: $150.00. Class B includes barbershop, tanning booth (per unit), dry cleaner (off premises), beauty shop/salon (without nails) and laundry service vehicle. 
Q.  Chapter 182, Health and Sanitation. 
[Amended 4-23-2014 by Ord. No. 14-042 ] 
(1)  Milk license fee: $15 for each wagon, automobile or other vehicle from which milk or milk products are sold or delivered at wholesale. 
(2)  Ice cream license: $25 for each wagon, automobile or other vehicle from which ice cream or other frozen confections are distributed or sold in Jersey City, whether wholesale or retail. 
(3)  Inspection and review of plans for initial licensing: $50.00. 
[Amended 8-16-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068] 
(4)  Reinspection fee for conditional or unsatisfactory posting. 
[Amended 8-16-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068] 
(a)  First reinspection: $100.00. 
(b)  Second reinspection: $200.00. 
(c)  Third reinspection or thereafter: $300.00. 
(5)  Water analysis fee: $20.00. 
(6)  Copy of inspection report: $5.00. 
(7)  Copy of Sanitary Code: $5.00. 
(8)  Copy of form letters: $5.00. 
(9)  Miscellaneous photocopies: $0.50 per page. 
(10)   Child-care center license fee: $200.00. 
[Added 8-16-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068] 
(11)   Tattooing. The annual license fee for tattooing shall be eight hundred dollars ($800.00). The fee shall not be prorated for less than a full year. 
[Added 8-13-2003 by Ord. No. 03-103] 
R.  Chapter 188, Housing Accommodations. 
(1)  License fee: $100. 
S.  Chapter 193, Ice. 
(1)  Ice depot license fee: $5 per year or any fraction thereof. 
(2)  Ice vehicle license fee: $3 per year or any fraction thereof. 
T.  Chapter 202, Junkyards. 
[Amended 12-15-1999 by Ord. No. 99-181] 
(1)  License fee for junkyards, scrap yards, junk dealers, scrap yard dealers and waste yard dealers: 
(a)  Beginning January 1, 2000: $450 per year. 
(b)  Beginning January 1, 2001: $700 per year. 
(c)  Beginning January 1, 2002: $1,000 per year. 
U.  Chapter 207, Laundries and Dry Cleaners. 
(1)  Coin-operated dry cleaner permit: $15 for each machine. 
(2)  License fee for cleaning or laundry establishment: $50 per year. 
V.  Chapter 215, Motor Vehicle Repair Shops. 
(1)  Annual fee for all licenses and renewal licenses: $200. 
[Amended 12-15-1999 by Ord. No. 99-181] 
W.  Chapter 222, Noise. 
(1)  Audible burglar alarm registration fee (one-time): $5. 
(2)  Commercial sound truck license fee: $100 per year. 
X.  Chapter 254, Property Maintenance. 
[Amended 5-24-1995 by Ord. No. 95-045; 6-13-2018 by Ord. No. 18-060 ; 6-27-2018 by Ord. No. 18-068 ] 
(1)  License fees, in addition to the fees provided in N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1 et seq. 
(a)  Furnished apartments: $125.00, plus $20.00 for each apartment. 
(b)  Motels, hotels, etc.: $200.00, plus $20.00 per room. 
(2)  Reinspection fee: $10.00. 
(3)  Inspections made under § 254-107. 
(a)  For an inspection and two additional reinspections, if necessary, for dwellings of two units or less: $40.00. 
(b)  For an inspection and two additional reinspections, if necessary, for each dwelling unit in excess of two: $10.00. 
(c)  For the third reinspection and any additional reinspections, per rooming unit: $20.00. 
(4)  Status report fee. 
(a)  Pages one through 10: $0.25 per page. 
(b)  Pages 11 through 20: $0.15 per page. 
(c)  All pages over 21: $0.10 per page. 
(5)  Vacant property registration fee. 
(a)  The initial registration fee for each vacant building or vacant lot shall be $500.00. 
(b)  The fee for the first renewal shall be $1,000.00. 
(c)  The fee for the second renewal shall be $2,000.00. 
(d)  The fee for any subsequent renewals shall be $3,000.00. 
(6)  The semi-annual registration fee for foreclosure property under section 254-127 shall be $300.00. 
Y.  Chapter 233, Paint Stripping. 
(1)  Fee for paint cleaning/stripping permit: 1.5% of cost of project. 
Y.1.   ;hg;Chapter 236, Parking Lots and Public Garages. [Added 12-23-1997 by Ord. No. 97-087] 
(1)  The annual license fee for a parking lot or parking garage shall be determined by multiplying the total area in square feet allocated to the parking or storage of vehicles by $0.015 through December 31, 1997, $0.025 through December 31, 1998 and $0.04 thereafter. 
(2)  The seasonal license fee for a parking lot or parking garage shall be determined by multiplying the number of months for which said seasonal license is issued by 1/10 of the annual license fee for operating said parking lot or garage [as determined in Subsection Y.2(1) above]. 
Z.  Chapter 239, Parks and Recreation Areas. [Amended 9-13-1995 by Ord. No. 95-076; 4-10-1996 by Ord. No. 96-030; 5-8-1996 by Ord. No. 96-039; 11-29-2001 by Ord. No. 01-125; 12-17-2014 by Ord. No. 14-163 ] 
(1)  Membership fee for the use of Pershing Field Swimming Pool shall be as follows: 
(a)  Fees for residents. 
Type of Membership 	Annual Fee 	Semi- 
annual Fee 
Husband and wife, no children 	$200.00 	$100.00 
Husband and wife with up to 5 resident children 21 years of age or younger 	$250.00 	$125.00 
Each additional resident child 	$ 20.00 	$ 10.00 
Persons 62 years of age or older 	$ 50.00 	$ 50.00 
Persons between the ages of 10 and 18, inclusive 	$100.00 	$ 50.00 
All other persons 	$150.00 	$ 75.00 
 
(b)  Fees for nonresidents. 
Type of Membership 	Annual Fee 	Semi- 
annual Fee 
Husband and wife, no children 	$400.00 	$200.00 
Husband and wife with up to 5 resident children 21 years of age or younger 	$500.00 	$250.00 
Each additional resident child 	$ 40.00 	$ 20.00 
Persons 62 years of age or older 	$100.00 	$ 50.00 
Persons between the ages of 10 and 18, inclusive 	$200.00 	$100.00 
All other persons 	$300.00 	$150.00 
 
(c)  Any individual may purchase daily passes for the following fees: 
[1]  Fees for resident daily passes shall be as follows: 
Type of Pass 	Weekdays 	Weekends and Holidays 
Youths 18 and under 	$2.00 	$3.00 
Individuals 19 and above 	$3.00 	$4.00 
Persons 62 years of age or older 	$1.00 	$1.00 
 
[2]  Fees for nonresident daily passes shall be double the amount of resident daily passes. 
(d)  Members may purchase guest passes for the following fees: 
[1]  Youths 18 and under: $15.00 weekly; $35.00 monthly. 
[2]  Individuals 19 and above: $20.00 weekly; $45.00 monthly. 
(e)  Residents between the ages of 10 and 18 who are not members may use the pool free of charge during such times when other municipal pools are available for use without charge to such residents; provided, however, that the Pool Director may, in his or her discretion, allow nonmember residents between the ages of eight and 10 to use the pool at such times if he or she determines that such person is capable of using the pool without parental supervision. 
(f)  There shall be a fee of $2.00 to replace any membership identification pass. 
(2)  Fees for individual and group rentals of the ice-skating rink. 
(a)  Fees for daily use of the ice-skating rink by individuals are as follows: 
[1]  Residents. 
[a]  Adults 19 years of age and older: $3. 
[b]  Children under 18 years of age: $1.50. 
[c]  Seniors 65 years of age or older: $1. 
[2]  Nonresidents. 
[a]  Adults 19 years of age and older: $5. 
[b]  Children under 18 years of age: $3. 
[c]  Seniors 65 years of age and older: $2. 
(b)  Rentals for hockey teams: 
[1]  Hockey teams submitting proof of a roster comprised of at least 51 percent of residents or the dependants of active full-time employees of the City: $75 an hour. 
[a]  All other hockey teams: $200 an hour. 
[2]  Other groups or organizations: 
[a]  Residents (51 percent or more): $150 per hour. 
[b]  Non-residents: $200 per hour. 
(c)  Fees for daily use of the in-line skating rink at Pershing Field by individuals are as follows: 
[1]  Residents. 
[a]  Adults 19 years of age and older: $3. 
[b]  Children under 18 years of age: $1.50. 
[c]  Senior citizens 65 years of age or older: $1. 
[2]  Nonresidents. 
[a]  Adults 19 years of age and older: $3. 
[b]  Children under 18 years of age: $3. 
[c]  Senior citizens 65 years of age or older: $2. 
(d)  The in-line skating rink at Pershing Field may be rented by teams, groups or organizations for group activities at the following rates: 
[1]  Residents (51 percent or more): $75. 
[2]  Nonresidents: $100 per hour. 
(3)  Maintenance fee for fishing in Jersey City reservoir waters. 
(a)  Seasonal fees for Jersey City residents shall be as follows: 
[1]  Adult (18 to 61): $10. 
[2]  Senior (62 and over): $5. 
[3]  Junior (eight to 17): $5. 
[4]  Children (seven or under): no charge. 
[5]  Handicapped persons: no charge. 
Note: Persons 17 or under must be accompanied by an adult. 
(b)  Seasonal fees for non-Jersey City residents shall be as follows: 
[1]  Adult (18 to 61): $20. 
[2]  Senior (62 and over): $10. 
[3]  Junior (eight to 17): $10. 
[4]  Children (seven or under): no charge. 
[5]  Handicapped persons: no charge. 
Note: Persons 17 or under must be accompanied by an adult. 
(c)  Daily fees for Jersey City residents and non-Jersey City residents: $5. 
[1]  Children (seven or under): no charge. 
[2]  Handicapped persons: no charge. 
(d)  There shall be no charge for nonprofit groups, Jersey City Department of Recreation and Cultural Affairs programs and Jersey City public schools programs. 
(4)  Maintenance fee for hiking on Jersey City reservoir properties. 
[Added 4-10-1996 by Ord. No. 96-030] 
(a)  Seasonal fees for Jersey City residents: 
[1]  Adult (18 to 61): $5. 
[2]  Senior (62 and over): $3. 
[3]  Junior (eight to 17): $3. 
[4]  Children (seven or under): no charge. 
[5]  Handicapped persons: no charge. 
Note: Persons 17 or under must be accompanied by an adult. 
(b)  Seasonal fees for non-Jersey City residents: 
[1]  Adult (18 to 61): $10. 
[2]  Senior (62 and over): $5. 
[3]  Junior (eight to 17): $5. 
[4]  Children (seven or under): no charge. 
[5]  Handicapped persons: no charge. 
Note: Persons 17 or under must be accompanied by an adult. 
(c)  Daily fees for Jersey City residents and non-Jersey City residents: $5. 
[1]  Children (seven or under): no charge. 
[2]  Handicapped persons: no charge. 
(d)  There shall be no charge for nonprofit groups, Jersey City Department of Recreation and Cultural Affairs programs and Jersey City public schools programs. 
(5)  [Added 5-8-1996 by Ord. No. 96-044] Fee for parking in the north and south parking lots on the Boonton Reservoir watershed property: 
(a)  Nonresidents: $3 per car per day. 
(b)  Jersey City residents: no charge. 
AA.   Chapter 245, Peddling, Soliciting and Canvassing. 
(1)  Peddler's license fee: $250 per year, not prorated, or a daily charge of $25. 
(2)  Peddler's identification tag: $5 per year. 
(3)  Transient business license fee: $100 per month or fraction thereof. 
(4)  Investigation of applicant for canvasser license: $2. 
BB.   Chapter 248, Pool Rooms. 
(1)  Annual pool room license fee: $100. 
(2)  License transfer fee: $5. 
CC.   Chapter 251, Pornography and Obscenity. 
(1)  Obscene material registration fee: $50. 
CC.1   Chapter 254, Property Maintenance. 
[Added 7-14-2004 by Ord. No. 04-071] 
(1)  License fees, in addition to the fees provided in N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1, et seq. 
(a)  Furnished apartments: seventy-five dollars ($75.00), plus ten dollars ($10.00) for each apartment. 
(b)  Motels, hotels, etc.: six hundred dollars ($600.00), plus forty dollars ($40.00) per room. 
(2)  Re-inspection fee: twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(3)  Inspections made under § 254-107. 
(a)  For an inspection and two additional re-inspections, if necessary, for dwellings of two units or less: eight dollars ($80.00) 
(b)  For an inspection and two additional re-inspections, if necessary for each dwelling unit in excess of two: twenty-five dollars ($25.00) 
(c)  For the third re-inspection and any additional re-inspections, per rooming unit: forty dollars ($40.00) 
(4)  The initial registration fee for each vacant property shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). The fee for subsequent renewals shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00). The renewal fee for the annual registration shall be due by October 1st of each year. The registration fee will not be prorated or refunded. [Added 9-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-108] 
DD.   Chapter 260, Rent Control. [ Amended 10-24-12 by Ord. No. 12-137 ] 
(1)  $125 per housing space for the filing of capital improvement to vacant housing spaces. 
(2)  $20 per housing space for major or minor capital improvement applications. 
(3)  $30 per housing space for hardship application. 
(4)  $10 per housing space for the filing of landlord registration statement for all dwellings with five (5) or more housing spaces, including dwellings that are exempt from the restrictions of rent increases mandated under Chapter 260-1, during each registration event. 
(5)  $30 per housing space for condominium and cooperative conversions. 
(6)  $150 per housing space for appeal of a protected tenancy determination. 
EE.   Chapter 269, Sales. 
(1)  Application fee for liquidation sale license: $25. 
(2)  Renewal license fee: $25. 
FF.   Chapter 275, Secondhand Dealers. 
[Amended 12-15-1999 by Ord. No. 99-181; 4-23-2003 by Ord. No. 03-055] 
(1)  Fee for general license: 
Class A: $200 per year 
Class B: $1,000 per year 
(2)  Fee for temporary license: 
Class A: $100 
Class B: $500 
GG.   Chapter 284, Shopping Carts. 
(1)  Redemption fee: $5 per day for each cart to cover municipal retrieval costs, plus $1 per day for storage of each such cart. 
HH.   Chapter 287, Solid Waste. 
(1)  Recycling license fee: $100 per year. 
II.  Chapter 290, Spray Paint, Sale of. 
(1)  License to sell spray paint: $25. 
JJ.  Chapter 296, Streets and Sidewalks. [Amended 9-23-1998 by Ord. No. 98-125; 2-28-01 by Ord. No. 01-120; 6-13-01 by Ord. No. 01-159; 2-27-02 by Ord. No. 02-012] 
(1)  Fee for sidewalk sale: $10 per day. 
(2)  Fee for sidewalk sale conducted within a special improvement district: $100. 
(3)  Fees and deposits for excavations in public rights-of-way [Amended 1-28-2015 by Ord. No. 15-003 ] : 
(a)  Fees for water service line to each house connection .....  $150.00 
Fee for sewer service line to each house connection .....  $200.00 
Fee for both water and sewer lines to each house connections .....  $300.00 
(b)  Administrative fee of $50.00 for each application in which an excavation is proposed. 
(c)  Inspection fee of $50 for excavations up to 25 square feet and $2.00 per square foot for each additional square foot thereafter. 
(d)  Such additional fees as may be required by § 296-36. 
(e)  Administration fee for a traffic permit is $50.00, which will be exempt as part of the street opening permit. 
(f)  Any and all permit fees for autonomous agencies seeking to excavate a city street shall be waived. 
(4)  Initial fee for permit for use of pay telephone franchise: fifty dollars ($50.00) per year or any part of a year. 
(5)  Renewal permit for pay telephone franchise: twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per year. 
(6)  (a)  The annual license fee for a sidewalk café shall be $225 for a sidewalk café seating sixteen (16) or fewer patrons and $275 for a sidewalk café seating over sixteen (16) patrons renewable on or before March 31 of each year. The fee shall not be prorated for less than a full year. 
(b)  Where a special improvement district (SID) duly exists within the City of Jersey City, the SID shall have the option of paying one annual license fee for all sidewalk cafes within its boundaries. This annual fee shall be two thousand dollars ($2000), payable and renewable by the SID to the City of Jersey City on or before March 31 of each year. The City shall supply the SID with the appropriate number of individual permits needed. 
KK.   Chapter 304, Taxation.* [Amended 4-24-2002 by Ord. No. 02-046; 1-24-2007 by Ord. No. 07-002] 
* Editor's Note: Former subsection (3) was repealed 4-24-02 by Ord. No. 02-049. 
(1)  Five-year tax exemption application fees. 
(a)  No application for the approval of a five (5) year tax exemption shall be accepted unless it is accompanied by full payment of the following fees: 
(1)  Improvement to dwellings (1-4 units): $100 per unit; 
(2)  New construction of dwellings (1-4 units): $100 per unit; 
(3)  Improvements to and conversions of multiple dwellings (5 units and above): $100 per unit; 
(4)  Improvements to commercial or industrial structures: 
A.  10,000 square feet or less: $1,500 and 
B.  More than 10,000 square feet: $3,000; 
(5)  New construction of multiple dwellings by tax agreements: $200 per unit with a maximum of $10,000 per building; and 
(6)  New construction of commercial or industrial structures by tax agreements: $3,500. 
(2)  Long term tax exemption application fees. 
(a)  No application for approval or amendment of a tax exemption shall be accepted unless it is accompanied by full payment of the following fees: 
[1]  $5,500 for projects whose total project cost is estimated to be less than $1,000,000. 
[2]  $9,500 for all other projects plus an additional sum of up to $3,500 for any professional fees that may be incurred by the City to verify the estimated construction costs of the applicant. 
[3]  Zero ($0) dollars for projects which provide housing for families of low or moderate income within the meaning of the Fair Housing Act, N.J.S.A 52:27D-301 et seq. 
(b)  No application for the assignment of a tax exemption, whether approved under N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. or prior laws, shall be accepted unless it is accompanied by a $1,500 fee. 
(c)  No application for approval or amendment or assignment of a tax exemption, which is unconditionally rejected, shall be accepted for resubmission unless it is accompanied by payment of a full additional fee. 
(d)  No application for approval or assignment of, or amendment to, a tax exemption, which is deemed incomplete or deficient, shall be accepted for resubmission unless it is accompanied by full payment of a fee of $500. 
(e)  These fees shall be received as compensation for the legal review and related administrative work of the City's departments and agencies. All fees shall be paid in full by a certified check made payable to the City. The fees shall be nonrefundable. 
LL.   Chapter 307, Taxicabs and Limousines. [Added 1-11-2012 by Ord. No. 11-156] 
(1)  Limousine license required; fees - § 307-38. 
a.  No limousine license for limousine services with principal places of business within the City of Jersey City, shall be issued or renewed unless the applicant has paid the annual license fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each limousine service business and ten dollars ($10.00) for each limousine. Limousine license fees shall be in addition to any other fees or charges established by the proper authorities and applicable to the holder of the license(s) for the vehicle or vehicles under his operation and control. 
b.  Limousine services with a place of business within, and licensed by, the City of Jersey City shall be required to pay an annual administrative fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) to cover administrative costs including, but not limited to, vehicle inspections, preparation of reports and documents by Division personnel and the enforcement by the Division of the provisions of this chapter. 
c.  The holder shall make annual application for renewal of his/her limousine license and limousine operator's licenses not later than thirty (30) days prior to the expiration date, and pay the annual fee of $50.00 for the limousine license and ten ($10.00) for each limousine. Late filing of applications shall be subject to an additional fifty dollar ($50.00) late filing fee. 
(2)  Limousine operator's license fees - § 307-39. No operator's license shall be issued or renewed unless the applicant has paid an initial license fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) and, on or before March 31 of each year, and fifty dollars ($50.0.0) as the annual renewal fee. 
(3)  Failure to transfer ownership when no claim on vehicle is made - § 319-19. Vehicle owners who wish not to claim and or remove their vehicle from an impound storage area must sign a certificate of ownership, which transfers ownership to the City of Jersey City. Failure to do so may result in the owner being cited with a summons for abandonment of motor vehicle pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-56.5 which will subject the owner, for the first offense, to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), and his license or driving privilege may be suspended of revoked for not more than two (2) years. For any subsequent violation, the owner will be subject to a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), and his license or driving privilege may be suspended or revoked for not more than five (5) years. 
MM.   Chapter 310, Theaters. [Amended 12-15-1999 by Ord. No. 99-181] 
(1)  Annual license fee for theaters: $350. 
NN.   Chapter 313, Tires, Sale of. [Amended 12-15-1999 by Ord. No. 99-181] 
(1)  Annual permit fee: $25. 
OO.   Chapter 319, Towers and Towing. [Amended 12-15-1999 by Ord. No. 99-181; 9-13-2000 by Ord. No. 00-116; amended 3-14-2012 by Ord. No. 12-017] 
(1)  License fees - § 319-7.1. 
a.  Annual combined license fee for principal license and any and all supplemental licenses for a Class A Tower: $1,500. 
b.  Annual combined license fee for principal license and any and all supplemental licenses for a Class B Tower: $1,500. 
c.  Annual license fee for an Impound Operator for 300 vehicles: $2,000. [ Amended 4-25-2012 by Ord. No. 12-052 ] 
d.  Annual license fee for an Impound Operator for 200 vehicles: $1,500. [ Amended 4-25-2012 by Ord. No. 12-052 ] 
e.  Annual license fee for an Impound Operator for 150 vehicles: $1,000. [ Amended 4-25-2012 by Ord. No. 12-052 ] 
f.  Tower and Impound Operator fees shall increase every four years computed by applying the aggregate C.P.I. for the four years and rounded up to the next $50. [ Amended 4-25-2012 by Ord. No. 12-052 ] 
(2)  Maximum fees to tow, transport, convey or move vehicles - § 319-11. 
a.  Maximum fees to tow, transport, convey or move vehicles (Class A Licensee). 
(1)  No licensee shall charge more than the following maximum fees to tow, transport, convey or otherwise move a vehicle from one location within the City of Jersey City to another location within the City of Jersey City: 
(a)  Class I vehicle: $150 (one hundred fifty dollars), inclusive of a forty-dollar ($40) administrative fee. 
(b)  Class II vehicles: $200 (two hundred dollars), inclusive of a forty-dollar ($40) administrative fee. 
(c)  Class III vehicles: $225 per hour (minimum two hours). 
(2)  In addition to the above charges, recovery of an overturned vehicle, uprighting it or removing it from a hill, ditch or other similar precarious position will be charged no more than the rate of $50, $125, and $225 per hour for vehicle Classes I, II and III, respectively. If an issue arises as to these charges, it shall be the burden of the tower to provide documentation in the form of photographs as to the particular circumstances requiring the additional charges, i.e., position of the vehicle. 
(3)  No charge shall be imposed on a rotation list tow for waiting time, clean-up, yard fee or any other service not specifically authorized under this chapter. 
(4)  The above fees are chargeable once a vehicle is hooked up by the tower. 
b.  Maximum fees for vehicle storage (Impound Storage Licensee). 
(1)  No licensee shall charge more than the following maximum fees per day, or portion thereof, for storage of a disabled vehicle towed away pursuant to this chapter: 
(a)  Class I vehicles: $30 per day. 
(b)  Class II vehicles: $60 per day. 
(c)  Class III vehicles: $100 per day. 
(2)  No vehicle shall be released from storage by a licensee unless proper owner and vehicle identification are shown. 
c.  Each driver of a Class A licensee shall have a schedule of the maximum prices when responding to the scene of a disabled, abandoned or other vehicle. 
d.  Before performing any service pursuant to this chapter, the licensee shall furnish the owner or driver of the vehicle with a copy of the schedule of prices. In the event that the owner or driver is incapacitated, the licensee shall furnish such schedule to the owner's authorized agent as defined herein before such person pays for the services rendered. 
(3)  Fees for storage - 319-18. Upon receipt of an impounded vehicle, the impound operator licensee shall pay the tower ninety dollars ($90.00) for a Class I Vehicle and one hundred forty dollars ($140.00) for a Class II Vehicle, and for a Class III Vehicle, a minimum of three hundred ninety dollars ($390.00) no later than thirty (30) days of receipt of the vehicle. The tower shall not receive any additional payment. Upon payment of the fee, as set forth in Section 319-11, by the owner or person entitled to claim the vehicle, the city shall receive an administrative fee of forty dollars ($40.00) and the licensed storage facility a fee of twenty dollars ($20.00). [Added 3-14-2012 by Ord. No. 12-017] 
(4)  Violation for failure to remove vehicle - 319-19. Vehicle owners who wish not to claim and or remove their vehicle from an impound storage area must sign a certificate of ownership, which transfers ownership to the City of Jersey City. Failure to do so may result in the owner being cited with a summons for abandonment of motor vehicle pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-56.5 which will subject the owner, for the first offense, to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), and his license or driving privilege may be suspended of revoked for not more than two (2) years. For any subsequent violation, the owner will be subject to a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), and his license or driving privilege may be suspended or revoked for not more than five (5) years. [Added 3-14-2012 by Ord. No. 12-017] 
PP.   Chapter 321, Trees. [Amended 8-14-2002 by Ord. No. 02-084] 
(1)  Tree permit: $2 for each tree involved. 
(2)  Tree planting fee: fifty dollars ($50.00) for each tree (includes cost of tree and labor). 
QQ.   Chapter 324, Used Car Dealers. 
[Amended 12-15-1999 by Ord. No. 99-181] 
(1)  Motor vehicle sales license fee: 
(a)  Beginning January 1, 2000: $300 per year. 
(b)  Beginning January 1, 2001: $500 per year. 
(c)  Beginning January 1, 2002: $800 per year. 
RR.   Chapter 329, Vending Machines. [Amended 8-16-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068; 4-23-2014 by Ord. No. 14-042 ] 
(1)  Operator's license fee, each vending machine. 
(a)  Class A machine: $100.00 per year or part thereof. 
(b)  Class B machine: $75.00 per year or part thereof. 
(c)  Class C machine: $50.00 per year or part thereof. 
(d)  Class D machine: $30.00 per year or part thereof. 
SS.  Chapter 332, Vehicles and Traffic. 
(1)  Violations and penalties—Emergency No Parking Areas - § 332-34; Signs - § 332-35. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter or the New Jersey statutes, every person convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter or any supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) or imprisonment for a term not exceeding five (5) days, or both. 
(2)  Parking prohibited for sale or repair of vehicles or parking in front of handicap access ramp prohibited - § 332-25B. For a violation of this provision, the offender shall be liable to a penalty of not less than sixty dollars ($60.00). 
(3)  Penalties for violation of bus regulations. Any operator found guilty of violating any provisions of this Article shall be liable to a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(4)  Violations and penalties of regulations regarding parking facilities operated by the Division of Parking Enforcement - § 332-40. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey state statute, any person who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this Article shall, upon conviction therefor, be liable to a fine of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00), together with court costs, or imprisonment for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) days, or both, for each and every offense. 
[Amended 11-12-2014 by Ord. No. 14-017 ] 
(5)  Reserved. 
(6)  Reserved. 
(7)  Abandonment of motor vehicles prohibited; violations and penalties - § 332-72. The Municipal Court may impose the following penalties for any violation of this section: 
a.  A fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and a suspension of driving privileges for up to two (2) years for the first violation. 
b.  A fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and suspension of driving privileges for up to five (5) years for additional violations. 
(8)  Penalties—Impounding and booting vehicles - § 332-73. Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment not exceeding ninety (90) days or both for each offense. (Ord. No. MC-807, § A, 3/14/85.) 
(9)  Fines - § 332-3. Any person liable for a traffic control signal violation, pursuant to the Ordinance and the Act, utilizing the System shall be subject to the following fines: 
Violation $100.00 
Late Fee $ 25.00 
(10)   On street parking permit fees. Beginning on July 1, 2015, the following fees shall apply: 
[Added 4-19-1997 by Ord. No. 97-011; amended 10-13-1999 by Ord. No. 99-151; 2-23-2000 by Ord. No. 00-011; 9-14-2005 by Ord. No. 05-108; 9-9-2015 by Ord. No. 15-109 ; 11-24-2015 by Ord. No. 15-156 ; 4-12-2017 by Ord. No. 17-033 ] 
a.  Residential parking permit or new resident temporary parking permit: fifteen dollars ($15.00) per year for each vehicle registered to a resident of the zone; 
b.  Non-residential parking permit: three hundred dollars ($300.00) per year; 
c.  Temporary resident parking permit (90-day): one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00); 
Temporary work permit (90-day): one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00) and not more than 90 days; 
Temporary residential permit (14-day): fifteen dollars ($15.00); 
d.  Home healthcare permit (90-day): fifty dollars ($50.00); 
e.  Contractor parking permit (1 and 2 family residences): 
(i)  Six-month permit: one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00); and 
(ii)  Daily permit: fifteen dollars ($15.00) a day; 
f.  Visitors parking permit: Daily: five dollars ($5.00) for each permit for up to five (5) permits; 
g.  Transfer permit: fifteen dollars ($15.00); 
h.  Senior citizen residents or deed restricted low/moderate income residents or R-2 residents: zero dollars ($0.00). 
i.  Zone 16-2: $50 per six-month period for each vehicle registered to a person currently working for an employer located within Parking Permit Zone 16. 
(11)   On-street permit to park in the zone designated by ordinance as Douglas and Arthur Skinner Memorial Drive (FKA: Jersey Avenue): $200.00 per year. 
[Amended 5-9-2012 by Ord. No. 12-062 ; 9-9-2015 by Ord. No. 15-109 ] 
(12)   Parking or standing a vehicle in designated space in the parking meter zone within the area of the west side of Douglas and Arthur Skinner Memorial Drive (FKA: Jersey Avenue) from Grand Street south to the light rail tracks shall be lawful for two (2) hours upon the deposit of twenty-five cents ($0.25) per one-half (½) hour in the multi-space machine for those hours specified in this section. 
[Added 5-9-2012 by Ord. No. 12-062 ] 
(13)   Parking permit fees for municipal lots [Added 9-9-2015 by Ord. No. 15-109 ] : 
PARKING PERMIT FEES FOR MUNICIPAL LOTS 
(F/K/A) LOT# 	LOCATION 	PERMITS 	FEE MONTHLY 
1 	Oakland/Washburn/Hoboken Avenue (leased from DOT) 	24/7 	$105.00 
2 (a/k/a 28) 	Montgomery Street & Orchard Street (leased) 	24/7 	$80.00 
3 (a/k/a 33) 	Sherman Place & Central Avenue 	24/7 	$95.00 
4 (a/k/a 39) 	522 West Side Avenue (Between Clendenny Avenue & Union Street) 		
5 (a/k/a 44) 	693 Newark Avenue & Cottage Street 	24/7 	$105.00 
6 (a/k/a 49) 	340 Central Avenue (Burger King Lot) 	24/7 
NP 	$70.00 
7 (a/k/a 50) 	Fairview & Bergen Avenue 	24/7 	$85.00 
8 (a/k/a 51) 	404 2nd Street 	24/7 	$85.00 
9 (a/k/a 52) 	174 Newark Avenue 	24/7 	$90.00 
10 (a/k/a 53) 	477-79 Central Avenue & Congress 	24/7 	$75.00 
11 (a/k/a 54) 	Boland Street Fairmount Avenue 	24/7 	$65.00 
12 (a/k/a 56) 	733-735 Newark Avenue (leased from DOT) 	24/7 	$105.00 
13 (a/k/a 15) 	754 West Side Avenue (between Fairview and Fairmount Avenue) 	24/7 	$55.00 
14 (a/k/a 3) 	352 Central Avenue 		
15 (a/k/a 4) 	388 Central Avenue 		
16 (a/k/a 12) 	Hoboken Ave. & Cook Street (LEASED) 		
ALL 	ALL COMMERCIAL VEHICLES 	24/7 	$130.00 
ALL 	NIGHT TIME PARKING (NP) as available, first come, first served. City residents shall be accorded a preference. 	NP 	$55.00 
 
TT.   Chapter 337, Water. 
(1)  Meter testing charge: $2 for meters up to and including one-inch capacity. 
(2)  Special meter reading and report: $10. 
(3)  Permit for installation of water-cooled air-conditioning equipment, refrigeration machinery or compression installations, discharging water into the city sewerage system: $3 
(4)  Metered water rates. 
(a)  Each 100 cubic feet of water consumed: $1.31. 
(b)  A charge for each connection to the municipal water system, based on the size of the meter, or in the absence of a meter, the size of the service line, as follows (these charges shall be in addition to any charge for metered water): 
Size of Meter (inches) 	Monthly Charge 
5/8	$  1.00 
¾ 	   1.50 
1 	   2.50 
1 ½ 	   5.00 
2 	  14.00 
3 	  30.00 
4 	  52.50 
6 	 109.35 
8 	 157.50 
10 	 253.75 
12 	 376.25 
 
(c)  A charge for each connection to the municipal water system for the purpose of providing fire protection, based on the size of the service line, shall be as follows (these charges shall be in addition to any charge for metered water): 
Size of Meter (inches) 	Monthly Charge 
1 ½ 	$ 10.00 
2 	  28.00 
3 	  61.25 
4 	 105.00 
6 	 218.75 
8 	 315.00 
10 	 507.50 
12 	 752.50 
 
(d)  Municipal and private water systems for water, other than water belonging to the City of Jersey City, transported through the Jersey City Aqueduct shall be at the rate of $6 per 1,000,000 gallons per pipe mile. 
(e)  Rate for private, nonprofit educational organizations as accredited elementary and secondary schools: $1,000 per 1,000,000 gallons. 
(5)  Bulk water rates. The rate charged to municipal and private water systems and other customers which enter into contracts having a term of five years or more shall be: 
Year 1, January 1, 1993 	$1,000.00 per 1,000,000 gallons 
Year 2 	$1,050.00 
Year 3 	$1,125.00 
Year 4 	$1,250.00 
Year 5 	$1,400.00 
Year 6 and thereafter 	$1,500.00 
 
(6)  Fire hydrant charge: $200 for each fire hydrant. 
(7)  Charges for services rendered collected by the Office of Utility Management. [Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
(a)  Duplicate bill upon request: $4 for photocopies and $5 for typewritten duplicates. 
(b)  Return check charge: $15; returned checks of $200 or more must be redeemed with certified check, cash or money order. 
(c)  Water meter test. 
[1]  One-half (½) inch to one inch: $25. 
[2]  One inch to two inches: $40. 
[3]  Three inches and above: $60. 
(d)  Copies of blueprints: $10. 
(e)  Copies of intersection maps: $5. 
(f)  Copies of financial records: $4 per sheet. 
(8)  Water permit fees. 
(a)  Water meter permits. 
Size of Meter (inches) 	Fee 
5/8	$   90.00 
5/8 × ¾ 	    90.00 
¾ 	   115.00 
1 	   150.00 
1½ 	   325.00 
2 	   450.00 
3 	 1,350.00 
4 	 2,200.00 
6 	 3,500.00 
6-inch strainers 	 4,500.00 
8 	 5,000.00 
 
(b)  Water tap permits. 160-1 
Main (inches) 	Tap (inches) 	Cost 
	¾ 	$ 100.00 
	1 	130.00 
	1 ¼ 	140.00 
	1 ½ 	150.00 
	2 	200.00 
6 	4 	525.00 
6 	6 	525.00 
8 	4 	700.00 
8 	6 	700.00 
8 	8 	700.00 
10 	4 	1,050.00 
10 	6 	1,050.00 
10 	8 	1,050.00 
10 	10 	1,050.00 
12 	4 	1,400.00 
12 	6 	1,400.00 
12 	8 	1,400.00 
12 	10 	1,400.00 
12 	12 	1,400.00 
16 	4 	1,750.00 
16 	6 	1,750.00 
16 	8 	1,750.00 
16 	10 	1,750.00 
16 	12 	1,750.00 
20 	4 	2,187.50 
20 	6 	2,187.50 
20 	8 	2,187.50 
20 	10 	2,187.50 
20 	12 	2,187.50 
24 	4 	2,625.00 
24 	6 	2,625.00 
24 	8 	2,625.00 
24 	10 	2,625.00 
24 	12 	2,625.00 
 
[1]  For water connections of ¾ inch through 24 inches in diameter, a fee based on the cost of materials and labor shall be charged. Such fees shall be revised by the Department of Administration periodically, as material and labor costs increases shall necessitate. 
[Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
[2]  For all taps larger than 12 inches, a tap permit fee of $1,500 shall be paid by the applicant before any tapping is performed, and the actual tap shall be performed by the applicant. 
[3]  Applicants for tap permits of two inches or larger must supply their own tapping gates and tapping sleeves. These gates and sleeves must conform to specifications, available at the Office of Utility Management. 
[Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
(c)  Fire hydrant use permits. The fee for a fire hydrant use permit shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) per day, per hydrant for a minimum of five days and a maximum of thirty (30) days. If the Municipal Utilities Authority determines that usage at a site so warrants, then at the option of the Municipal Utilities Authority, the fee shall be based upon actual water usage as measured by a meter to be provided by the Administration Department. The Municipal Utilities Authority may require reasonable security for each meter it provides. The Municipal Utilities Authority's option to base the fee on actual usage may be exercised at any time, including while the permit is in effect, or upon any renewal or extension of the permit. 
[Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052; 9-14-2005 by Ord. No. 05-113] 
(d)  The fee for a flow test to determine pressure in a main shall be $100 Requests for flow test shall be made in writing to the Office of Utility Management. 
[Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
(e)  The fee for shutting a service line at the request of the customer or because of a leak or service problem shall be: 
[1]  Where excavation is required: $875. 
[2]  Where no excavation is required: $50. 
(f)  The fee for relocating a fire hydrant, at the customer's request, shall be $2,000. 
(9)  Jersey City Water Laboratory Schedule. 
(a)  Physical examination. 
Test 	Fee 
Color, apparent, Pt-Co Unit 	$ 8 
Conductance, specific, microohms/CM 	8 
Odor (cold and hot) 	8 
Solids, total 	10 
Solids, suspended 	10 
Solids, dissolved 	10 
Solids, dissolved volatile 	15 
Solids, suspended volatile 	15 
Solids, total volatile 	15 
Fixed residue 	10 
Turbidity, nephelometric units 	10 
Specific gravity 	10 
 
(b)  Microbiological examination. 
Test 	Fee 
Algal counts, Sedgwick-Rafter Cell 	$ 15.00 
Standard plate count 	15.00 
Heterotrophic plate count 	15.00 
Presence-absence (5-day test) 	40.00 
Total coliform 	25.00 
Fecal coliform 	25.00 
Fecal streptococcus 	25.00 
Staphylococcus 	25.00 
Stressed organisms 	30.00 
Inhibitory residue test 	130.00 
Water suitability test 	130.00 
 
(c)  Inorganic - nonmetallic examination. 
Test 	Fee 
Alkalinity, pH 4.5 as CaCO3 	$10.00 
Alkalinity, carbonate 	10.00 
Alkalinity, bicarbonate 	10.00 
Chlorine, residual (free and total) 	15.00 
Chlorine demand 	15.00 
Chlorides 	10.00 
Calcium hardness, as CaCO3 	10.00 
Hardness, total, as CaCO3 	10.00 
Nitrates, NO3-N 	20.00 
Nitrites, NO3-N 	20.00 
Ammonia, NH3-N 	20.00 
Chemical oxygen demand 	35.00 
Oxygen, dissolve, Winkler method 	25.00 
Oxygen, dissolve, electrode method 	20.00 
pH 	15.00 
Phosphorus, total 	25.00 
Phosphorus, ortho 	25.00 
Sulfates, turbidimetric as SO4 	20.00 
Oils and greases, gravimetric 	30.00 
Hydrocarbons, gravimetric 	30.00 
Corrosivity, Langlier Index 	30.00 
Corrosivity, aggressiveness index 	30.00 
 
(d)  Sample pretreatment. 
Test 	Fee 
Soil 	$35.00 
Water 	15.00 
Wastewater 	15.00 
Sludge (water) 	25.00 
Sludge (wastewater) 	30.00 
 
(e)  Metals, total. 
Test 	Fee 
Aluminum 	$20.00 
Antimony 	20.00 
Arsenic 	35.00 
Barium 	25.00 
Cadmium 	25.00 
Calcium 	20.00 
Cobalt 	25.00 
Copper 	20.00 
Chromium 	25.00 
Chromium (hexavalent) 	25.00 
Chromium (trivalent) 	25.00 
Fluoride 	25.00 
Iron 	20.00 
Lead 	25.00 
Magnesium 	20.00 
Manganese 	25.00 
Nickel 	25.00 
Potassium 	30.00 
Selenium 	35.00 
Silver 	35.00 
Sodium 	30.00 
Tin 	25.00 
Zinc 	25.00 
 
(f)  Organic examination. 
Test 	Fee 
Trihalomethanes, total EPA 501.1 	$ 75.00 
Chloroform 	20.00 
Dichlorobromomethane 	20.00 
Dibromochloromethane 	20.00 
Bromoform 	20.00 
EPA 601 and 502.1 - volatile halocarbons 	100.00 
EPA 602 volatile aromatics 	100.00 
EPA 503.1 - 601/602 scan 	150.00 
EPA 608 and 508 organochlorine pesticides 	100.00 
EPA 608 and 508 PCB (scan) 	125.00 
EPA 608 and 508 PCB (ID) 	160.00 
EPA 505 - organochlorine pesticides 	100.00 
Total petroleum hydrocarbon scan 	100.00 
EPA 502.2 - synthetic organic contaminants (scan) 	150.00 
 
  
UU.   Chapter 345, Zoning. Refer to Chapter 345, Section 33.B. 
Fee Table I 
Application Type 	Application Fees 
Zoning Officer and Division of Zoning Enforcement Applications 	Non-Refundable 
Plan Review and Determination 	$100.00 
Certificate of Occupancy Review and Determination 	$100.00 
Zoning Determination 	$100.00 
Pre-existing Curbcut Determination 	$ 25.00 
 
Application Type 	Application Fees 
Planning Board and Board of Adjustment Applications 	Non-Refundable 
Minor site plan—Cell antenna application 
Minor site plan—Signage and storefronts 
Minor site plan—Other 	$2,500.00 
$  200.00 
$  350.00 
Preliminary major site plan—Residential 	$50.00 per dwelling unit or a minimum of $500.00 
Preliminary major site plan—Non-residential 	With principal buildings over 1,000 sq. ft. GFA: 
$50.00 per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA or part thereof or a minimum of $500.00 
Without principal building over 1,000 sq. ft. GFA: 
$50.00 per 1,000 sq. ft. lot area or part thereof or a minimum of $500.00 
Final major site plan 	50% of current preliminary major site plan fee 
Site plan amendment 	50% of the current application fee or a minimum of $1,000.00 
Administrative amendment 	$100.00 
Conceptual site plan 	$500.00 (to be deducted from fees for formal application for development) 
Extension of site plan approval 	$300.00 
Minor subdivision 	$500.00 
Preliminary major subdivision 	$1,000.00 plus $100.00 per lot 
Final major subdivision 	50% of current preliminary major subdivision fee 
SPECIAL MEETING REQUESTED BY APPLICANT 	$1,000.00 
REZONING OR REDEVELOPMENT PLAN AMENDMENT REQUESTED BY DEVELOPER 	Fee as specified in applicable redevelopment plan, or $1,000.00, if no fee specified in plan. 
APPEALS, INTERPRETATIONS AND VARIANCES 	$150.00 
"a" and "b" appeals and interpretations as per N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70 a and b 	$150.00 
"c" variance as per N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(c) and deviation from redevelopment plan 	$500.00 for the first variance or deviation when not accompanied by a major or minor site plan or subdivision 
$300.00 for the first variance or deviation when accompanied by a major or minor site plan or subdivision 
$150.00 for each additional 
"d" variance as per N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(d) 	$1,000.00 for the first variance 
$250.00 for each additional 
Extension of variance approval 	$300.00 (when not filed concurrently with extension of Site Plan) 
 
Application Type 	Application Fees 
Historic Preservation Commission Applications 	Non-Refundable 
CERTIFICATE OF NO EFFECT 	
Non-Residential 	
 With principal building 	$40.00 per 1,000 square feet GFA or part thereof 
 Without principal building 	$40.00 per 1,000 square feet of lot area or part thereof 
 Unlit Interior window sign only 	$40.00 
 Sidewalk repair/replacement when not filed concurrently with other work 	$40.00 for first 25 linear feet of frontage, additional $20.00 for each 25 feet of frontage over 25 or part thereof 
Residential 	
 Interior work only 	$10 per affected dwelling unit to a Maximum of $60 
 Exterior work only or Interior & exterior work filed concurrently 	$20.00 per dwelling unit to a maximum of $750.00 
 Sidewalk repair/replacement when not filed concurrently with other work 	$20.00 per dwelling unit to a maximum of $60.00 
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS (COA) 	
Residential 	
 New construction on vacant land 	$500.00 
 All others: 	
  1—4 dwelling units 	$100.00 
  5 dwelling units or over 	$20.00 per dwelling unit to a maximum of $1,000.00 
Non-residential 	
 With principal building 	$100.00 per 1,000 square feet of GFA or part thereof 
 Without principal building 	$100.00 per 1,000 square feet lot area or part thereof 
 Exterior sign application only 	$100.00 
 Outdoor café only 	$100.00 
Extension of COA approval 	$200.00 
SPECIAL MEETING REQUESTED BY APPLICANT 	$700.00 
 
[Amended 5-28-2008 by Ord. No. 08-072; 11-10-2010 by Ord. No. 10-133; 2-23-2011 by Ord. No. 11-021; 9-27-2011 by Ord. No. 11-112; 11-10-2015 by Ord. No. 15-147 ] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Formerly, similar provisions were contained in Chapter 142, Dance Halls, which was repealed 6-24-1998 by Ord. No. 98-081. 


Chapter 163 - FIREARMS AND WEAPONS 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City: Art. I, 1-7-1975 by Ord. No. J-496 as Secs. 16-43 and 16-44 of the 1971 Jersey City Code, as readopted 9-19-1978 by Ord. No. S-128; Art. II, 6-11-1987 as Ord. No. C-468; amended in its entirety 4-24-1996 by Ord. No. 96-034. Subsequent amendments noted where applicable.] 
Cross reference— Peace and good order, Ch. 242. 
_____ 
ARTICLE I - Discharge of Firearms 
[Adopted 1-7-1975 by Ord. No. J-496 as Secs. 16-43 and 16-44 of the 1971 Jersey City Code, as readopted 9-19-1978 by Ord. No. S-128] 
 
§ 163-1. - Discharge restricted. 
The discharge of a firearm of any description, carelessly or without due caution and circumspection in a manner so as to endanger or be likely to endanger a person or property, is prohibited; provided that this section shall not be construed to apply to any officer of the law discharging a firearm in the performance of his duty.  
§ 163-2. - Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050] 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25.  
ARTICLE II - Toy Guns and Box Cutters 
[Adopted 6-11-1987 as Ord. No. C-468; amended in its entirety 4-24-1996 by Ord. No. 96-034] 
 
§ 163-3. - Sale, distribution and use restricted. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, expose for sale, distribute, possess or use toy guns in the City of Jersey City. 
B.  "Toy gun" means any toy facsimile of an actual firearm that can reasonably be perceived to be an actual firearm. [Amended 4-14-2010 by Ord. No. 10-049]  
§ 163-4. - Council findings. [ ] 
It has come to the attention of the Council that persons under the age of eighteen (18) have been purchasing devices sold as "box cutters" to carry on their person for purposes unrelated to their intended use. According to reports from the Department of Public Safety, Board of Education and the media, the purchase of box cutters by juveniles is increasing, and box cutters have been found in the possession of both students and others within Jersey City schools. Since these devices have blades which can be withdrawn into a handle or sheath, they can be concealed on one's person and used as weapons in fights and while committing crimes. It has been reported to the Council by school officials and through the media that persons under the age of eighteen (18) have used these devices to inflict serious injuries upon other youths and adults. From available reports, the sale and distribution of box cutters appears to have contributed to, and even aggravated, violent crimes by juveniles. The Council is of the opinion that it should use its municipal police powers to limit the sale and distribution of a device, the misuse of which aggravates criminal acts and causes severe injury to the victims of juvenile violence. Although the Council recognizes that these devices can be acquired outside the City of Jersey City, it believes nevertheless that it should not be made easy to acquire them within the city and that persons selling these devices should be required to assume the responsibility for their distribution to persons under the age of eighteen (18) who may use them for illegal acts.  
§ 163-5. - Sale of box cutters to minors prohibited; definitions of terms. 
"Box cutter" means any knife or similar device designed to cut cardboard, fiberboard and similar materials, having a razor-like blade which can be released from a handle or sheath by the application of hand pressure upon a button, slide or other device attached to the handle, sheath or blade.  
§ 163-6. - Sale and distribution to minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell any box cutter or similar device to a person under eighteen (18) years of age; except that the establishment by a preponderance of the evidence of all of the following facts by a person making the sale shall constitute an affirmative defense to any prosecution for violating this Article: 
A.  The purchaser falsely represented his or her age by producing a driver's license bearing a photograph of the licensee, or by producing a photographic identification card issued pursuant to § 1 of L. 1968, c. 313* or by producing a similar card purporting to be a valid identification card indicating that he or she was eighteen (18) years of age or older; 
* Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 33:1-81.2. 
(1)  Every person engaged in the business of selling box cutters shall maintain the box cutters in a secure area, either behind a counter or in a locked display case or other location where such box cutters are not accessible to the public. No box cutters shall be displayed on any open counter or any aisle or other area which is accessible to the general public entering a place of business. 
B.  The appearance of the purchaser was such that an ordinary prudent person would believe him or her to be eighteen (18) years of age or older; and 
C.  The sale was made in good faith relying upon the indicators of age listed in Subsections A and B above.  
§ 163-7. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this Article shall, upon conviction, be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25; except that the minimum penalty for any violation shall be a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.).  
ARTICLE III - Reporting of Lost or Stolen Firearms 
[Adopted 6-14-2006 as Ord. No. 06-073] 
 
§ 163-8. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this Article the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
A.  Pursuant to N.J. Stat. § 2C:39-l(f), "Firearm" shall mean any handgun, rifle, shotgun, machine gun, automatic or semi-automatic rifle, or any gun, device or instrument in the nature of a weapon from which may be fired or ejected any solid projectable ball, slug, pellet, missile or bullet, or any gas, vapor or other noxious thing, by means of a cartridge or shell or by the action of an explosive or the igniting of flammable or explosive substances. It shall also include, without limitation, any firearm which is in the nature of an air gun, spring gun or pistol or other weapon of a similar nature in which the propelling force is a spring, elastic band, carbon dioxide, compressed or other gas or vapor, air or compressed air, or is ignited by compressed air, and ejecting a bullet or missile smaller than three-eighths of an inch in diameter, with sufficient force to injure a person.  
§ 163-9. - Reporting lost firearms. [ ] 
A.  Any person who loses a firearm must report to the Department of Public Safety within forty-eight (48) hours, after recognizing that the gun is missing. 
B.  Failure to report a lost firearm shall result in a penalty of up to ten thousand dollars ($10,000). 
C.  A person reporting a lost firearm must provide all of the following information to the Department of Public Safety: 
(1)  Name and address of the lawful owner, (2) kind of firearm, (3) serial number, (4) model, (5) caliber, (6) manufacturer of the firearm, (7) date and place of theft or loss, and (8) complete statement of facts and circumstances surrounding such theft or loss. 
D.  Failure to correctly report any information of § 163-9(B) shall result in a penalty of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000).  
§ 163-10. - Reporting stolen firearms. [ ] 
A.  Any person whose firearm is stolen must report to the Department of Public Safety within forty-eight (48) hours, after recognizing that the gun is missing. 
B.  Failure to report a stolen firearm shall result in a penalty of up to ten thousand dollars ($10,000). 
C.  A person reporting stolen firearm must provide all of the following information to the Department of Public Safety: 
(1)  Name and address of the lawful owner, (2) kind of firearm, (3) serial number, (4) model, (5) caliber, (6) manufacturer of the firearm, (7) date and place of theft or loss, and (8) complete statement of facts and circumstances surrounding such theft or loss. 
D.  Failure to correctly report any information of § 163-10(B) shall result in a penalty of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000).  
§ 163-11. - City's obligation. 
In undertaking enforcement of this Chapter, the City is assuming an undertaking only to promote the general welfare and safety. It is not assuming, nor it is imposing on its officers and employees, an obligation for breach of which it is liable in money damages to any person who claims that such breach proximately caused injury.  
§ 163-12. - Severability. 
If any part of this Chapter, or the application thereof to any person or circumstances, is held invalid, the remainder of this Chapter, including the application of such part of provision to other persons or circumstances, shall not be affected thereby and shall continue in full force and effect. To this end,, provisions of this Chapter are severable.  
ARTICLE V - Prohibiting the Sale or Purchase of More Than One Handgun Within a Thirty (30)-Day Period 
[Adopted 6-28-2006 as Ord. No. 06-082; amended in its entirety 10-11-2006 by Ord. No. 06-116] 
 
§ 163-16. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this Article the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
A.  Pursuant to N.J.S.A. § 2C:39-1(k), "Handgun" shall mean any pistol, revolver or other firearm originally designed or manufactured to be fired by the use of a single hand.  
§ 163-17. - Prohibition of sale or purchase. 
A.  The term "dealer" shall mean a retail firearms dealer licensed by the State of New Jersey or by the United States Government. 
B.  No dealer located within the City of Jersey City shall sell any handgun to any person who has purchased or made application to purchase any other handgun within the City of Jersey City within a thirty (30) day period prior thereto. 
C.  The dealer shall require the purchaser, at the time of application to certify on a form prescribed by the Chief of Police, that he or she has not purchased or made an application to purchase a handgun within the last thirty (30) days, and which, if any, of the exemptions set forth in Subsection (D) of this section is applicable to the purchaser. 
D.  Purchases and applications under this section shall be exempt if made solely by and for: 
1.  Any agent or employee of a law enforcement agency duly authorized to purchase a handgun by that law enforcement agency. 
2.  Any agent or employee of any agency, authorized to perform law enforcement duties, duly authorized by that agency to purchase a handgun. 
3.  Any agent or employee of a federal, state or local correctional facility duly authorized to purchase a handgun by that federal, state or local correctional facility. 
E.  No resident of the City of Jersey City, except for those residents specifically exempted by this ordinance, may purchase or make application to purchase more than one handgun in any thirty (30) day period. 
F.  Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this Article shall, upon conviction, be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25; except that the minimum penalty for any violation shall be a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.).  
§ 163-18. - Severability. 
If any part of this Chapter, or the application thereof to any person or circumstances, is held invalid, the remainder of this Chapter, including the application of such part of provision to other persons or circumstances, shall not be affected thereby and shall continue in full force and effect. To this end, provisions of this Chapter are severable.  
Chapter 166 - FIRE LANES 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City 12-22-1993 as Ord. No. 93-144; amended in its entirety 2-9-1994 by Ord. No. 94-005. Subsequent amendments noted where applicable.] 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Parking lots and public garages — See Ch. 236. 	Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 332. 
Towers and towing — See Ch. 319. 	
 
 
§ 166-1. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
FIRE LANE/ZONE - The areas designated by the Fire Official and properly posted and marked in accordance with this chapter. The terms "fire zone" and "fire lane" shall be interchangeable. 
FIRE OFFICIAL - The City of Jersey City Fire Official or the designated representative, as defined in N.J.A.C. 5:18, 1.1 et seq., the New Jersey State Uniform Fire Code.  
§ 166-2. - General regulations. 
A.  Designation. The Fire Official, with the approval of the Director of Public Safety and the Chief of Police, may designate fire lanes on private property to which the public is invited or which is devoted to public use, if such designation is necessary to provide safety for the public or to provide proper access for Department of Public Safety operations in an emergency; [ Amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] 
B.  Notification. Whenever a proposed fire lane has been designated, the Fire Official shall notify the owner of the property in writing by registered or certified mail, or by hand delivering notice, describing the area to be designated and the reason for the designation; 
C.  Marking of fire lanes. Marking of fire lanes shall be done by the owner at the owner's expense and shall be accomplished within thirty (30) days after receiving the notification. Upon completion of the marking, the Fire Official shall file a description of the fire lane with the City Clerk in accordance with § 3-29 of Chapter 3, Administration of Government. 
D.  Obstructions. It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave standing any vehicle or place any obstruction on lands, whether publicly or privately owned, after notice has been posted as hereinafter provided prohibiting such parking.  
§ 166-3. - Delineation of fire zones. 
All fire lanes and zones located shall be striped and signs posted in the following manner: 
A.  Signs. 
(1)  Signs shall be twelve (12) inches wide by eighteen (18) inches long with a minimum of two-inch-high lettering. 
(2)  Light reflective material shall be used for the sign background, which shall be white. 
(3)  Lettering shall be red on the white background. 
(4)  Signs, whether wall- or post-mounted, shall be placed at the beginning and end of the lane and at such intervals as required by the Fire Official, but not more than one hundred (100) feet center to center. 
(5)  Whenever a fire lane changes angle or direction more than sixty degrees (60°), a sign shall be visible from another side; additional signs may be required at the discretion of the Fire Official, the Municipal Fire Subcode Official or the Department of Public Safety. [ Amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] 
(6)  Signs shall be placed at a height of seven (7) feet as measured from the ground surface to the bottom of the sign at a forty-five-degree angle (right angle) facing the direction of the traffic flow. If traffic flows in two (2) directions, signs shall be placed parallel to the traffic flow. Signs may be placed upon existing supports. 
(7)  The fire lane and zone sign shall state: "No Parking Fire Lane/Zone." 
(8)  A single-headed arrow shall point in the direction in which the regulation is in effect if the sign is at the end of a lane; or a double-headed arrow pointing both ways if the sign is at an intermediate point in a lane. 
B.  Striping. 
(1)  Paint for striping and lettering shall be yellow. 
(2)  Fire lanes shall be identified by painting the curb yellow and be striped a minimum of eighteen (18) feet wide, if feasible; the lane shall be striped to a minimum of twelve (12) feet or as designated by the Fire Official. 
(3)  Each yellow diagonal stripe shall be four (4) inches wide, five (5) feet apart throughout the area and around the perimeter of the lane. 
(4)  The legend "No Parking Fire Lane/Zone" shall be placed within the striped outer boundary lines of the lane/zone at a minimum of one-hundred-foot intervals, if so designated by the Fire Official, to further identify the area designated. 
(5)  The lettering of the legend, if required, shall be eighteen (18) inches high and placed within the center of the fire lane/zone.  
§ 166-4. - Enforcement. [ ] 
The Fire Official and the Department of Public Safety, in addition to other officers authorized by law to issue parking/traffic summonses, shall have concurrent jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this code.  
§ 166-5. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person who violates this chapter shall, upon conviction in Municipal Court, be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100). Each violation shall constitute a separate offense.  
Chapter 172 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City 2-23-1984 as Ord. No. MC-575; Amended 7-19-2006 by Ord. No. 06-083; Amendments noted where applicable.] 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Certificates of occupancy — See Ch. 119. 	Subdivision of land — See Ch. 299. 
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 131. 	Waterfront — See Ch. 340. 
Multiple dwellings — See Ch. 218. 	Zoning — See Ch. 345. 
 
 
§ 172-1.0. - Statutory authorization, findings of fact, purpose and objectives. [Amended 7-19-06 by Ord. No. 06-083]  
§ 172-1.1. - Statutory authorization. [Amended 7-19-06 by Ord. No. 06-083] 
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1, et seq., delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Municipal Council of the City of Jersey City, of New Jersey does ordain as follows:  
§ 172-1.2. - Findings of fact. [Amended 7-19-06 by Ord. No. 06-083] 
(1)  The flood hazard areas of [municipality] are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption or commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(2)  These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and velocities, and when inadequately anchored, causes damage in other areas. Uses that are inadequately flood proofed, elevated otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.  
§ 172-1.3. - Statement of purpose. [Amended 7-19-06 by Ord. No. 06-083] 
It is the purpose of this ordinance to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed: 
(1)  To protect human life and health; 
(2)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer line, streets, bridges located in areas of special flood hazard; 
(6)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood blight areas; 
(7)  To insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and 
(8)  To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their action.  
§ 172-1.4. - Methods of reducing flood losses. [Amended 7-19-06 by Ord. No. 06-083] 
In order to accomplish its purposes, this ordinance includes methods and provisions for: 
(1)  Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)  Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods including facilities which serve such uses be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  Controlling the alteration of natural flood plains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood waters; 
(4)  Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage; and 
(5)  Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas.  
§ 172-2.0. - Definitions and word usage. [Amended 3-12-1987 by Ord. No. C-427; 7-19-06 by Ord. No. 06-083] 
A.  Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meanings they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
B.  As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
APPEAL — A request for a review of the Construction Official's interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance. 
SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO or AH Zone on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater chance of flooding to an avenge depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system. 
CHIEF ENGINEER — Licensed professional engineer who is the City's Director of Engineering. 
DEVELOPMENT— Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials located within an area of special flood hazard. 
ELEVATED BUILDING— A non-basement building built, in the case of a building in an Area of Special Flood Hazard, to have the top of the elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means of piling, columns (posts and piers) or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water and adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. In an area of special flood hazard, "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters. 
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source; 
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided in which the Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as the Flood Insurance Rate Maps and the wafer surface elevation of the base flood. 
FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances, subdivison regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a flood plain ordinance, grading ordinance, erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such State or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior), or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district, or one preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a State inventory of historic places in States with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on the local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
(a)  By an approved State program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(b)  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in States without approved programs. 
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure usable solely for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement is not considered a building's "lowest floor," provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other applicable non-elevation design requirements. 
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreation vehicle." 
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of this chapter adopted by the community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of the flood plain management regulations adopted by the municipality. 
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is: 
(i)  Built on a single chassis; 
(ii)  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the longest horizontal projections; 
(iii)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(iv)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
START OF CONSTRUCTION — For other than new construction or substantial improvement under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L. 97-348), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided that the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The "actual start" means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site such as the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home or a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground. 
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: 
(1)  Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other improvement of a structure, as per the definitions set forth in NJAC5:23-6 Rehabilitation Sub-Code. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. 
(2)  For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. 
(3)  The term does not, however, include either: 
(a)  Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing State or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
(b)  Any attention of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter.  
§ 172-3.0. - General provisions. [Amended 7-19-06 by Ord. No. 06-083]  
§ 172-3.1. - Lands to which this ordinance applies. [Amended 7-19-06 by Ord. No. 06-083] 
This ordinance shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of Jersey City, Hudson County, New Jersey.  
§ 172-3.2. - Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard. [Amended 7-19-06 by Ord. No. 06-083] 
The areas of special flood hazard for the City of Jersey City, community No. 340223, are identified and defined on the following documents prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency: 
A.  A scientific and engineering report "Flood Insurance Study, Hudson County, New Jersey (All Jurisdictions)" dated August 16, 2006. 
B.  Flood Insurance Rate Map for Hudson County. New Jersey (All Jurisdictions) as shown on Index and panel numbers 0039, 0043, 0101, 0102, 0103, 0104, 0106, 0107, 0108, 0109, 0111, 0112, 0116; whose effective date is August 16, 2006. 
The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of this ordinance. The Flood Insurance Study and maps are on file at City Hall, 280 Grove Street, Jersey City, NJ 07302.  
§ 172-3.3. - Violations and penalties.* [Amended 7-19-06 by Ord. No. 06-083] 
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25. Nothing herein contained shall prevent Jersey City from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
* Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.  
§ 172-3.4. - Abrogation; greater restrictions to apply. [Amended 7-19-06 by Ord. No. 06-083] 
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.  
§ 172-3.5. - Construal of provisions. [Amended 7-19-06 by Ord. No. 06-083] 
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
A.  Considered as minimum requirements; 
B.  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body, and 
C.  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under State Statutes.  
§ 172-3.6. - Warning; disclaimer of liability. [Amended 7-19-06 by Ord. No. 06-083] 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of Jersey City, any officer or employee or any of the City's agencies or agents thereof, or the Federal Insurance Administration for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.  
§ 172-4. - Administration. [Amended 7-19-06 by Ord. No. 06-083]  
§ 172-4.1. - Establishment of development permit. [Amended 7-19-06 by Ord. No. 06-083] 
A.  A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins within any area of special flood hazard. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the City's Chief Engineer and provided to the applicant by the Construction Official and may include, but not be limited to: plans in triplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials; drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. 
B.  Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  The elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures. 
(2)  The elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been flood proofed. 
(3)  Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the flood proofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the flood proofing criteria in Section 172-5.2B. 
(4)  A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.  
§ 172-4.2. - Local administrator designated. [Amended 7-19-06 by Ord. No. 06-083] 
The Construction Official is hereby appointed to administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in accordance with its provisions.  
§ 172-4.3. - Duties of Construction Official. [Amended 7-19-06 by Ord. No. 06-083] 
Duties of the Construction Official shall include, but not be limited to: 
A.  Permit review. The Construction Official shall: 
(1)  Review all development permits to determine that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied. 
(2)  Review all development permits to determine that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required. 
(3)  Review all development permits to determine if the proposed development is located in the floodway. 
(4)  Refer any application for development of property determined to be within the floodway to the City's Chief Engineer for further compliance review, if deemed necessary, prior to issuance of a development permit. 
B.  Use of other base flood and floodway data. When base flood elevation and floodway data has not been provided in accordance with § 172-3.2, Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard, the Construction Official shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source in order to administer § 172-5.2A, Specific standards, residential construction, and § 172-5.2B, Specific standards, nonresidential construction. 
C.  Record maintenance. The Construction Official shall: 
(1)  Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures and whether or not the structure contains a basement. 
(2)  For all new substantially improved flood proofed structures: 
(a)  Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level); and 
(b)  Maintain the flood proofing certifications required in Section 172-4.1. 
(3)  Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter. 
D.  Alteration of watercourses. The Construction Official shall: 
(1)  Upon consultation with the Chief Engineer, shall ensure that the applicant shall notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection - Land Use Regulation Program and Dam Safety and Flood Control, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration. 
(2)  Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished. 
E.  Interpretation of FIRM boundaries. The Construction Official shall, in consultation with the Chief Engineer, make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided below.  
§ 172-4.4. - Establishment of fees. [Amended 7-19-06 by Ord. No. 06-083] 
Reasonable fees may be established under Chapter 160 of the Municipal Code to cover the cost of administering this chapter; to cover the cost of review of applications for development pursuant to this Chapter by the Construction Official or by the City's Chief Engineer and his staff; and to cover the administrative cost of appeals and variance applications.  
§ 172-4.4-1. - Appeal and variance procedure. [Amended 7-19-06 by Ord. No. 06-083]  
§ 172-4.4-2. - Construction Board of Appeals; variances. [Amended 7-19-06 by Ord. No. 06-083] 
A.  The Construction Board of Appeals as established by Jersey City shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter. 
B.  The Construction Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the Construction Official in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
C.  Those aggrieved by the decision of the Construction Board of Appeals, or any taxpayer, may appeal such decision to a court of competent jurisdiction. 
D.  In passing upon such applications, the Construction Board of Appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter; and 
(1)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the inquiry of others. 
(2)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage. 
(3)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner. 
(4)  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community. 
(5)  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable. 
(6)  The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage. 
(7)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development. 
(8)  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program of that area. 
(9)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles. 
(10)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site. 
(11)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems and streets and bridges. 
E.  Upon consideration of the above-listed factors, the Construction Board of Appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
F.  The Construction Official shall maintain the records of all appeal actions, including technical information, and report any variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request  
§ 172-4.4-3. - Conditions for variances. [Amended 7-19-06 by Ord. No. 06-083] 
A.  Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items 1—11 in Section 172-4.4-2 have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
B.  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of historic structures (as defined by the chapter) without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this section upon a determination that the proposed reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
C.  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
D.  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
E.  Variances shall only be issued upon: 
(1)  A showing of good and sufficient cause; 
(2)  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
(3)  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety or extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public identified in Section 172-4.4-1 D, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
F.  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.  
§ 172-5. - Provisions for flood hazard reduction. [Amended 7-19-06 by Ord. No. 06-083]  
§ 172-5.1. - General standards. [Amended 7-19-06 by Ord. No. 06-083] 
In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required: 
A.  Anchoring. 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
(2)  All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
B.  Construction materials and methods. 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
C.  Utilities. 
(1)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system 
(2)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharge from the systems into floodwater. 
(3)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(4)  Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
D.  Subdivision proposal. 
(1)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
(2)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
(3)  All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage. 
(4)  Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other proposed development which contain at least fifty (50) lots or five acres (whichever is less) which is to be developed at one time or over a period of time as part of an overall project. 
E  Enclosure openings. All new construction and substantial improvements having fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for the parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
(1)  A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
(2)  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. 
(3)  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers or other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.  
§ 172-5.2. - Specific standards. [Amended 3-12-1987 by Ord. No. C-427; 7-19-06 by Ord. No. 06-083] 
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data have been provided as set forth in § 172-3.2 Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard or in § 172-4.3B Use of other base flood and floodway data, the following standards are required: 
A.  Residential construction. 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above base flood elevation. 
(2)  Within any AO zone on the municipality's FIRM, it is required that all new construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet (at least two feet if no depth number is specified). In addition, adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures are also required. 
B.  Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the level of the base flood elevation, or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall: 
(1)  If located within any AO zone on the municipality's FIRM, shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet (at least two feet if no depth number is specified). In addition, adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures are also required. 
(2)  Be flood proofed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water; 
(3)  Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and 
(4)  Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the applicable provisions of this subsection. Such certification shall be provided to the official as set forth herein, Section 172-4.3C. 
C.  Manufactured homes. 
(1)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with § 172-5.1A. 
(2)  All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved within an area of special flood hazard shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the top of the lowest floor is at or above the base flood elevation.  
Chapter 173 - RETAIL FLORISTS 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City 9-12-2002 by Ord. No. 02-096.] 
 
§ 173-1. - Definition. 
RETAIL FLORIST — means a person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of selling at retail or wholesale, to the public, in any quantity, cut or rooted flowers, funeral sprays, wreaths, designs, corsages, potted plants or cuttings or bedding plants of natural growth, and selling the aforementioned products during the entire calendar year. This section shall not apply to the sale of Christmas trees.  
§ 173-2. - License required. 
A.  No person shall engage either directly or indirectly in business as a retail florist within the City without having first obtained a license from the Director of Commerce. 
B.  The Director of Commerce shall issue a license upon payment of all fees required under § 160-1 (O.1).  
§ 173-3 - Facilities. 
No retail florist shall do business except from a store, shop or greenhouse. If cut flowers are sold, the premises shall be equipped with proper refrigeration, which shall consist of a regular florist display mechanical refrigerator of a minimum size of eight feet by ten (10) feet by five feet to house cut flowers and plants.  
§ 173-4. - Violation; penalties. 
Any person, corporation or firm convicted of violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be subject to the penalties set forth in § 1-25.  
§ 173-5. - Exceptions. 
This section shall not apply to any non-profit organizations, selling products under this section for purposes of fundraising for its own use.  
Chapter 175 - FOOD-HANDLING ESTABLISHMENTS 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City as indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.] 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 84. 	Retail and commercial premises — See Ch. 263. 
Dance halls — See Ch. 142. 	Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 296. 
Fees and charges — See Ch. 160. 	Zoning — See Ch. 345. 
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 182. 	
 
_____ 
ARTICLE I - (Reserved)[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Former Art. I, Dine-Dance Establishments, adopted 5-4-1971 as Ch. 11, Art. I, of the 1971 Jersey City Code, as readopted 9-19-1978 by Ord. No. S-128, as amended, was repealed 6-24-1998 by Ord. No. 98-081. 
 
§§ 175-1 through 175-7. - (Reserved)  
ARTICLE II - Mobile Food Vendors[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— This article was originally adopted May 4, 1971 as Ch. 11, Art. III, of the 1971 Jersey City Code, and readopted September 19, 1978 by Ord. No. S-128, amended in its entirety at time of adoption of Code. See Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. Subsequently, it was retitled and substantially amended March 28, 2013 by Ord. No. 13-037, and February 26, 2014 by Ord. No. 14-018 . 
 
§ 175-8. - Mobile food vendors. [Amended 5-10-2006 by Ord. No. 06-064; ; ] 
A mobile food vendor is anyone who sells food or beverages from a vehicle such as a truck, van or pushcart, whether such food or beverages are prepared on site or prepared elsewhere and transported to the site of the sale.  
§ 175-9. - License required; renewal; number of licenses limited; restrictions. [Amended ; ] 
A.  No person shall conduct, operate or maintain a mobile food vendor establishment without first obtaining a license to do so issued by the Division of Health upon payment of the sum as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and charges for mobile food vendors, per year or fraction of a year. Such license shall expire on the next April 30 after issuance, unless sooner suspended or revoked. Renewals of any license shall not be issued after July 31 of the renewal year. Any licensee who fails to renew a license by April 30 shall not be permitted to operate until said license is renewed within the grace period as set forth herein. 
B.  The Health Officer is authorized to renew the license of a deceased licensee in the name of the deceased licensee's surviving spouse. 
C.  The number of licenses which may be issued to mobile food vendors shall not exceed two hundred thirty-seven (237) licenses. In the event that a license is revoked or if it is not renewed after July 31 of the renewal year then any such license may be issued to an applicant for such license on a first-come-first-served basis. The Director of the Division of Health shall maintain a waiting list for such revoked or unrenewed licenses and shall notify the person at the top of the list that such a license is available. 
D.  Mobile food vendors shall affix to the vehicle or pushcart a copy of the license issued by the Division of Health, the certificate of registration issued by the New Jersey Division of Taxation, and shall have displayed prominently on or adjacent to the doors of the vehicle, a placard or lettering with the name and address of the owner, lessee and/or lessor of the vehicle. Said information shall be in letters and numbers no less than three (3) inches in height in accordance with N.J.S.A. 39:4-46. 
E.  Mobile food vendor licenses are not transferable.  
§ 175-9.1 - Application process. [ ] 
A.  All applicants or licensees attempting to apply for or renew a license must complete an application/reapplication form prescribed by the Division of Health, pay the license fee prescribed in § 160-1, and provide proof of the following: 
1.  Certificate of registration issued by the N.J. Division of Taxation; 
2.  Proof of ownership or rental of an approved vehicle or pushcart; 
3.  Proof of general liability insurance providing a minimum of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) coverage for non-motorized mobile food vendor vehicles; 
4.  Proof of motor vehicle insurance as per N.J.S.A. § 39:6B-1 if the mobile food vendor operates from a motor vehicle in addition to proof of general liability insurance providing a minimum of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) coverage; 
5.  A type 2 propane permit from the Jersey City Fire Department, if the vehicle or pushcart is carrying more than five (5) pounds of propane; 
6.  A satisfactory inspection report issued no more than thirty (30) days prior to a license being issued or renewed.  
§ 175-9.2. - Education/training requirement/pre-operation inspection. [ ] 
All approved applicants shall attend a food handlers' course directed by the Jersey City Division of Health or provide proof of having attended a similarly approved course and arrange for an inspection of their vehicle prior to commencing business. All mobile food vendors must attend a food handlers' course every five (5) years.  
§ 175-9.3. - Operation requirements for mobile food vendors. [ ] 
A.  Mobile food vendors shall provide trash and recycling receptacles within ten (10) feet of their site and shall collect all trash and debris within twenty-five (25) feet before leaving their site. Collected trash must not be deposited in public trash receptacles. 
B.  No mobile food vendors shall occupy the street and the sidewalk at the same time, i.e. park a motorized vehicle in the street and dispense food from the sidewalk or set up a pushcart on the sidewalk and dispense food in the street. 
C.  New or replacement mobile food vendor trucks, vans or other vehicles trucks shall be inspected before operating. No changes shall be made to approved mobile food vendor trucks, vans, pushcarts or vehicles without re-inspection by the Division of Health. 
D.  No mobile food vendor shall serve food or drink to a motorist or occupants of a vehicle blocking the passage of traffic. 
E.  No mobile food vendors shall occupy street space blocking the passage of traffic. 
F.  Mobile food vendors vehicle and pushcarts shall be self-contained; no coolers to be placed on streets or sidewalks. 
G.  No mobile food vendor shall provide in-truck dining services or sidewalk tables and chairs. 
H.  Grills, generators, or other items related to the mobile food vending operation shall be physically attached to the vehicle or pushcart. 
I.  Mobile food vendors must have a portable water tank/sink for hand washing attached to their vehicle as per N.J.A.C. 8:24-5.3. 
J.  All motorized vehicles must abide by all existing traffic and parking regulations.  
§ 175-10. - Use of streets by mobile food vendors; physically handicapped persons. [Amended 5-10-2006 by Ord. No. 06-064; ; ; ] 
A.  No person conducting, operating as a mobile food vendor shall be permitted to sell food or drink within the area designated as The Journal Square Special Improvement District, which area is more particularly described by block and lot numbers and street addresses as set forth in Schedule A to Chapter 69 of this Code on file in the Office of the Jersey City Clerk. No person conducting, operating or maintaining a mobile food vendor establishment, shall be permitted to sell food or drink within three hundred (300) feet of any licensed eating and drinking establishment, nor shall he or she be permitted to remain in any location for a period exceeding one hundred twenty (120) minutes during a four-hour period. The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the Police Department and the Division of Health. 
B.  Physically handicapped persons. 
(1)  An exemption to the one hundred twenty-minute regulation shall apply to physically handicapped persons who have been issued a specific vehicle identification card by the Division of Health. The exemption to the one hundred twenty-minute regulation shall not apply to any person operating an establishment on behalf of the handicapped person. Said exemption to the one hundred twenty-minute regulation shall only apply to one (1) vehicle or establishment operated by the handicapped person personally. The handicapped person shall not have an exemption for any more than one (1) vehicle or establishment. In the event that the handicapped person is not personally operating that vehicle or establishment then the exemption to the-one hundred twenty-minute regulation shall not apply to that vehicle or establishment. 
(2)  Certification is required by a physically handicapped person in order to qualify for the exemption to the one hundred twenty-minute regulation which shall contain the precise nature of the disability and shall not be in general terms. It shall also contain a prognosis by the doctor as to the length of time that such disability will exist. A new doctor's certification obtained pursuant to a current or recent examination shall be presented annually with the application for any renewal of a license to a physically handicapped person. 
(3)  "Physical handicap" means a physical impairment which confines a person to a wheelchair; causes a person to walk with difficulty or insecurity; affects the sight or hearing to the extent that a person functioning in public areas is insecure or exposed to danger; causes faulty coordination; or reduces mobility, flexibility, coordination and perceptiveness. "Physical handicap" shall include coronary conditions. Any such physically handicapped person shall submit a certificate from a physician certifying that said handicap does exist. 
C.  The provisions of the one hundred twenty-minute regulation in this section shall be enforced by the Police Division of the Public Safety Department and the Division of Health. 
D.  No mobile food vendors shall operate upon private property. No owner or person in control of or in possession of private property shall permit any mobile food vendors to be operated upon said property. 
E.  No mobile food vendors shall operate in any area where parking of motor vehicles is prohibited, restricted or regulated. Such areas shall include, but not be limited to, sidewalks, bus stops, taxi stands, fire hydrants, parking metered areas, loading zones, areas where parking is prohibited, such as from the corner of an intersection as indicated by curb markings, areas reserved for physically handicapped motor vehicle operators, crosswalks, driveways and any other areas so restricted, prohibited or regulated for the parking of motor vehicles. 
F.  No mobile food vendor vehicles shall exceed thirty-seven (37) feet long by eight (8) feet wide. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-018 , adopted February 26, 2014, amended the Code by repealing former § 175-10, and renumbering former § 175-11 as a new § 175-10. Former § 175-10 pertained to license transfer procedure, and carried no history note.  
§ 175-11. - Violations and penalties. [ .] 
A.  Anyone violating any of the provisions of this Article shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25. In the event that an offense is a continuing one, then each day such offense continues shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense and shall be punishable as such as provided herein. Where the offense is a continual one, only one (1) summons and complaint need be issued, provided that there is stated on such documents the charge that each day the violation continues shall be a separate and distinct offense. 
B.  In addition to the penalties set forth herein, any person operating a mobile food vendor who violates any provisions of this Article, or the applicable provisions of Chapter 24 of the New Jersey State Sanitary Code, the vehicle, cart or establishment which is being operated as such shall be impounded by either the Police or the Division of Health as the case may be. In the event that any such vehicle is impounded, the vehicle, cart or truck may be redeemed by the person upon payment of the cost of impounding and the storage charges established by the Department of Public Safety. Said storage charge and cost of impounding shall be the same as are established for the impounding of motor vehicles. [Amended 3-28-2013 by Ord. No. 13-037 ; 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13-037, adopted March 28, 2013 , amended the Code by repealing former §§ 175-12 and 175-13. Former § 175-12 pertained to licensing of itinerant catering establishments, and former § 175-13 pertained to use of streets by itinerant catering establishments, and derived from Ord. No. 06-064, adopted May 10, 2006. Subsequently, Ord. No. 14-018, adopted February 26, 2014, amended the Code by renumbering former §§ 175-14 and 175-15 as new §§; 175-12 and 175-13.  
§ 175-12. - License revocation or suspension. [ .] 
A.  The license of a person who violates any provision of this Article or has been found to be violation of this Article or the applicable provisions of Chapter 24 of the State Sanitary Code, may be revoked or suspended after hearing upon 10 days' notice served upon the licensee. Said notice shall contain the specific provision of this Article or of the State Sanitary Code which has been violated and the specifications which shall constitute the violation. The Health Officer and Chief Registered Environmental Health Specialist shall conduct the hearings upon any offenses. Licenses may be revoked or suspended for any violation of the Article, or of the State Sanitary Code, or for any repeated violations thereof. Any licensee of a mobile food vendor whose license has been revoked shall not be qualified to receive a new license or have said license restored to said person. [Amended 3-28-2013 by Ord. No. 13-037 ] 
B.  Any licensee who is charged with a violation shall have the right to be represented by an attorney and said facts shall be stated on the notice served upon him. 
C.  Any licensee whose license has been revoked or suspended shall have a right to appeal such revocation or suspension to a court of competent jurisdiction in accordance with the rules of the Courts of the State of New Jersey. 
Note— See editor's note, § 175-11.  
§§ 175-13—175-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III - Food Establishments 
[Adopted 5-4-1971 as Ch. 11, Art. IV, of the 1971 Jersey City Code, as readopted 9-19-1978 by Ord. No. S-128, amended in its entirety 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050 at time of adoption of Code] 
 
§ 175-16. - Applicability. 
This Article shall be applicable to eating and drinking establishments and to itinerant eating and drinking establishments.  
§ 175-17. - Restaurant home delivery service; notice. 
A.  Every restaurant which operates or advertises a home delivery service and does not deliver to every location in the City of Jersey City shall post a notice containing the following language: 
(RESTAURANT NAME) 
DOES NOT DELIVER TO EVERY LOCATION IN JERSEY CITY 
B.  The sign shall be in letters of one inch and shall be conspicuously displayed at the cash register at the point of sale and at the restaurant entrance and exit. 
C.  Any restaurant which does not display this sign will be deemed to deliver to any location in Jersey City. 
D.  A restaurant which does not deliver to every location in Jersey City and which does not display the above sign shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25, or to revocation of its license, or both. 
E.  "Restaurant" includes any restaurant, pizzeria, tavern, diner, luncheonette or place of business where food and drink are sold for consumption on and off the premises.  
§ 175-18. - Definitions. [Amended 8-16-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068; 5-10-2006 by Ord. No. 06-064; 3-11-2015 by Ord. No. ; 3-11-2015 by Ord. No. ] 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
AGRICULTURAL MARKET - Any retail food establishment which is primarily engaged in the sale of raw agricultural products, may cut the raw agricultural products for sale on the premises and may include as a minor portion of its operation, the sale of factory-sealed or prepackaged food products that do not normally require refrigeration and the sale of other grocery products. 
BAKERY - Any retail food establishment engaged in the sale or preparation of bakery products such as bread, cakes and pies; may include as a minor portion of the operation the sale of other grocery products. 
BAR/LIQUOR STORE - Any retail establishment engaged in the sale of alcoholic beverages; may include as a minor portion of the operation the sale of factory-sealed or prepackaged food products. 
BUTCHER - Any retail food establishment primarily engaged in the sale or preparation of meat products; may include as a minor portion of the operation the sale of other grocery products. 
CATERER/COMMISSARY/KITCHEN - Any food establishment engaged in the preparation of food which is then transported to be served or offered for sale elsewhere. 
CONFECTIONERY - Any retail establishment primarily engaged in the sale of non-factory-sealed or prepackaged candy products by weight or piece. 
DELIVERY VEHICLE - Any mobile vehicle primarily used in the sale or delivery to individuals or food establishments of raw agricultural, frozen dairy or flavored ice, milk/dairy, raw meat/fish/poultry or bakery products. 
DISTRICT MANAGEMENT CORPORATION - An entity created by municipal ordinance or incorporated pursuant to Title 15A of the New Jersey Statutes and designated by municipal ordinance to receive funds collected by a special assessment within a special improvement district. 
FARM PRODUCT - Shall mean any agricultural, horticultural, forest product, or other product of the soil or water including but not limited to, fruits, vegetables, eggs, dairy products, meat and meat products, poultry and poultry products, fish and fish products, grain and grain products, honey, nuts, preserves, maple sap products, apple cider, fruit juice, ornamental or vegetable plants, nursery products, flowers, firewood and Christmas trees. 
FARMERS' MARKET - Shall mean a temporary market established in a public space where farmers/growers sell a variety of farm products, as defined in this article, directly to the consumer. 
FISH MARKET - Any retail food establishment primarily engaged in the sale or preparation of fish or fish products; may include as a minor portion of the operation the sale of other grocery products. 
FLEA MARKET - An open or closed air market primarily arranged for individual vendors to sell or trade new or used nonfood products and at which food products may be available for sale at the discretion of the Jersey City Health Officer. 
FOOD DESERT - A census tract, as determined by standards established by the U.S. Departments of Agriculture, Treasury and Health and Human Services, with a substantial share of residents who live in low income areas that have low levels of access to a grocery store or healthy, affordable food retail outlets. 
FOOD ESTABLISHMENT - Any business engaged in the sale of food and beverages of any kind, whether prepared on- or off-site, including but not limited to the sale of raw agricultural products, bakery products such as bread, cakes and pies, meat products, candy or candy products, farm products as defined in this article, fish or fish products, frozen dairy or flavored ice products, groceries, products sold from a mobile food vendor; businesses such as delicatessens, restaurants/cafeterias (Class A), restaurants/luncheonettes/cafes (Class B), institution kitchens, supermarkets, taverns and temporary retail food establishments. 
FROZEN DAIRY AND FLAVORED ICE PRODUCTS - Any retail food establishment primarily engaged in the sale or preparation of frozen dairy or flavored ice products. 
GROCERY - Any retail food establishment engaged in the sale of a limited variety of bakery and dairy products as well as prepackaged and processed food products. 
GROCERY/DELICATESSEN - Any retail food establishment primarily engaged in the sale of prepared foods and/or hot or cold sandwiches and a limited variety of bakery, meat, fish, poultry, dairy or liquor products, as well as prepackaged and processed food products. 
HEALTH OFFICER - Any reference to the City's Health Officer shall refer to the Health Officer or his or her designee. 
INSTITUTIONAL KITCHEN - Any food establishment engaged in the preparation of food which is to be served therein or minimally transported for service within the confines of the structure that houses the kitchen. 
MINI-MARKET/MINIMART - Any retail food establishment engaged in the sale of a limited variety of bakery, meat, fish, poultry, raw agricultural, dairy or liquor products as well as prepackaged and processed food products. 
MISCELLANEOUS LICENSE - This shall consist of any activity delegated to the Division of Health for licensing or regulation. The license fee shall be determined by the Division of Health. 
MOBILE FOOD VENDORS - A mobile food vendor is anyone who sells food or beverages from a vehicle such as a truck, van or pushcart, whether such food or beverages are prepared on-site or prepared elsewhere and transported to the site of the sale. 
NEWSSTAND - Any retail establishment primarily engaged in the sale of newspapers, magazines and notions; may include as a minor portion of the operation the sale of factory-sealed or prepackaged food products or prepared foods such as coffee, tea and rolls. 
NOT-FOR-PROFIT CORPORATION - Shall mean a federal tax exempt, nonprofit corporation incorporated in New Jersey. A New Jersey corporation which can demonstrate proof of pending federal tax exempt status shall also be deemed a non-profit corporation for the purposes of this article. 
PHARMACY/DRUGSTORE - Any retail establishment primarily engaged in the sale of drugs, cosmetics and devices pursuant to N.J.S.A. Title 24; may include as a minor portion of the operation the sale of food products. 
RESTAURANT/CAFETERIA (CLASS A) - Any retail food establishment, having an occupancy of more than 20 persons, engaged in the preparation and sale of food. 
RESTAURANT/LUNCHEONETTE CAFE (CLASS B) - Any retail food establishment, limited to an occupancy of not more than 20 persons, engaged in the preparation and sale of food. 
SPECIAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT - A special improvement district means an area within a municipality designated by municipal ordinance as an area in which a special assessment on property shall be imposed for purposes of promoting the economic and general welfare of the district and the municipality. 
SUPERMARKET - Any retail food establishment engaged in the sale of an extensive variety of bakery, meat, fish, poultry, raw agricultural, dairy or liquor products as well as prepackaged and processed food products. 
TAVERN - Any retail establishment engaged in the sale of alcohol and in the preparation of foods offered for sale therein. 
TEMPORARY RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT - Any retail food establishment which operates at a fixed location for a temporary period of time in connection with a fair, carnival, circus, public exhibition or similar transitory function, including church suppers, picnics or other organizational meetings; includes mobile retail food establishments and mobile agricultural markets.  
§ 175-19. - Classification of establishments. 
A.  The classification of each establishment will be determined by the Jersey City Division of Health pursuant to § 175-18. 
B.  Establishments meeting the criteria for more than one classification shall be charged the greater fee. [Added 8-16-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068] 
C.  If an establishment includes more than one classification, the Health Officer or designee may inspect, rate and issue violations and orders on any separate classification, e.g., fish market, butcher or restaurant. 
[Added 8-18-1999 by Ord. No. 99-104]  
§ 175-20. - License required; application. 
A.  No person shall operate any food establishment as defined in this article without a license issued by the City. [Amended 3-11-2015 by Ord. No. 15-026 ] 
B.  Applications for such license shall be submitted to the Division of Health of the city. The application shall be upon appropriate forms as the Health Officer shall require.  
§ 175-21. - License fees. 
A.  The fee for said license shall be as set forth in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges. 
B.  There shall be no prorating of license fees. Such license fees shall not be refundable. Such license is not transferable. It shall not be displayed in a conspicuous place in the establishment. In the case of farmers' markets, the seasonal market license, defined in Chapter 160, Subsection 160-1.P(3)(a)[5][c](i), shall be displayed at the manager's table or some other publically viewable location within the market, and all vendors participating in such farmers' market shall display its seasonal vendor license, defined in Chapter 160, Subsection 160-1.P(3)(a)[5][c](ii), at its point of sale or other publically viewable location. [Amended 3-11-2015 by Ord. No. 15-026 ]  
§ 175-22. - License term. [Amended 8-16-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068; 3-11-2015 by Ord. No. ] 
All licenses provided for in this Article shall be for a term of one (1) year beginning on the date of issuance except for a supermarket, which shall be for a term of six (6) months, and in the case of farmers' markets, which shall be in operation during farmers' market season (April 1 through December 31). Existing licenses shall retain the April 30 expiration date except for existing supermarkets which shall have April 30 and October 30 as expiration dates.  
§ 175-23. - Operation without license; failure to renew. 
A.  Food establishments engaged in operation without a license or which have failed to renew a license after notification from the Division of Health shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25. 
B.  Establishments operating without a license shall be closed pending application and approval of license. 
C.  Establishments failing to renew their license after the issuance of a summons from the Division of Health are subject to forfeiture of license.  
§ 175-24. - Food handler's course; fee. 
A.  Pursuant to N.J.A.C. 8:42-3.4(a)5, the Division of Health shall maintain surveillance of retail food establishments, food and beverage vending machines and shall provide for, or conduct, training courses for food services supervisors using curricula approved by the Department of Health. 
B.  A minimum of one manager or supervisor of retail food establishments of any classification must satisfactorily complete the Jersey City Health Division food handler's course each year prior to renewal of the license. The effective date of this requirement shall be the licensing renewal deadline for 1989. Thereafter, no retail food establishment which has failed to meet this requirement shall receive a license. At least one person having satisfactorily completed the Jersey City Health Division food handler's course shall be on the premises during hours of operation. 
[Amended 8-18-1999 by Ord. No. 99-105] 
C.  A fee as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges, will be charged to cover the costs of each food handler's course.  
§ 175-25. - Closure by Health Officer. [Added 8-18-1999 by Ord. No. 99-105] 
A.  If an extremely unsanitary condition exists or if the Health Officer has reasonable cause to suspect that any food establishment or any employee thereof is or may be a source of food-borne infection, the Health Officer is authorized to require the immediate closure of the food establishment until the extremely unsanitary condition has been eliminated and/or cause the immediate exclusion of the employee from the food establishment until the employee no longer poses a threat of food-borne infection. [Amended 3-11-2015 by Ord. No. 15-026 ] 
B.  The Health Officer or delegee, when practical, shall give the owner, manager or employee an opportunity to be heard prior to closure or exclusion. However, when the Health Officer or delegee determines that in order to protect the public health a hearing cannot be afforded prior to closure or exclusion, a hearing shall be held within 10 days thereafter. 
C.  In addition to the authority and powers conferred herein, the Health Officer is authorized to suspend or revoke the license permitting the operation of a food establishment if the holder thereof shall violate any of the provisions of this Code. No suspension or revocation shall take place prior to the license holder having an opportunity to be heard upon at least 10 days' notice.  
§ 175-26. - Inspection of retail food establishments. [Added 8-18-1999 by Ord. No. 99-105] 
A.  The Health Officer shall inspect every retail food establishment as necessary. [Amended 3-11-2015 by Ord. No. 15-026 ] 
B.  The person operating a retail food establishment shall permit access to all parts of the establishment.  
§ 175-27. - Interference with Division of Health or police. [Added 8-18-1999 by Ord. No. 99-105; amended 3-11-2015 by Ord. No. ] 
No person shall obstruct or any way interfere with the Health Officer or with any police officer in the performance of any duty under this Chapter or under any other Chapter of this Municipal Code.  
§ 175-28. - Farmers' Markets. [Added 3-11-2015 by Ord. No. ] 
A.  A seasonal market license, as defined in Chapter 160, Subsection 160-1.P(3)(a)[5][c](i) (hereinafter "seasonal market license") to operate a farmers' markets will only be issued to not-for-profit corporations as defined by Section 175-18. 
B.  Farmers' markets shall only operate during farmers' market season. 
C.  At least 55 percent of the total volume of all products available for sale must be a farm product harvested or produced within 300 miles of Jersey City. Any vendor whose farm products are not grown within 300 miles of Jersey City shall so indicate with signage displayed by the farm product being sold. 
D.  No seasonal market license shall be issued to operate a farmers' market unless at least 25 percent of the vendors accept supplemental food vouchers (SNAP/EBT, WIC Cash Value Vouchers, and/or FMNP vouchers). Those vendors that accept such vouchers shall so indicate by posting a sign at the point of sale. 
E.  The Health Officer shall waive the seasonal vendor license fee, as set forth in Chapter 160, Subsection 160-1.P(3)(a)[5][c](ii), for any vendor participating in a farmers' market, which operates in a location deemed by the Health Officer to be a food desert. 
F.  Non-profit organizations which seek to operate a farmers' markets in a City park must receive additional permission from the Division of Park Maintenance pursuant to Subsection 3-71.l(e). 
G.  A seasonal market license to operate a farmers' market within one of the City's designated special improvement districts shall only be issued to the District Management Corporation (DMC). 
H.  An application to operate a farmers' market shall require proof of general liability insurance from an A.M. Best-rated insurance company in the amount of $1,000,000.00 and must name the City of Jersey City as an additional insured unless waived by the City's Risk Manager. 
I.  Applications to establish a farmers' market and all supporting documents must be submitted to the Office of Cultural Affairs at least 60 days before the planned opening of the market. 
[Amended 4-26-2017 by Ord. No. 17-044 ] 
J.  In addition to having satisfactorily completed the Jersey City Health Division Food Handler's Course, a minimum of one manager or supervisor of the farmers' market may be asked by the Health Officer to demonstrate knowledge of the Minimum Food Safety Requirements for Product Sales at Farmer's Markets as promulgated by the New Jersey Department of Agriculture. A copy of these requirements is available from the Department of Agriculture and shall be available upon request from the City's Health Officer. 
K.  Starting April 1, 2016, farmers' markets vendors shall not use plastic bags to dispense their products.  
Chapter 178 - FUEL OIL DELIVERIES 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City 5-27-1982 by Ord. No. MC-167. Amendments noted where applicable.] 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Housing accommodations — See Ch. 188. 
 
§ 178-1. - Emergency deliveries to residential property. 
This chapter authorizing the City of Jersey City to arrange for emergency fuel oil deliveries to residential properties in emergencies is enacted under the authority of the Emergency Fuel Oil Delivery Act, L. 1980, c. 170, N.J.S.A. 26:3-31.4 et seq.  
§ 178-2. - Engaging fuel oil dealers; administration. [Amended 9-25-1986 by Ord. No. C-297] 
A.  [Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] Whenever necessary to protect the health and safety of residential tenants, the Director of the Division of Construction Code Official may act as an agent for a landlord in engaging a fuel oil dealer to deliver fuel oil at a reasonable price per gallon to refire the burner to restore proper heating in a residential property containing six or more dwelling units under the following conditions: 
(1)  The tenant has lodged a complaint with the Division of Construction Code Official charging the landlord with failure to provide adequate heat and the Director of the Division of Construction Code Official has issued a summons for violation of Chapter 188, Housing Accommodations; and 
(2)  The following periods have elapsed since the tenant lodged his or her complaint: either 12 hours have elapsed if the outside air temperature is between 33° and 55° F., or at least four hours if the outside air temperature is 32° F. or lower. 
(3)  The tenant provides the Director of the Division of Construction Code Official with satisfactory evidence that he or she has made a bona fide effort to notify the landlord of the lack of heat and the landlord has failed to take appropriate action. 
B.  Records of all emergency fuel deliveries shall be supplied to the Director of the Division of Construction Code Official, Judge of the Municipal Court of Housing, City Clerk and Business Administrator. 
[Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
C.  For the purpose of this chapter, "lack of heat" means less heat than required by N.J.S.A. 26:3-31.  
§ 178-3. - Billing to landlord or municipality. 
Any fuel oil dealer who delivers fuel oil or refires the burner in accordance with § 178-1 may bill the landlord directly, or the city may issue a voucher to the fuel oil dealer who delivered the fuel oil for the amount due on the fuel oil delivered and the service charge for refiring the burner, if any. The voucher shall be paid in the manner provided for the approval and payment of claims pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:5-17.  
§ 178-4. - Landlord's negligence or failure to act; civil penalty. 
A.  Any landlord or his or her agent whose negligence or failure to act results in municipal action pursuant to § 178-2 shall be liable to a civil penalty of not more than $300 for each affected dwelling unit in residential property. This penalty shall be recoverable by the City of Jersey City in a civil action by a summary proceeding under the Penalty Enforcement Law (N.J.S.A. 2A:58-1 et seq.). Any action to collect such penalty shall be brought in the Superior Court, County District Court or Municipal Court. 
B.  Any landlord or agent who has failed to provide heating fuel oil in violation of this chapter shall also be liable to reimburse the city for the actual costs incurred for fuel oil and a service charge for refiring the burner and for reasonable attorney's fees and costs.  
§ 178-5. - Nonapplicability. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to owner-occupant residential rental properties containing five units or less. 
B.  The provision of emergency fuel oil authorized by this chapter shall be subject to the availability of funds appropriated for this purpose by the City Council. The amount so appropriated shall not exceed $15,000 in any budget year.  
Chapter 180 - GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City 1-28-2009 by Ord. Nos. 09-001 and 09-002. Amendments noted where applicable.]  
ARTICLE I - Green Building Initiative for Municipal Projects[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 09-001, §§ 1—3, adopted January 28, 2009, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion herein as Art. I, §§ 180-1—180-3, was at the discretion of the editor. 
 
§ 180-1. - Definitions 
[Added 1-28-2009 by Ord. No. 09-001] 
"USGBC" is hereby defined as the U.S. Green Building Council, a non-profit organization located at 1015 18th Street, N.W., Suite 508, Washington, DC 20036. 
"LEED® Standards" are hereby defined as the "Leadership in Energy & Environmental Design" standards and guidelines, as amended and supplemented by USGBC, which are on file with the Office of the City Clerk of the City of Jersey City. 
"LEED® Accredited Professional" means a person who has been designated a LEED® accredited professional by the Green Building Certification Institute. 
"Construction" is defined as the erection of a new principal or accessory building or structure on a lot or property; alterations and the act of creating an addition to an existing building. 
"Building" is defined as a structure built, erected and framed of component structural parts, designed for the housing, shelter, enclosure and support of individuals, animals, or property of any kind. 
"Structure" is defined as that which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner and permanently attached to the ground. 
"Municipal Project" or "Project" means construction of New Buildings owned by the City of Jersey City, renovations to buildings owned by the City of Jersey City, or construction or renovation of other buildings funded more than fifty percent (50%) by the City of Jersey City, where cost of such construction or renovation meets or exceeds one million dollars ($1,000,000.00), as calculated on the date of enactment of this ordinance and as indexed for inflation using the Construction Consumer Price Index, as reported by Engineering News Record. 
"New Building" means any building not previously erected prior to construction. 
"Green building" means the design, construction, and operation of buildings that mitigates the environmental, economic, and social impact of buildings. 
"Historic building" means a building that is listed in or formally determined eligible for the National Register of Historic Places, the New Jersey Register of Historic Places, Buildings in Historic Districts, or Buildings identified in an adopted historic resources survey as eligible for designation. 
"Renovation" means any rehabilitation, repair, remodeling, change, addition or modification to an existing building. 
"LEED®-NC Certified Rating" means that a building or other project that has earned twenty-six (26) to thirty-two (32) points as such points as defined in the LEED® Standard entitled "LEED® for New Construction and Major Renovations" as amended and supplemented, and has satisfied all prerequisites as specified therein, thus meeting a "certified level." 
"LEED®-NC Silver Rating" means that a building or other project that has earned thirty-three (33) to thirty-eight (38) points as such points as defined in the LEED® Standard entitled "LEED® for New Construction & Major Renovations" as amended and supplemented, and has satisfied all prerequisites as specified therein, thus meeting a "Silver Level." 
"LEED®-EB Gold Rating" means that a building or other project that has earned thirty-nine (39) to fifty-one (51) points as such points as defined in the LEED® Standard entitled "LEED® for Existing Buildings" as amended and supplemented, and has satisfied all prerequisites as specified therein, thus meeting a "Gold Level." 
"LEED®-NC Platinum Rating" means that a building or other project that has earned fifty-two (52) to sixty-nine (69) points as such points as defined in the LEED® Standard entitled "LEED® for New Construction and Major Renovations" as amended and supplemented, and has satisfied all prerequisites as specified therein, thus meeting a "Platinum Level." 
ENERGY STARTM is hereby defined as those products which meet the energy efficiency standards set forth by the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the U.S. Department of Energy for compliance with its ENERGY STAR® program.  
§ 180-2. - Application of LEED®-NC Green Building Rating System to Municipal Projects 
[Added 1-28-2009 by Ord. No. 09-001] 
(a)  The "Leadership in Energy & Environmental Design (LEED®) Green Building Rating System and guidelines are herein incorporated by reference, as amended and supplemented, and as may be found by contacting the U.S. Green Building Council, 1015 18th Street, N.W., Suite 508, Washington, DC 20036, and as are on file with the Office of the City Clerk for the City of Jersey City. 
(b)  Subject to sections (e) and (f) below, there is hereby adopted as the minimum standard for each Municipal Project the LEED®-NC Silver Rating. For all such Municipal Projects, A LEED® Accredited Professional must certify each Municipal Project as having achieved, at a minimum, the LEED®-NC Silver Rating. 
(c)  Subject to sections (e) and (f) below, all municipal projects must, in their design and construction, earn the U.S. EPA's ENERGY STARTM Building Label. 
(d)  Except where waived pursuant to sections (e) and (f) below, specifications and terms for all bids, contracts, or agreements for those municipal projects which require public advertisement for bids under the Local Public Contracts Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq., shall be modified to require adherence at a minimum to the LEED®-NC Silver Rating, and ENERGY STARTM Building Label requirements above. 
(e)  The Chief Architect of the City of Jersey City shall review each municipal project and determine whether or not the total cost of adhering to the LEED®-NC Silver Rating and achieving the ENERGY STARTM building label on that project shall exceed by twenty percent (20%) of the cost anticipated in the absence of the LEED® and ENERGY STARTM requirements, in which case he or she shall recommend to the Business Administrator of the City of Jersey City such modifications for amendments to the project necessary to assure that the costs remain within the amount appropriated for such project, up to and including waiver of the LEED®-NC Silver Rating requirement, the ENERGY STARTM Building Label Requirement or both. 
(f)  Where cost of the project's adherence to the LEED®-NC Silver Rating and the ENERGY STARTM Building Label Requirement exceeds by twenty percent (20%) of the cost otherwise anticipated in the absence of its application, the Business Administrator is hereby empowered to waive application of either or both requirements for the entire project or for any specifications or portions thereof as he or she deems necessary and appropriate. 
(g)  Where the Business Administrator has waived application of LEED® Silver Rating or the ENERGY STARTM Building Label requirement pursuant to section (f) above, A LEED® Accredited Professional must certify each Municipal Project as having achieved, at a minimum, the LEED®-NC Certified Rating. 
(h)  The Business Administrator of the City of Jersey City shall select, from among the next three (3) municipal projects, one (1) project which will adhere to the LEED®-NC Platinum Rating and achieve the ENERGY STARTM Building Requirement. That project will be viewed as a pilot project and will be evaluated by the City Chief Architect who will make further recommendations to the Municipal Council of the City of Jersey City, concerning the feasibility of application of the LEED® Platinum Rating to future municipal projects.  
§ 180-3. - Application of LEED®-EB Green Building Rating System to Existing Municipal Buildings 
[Added 1-28-2009 by Ord. No. 09-001] 
(a)  Subject to sections (c) and (d) below, there is hereby adopted as the minimum standard the LEED®-EB Silver Rating. All existing municipal buildings must be evaluated by a LEED® Accredited Professional to determine if LEED Standards may be applied to achieve, at a minimum, the LEED®-EB Silver Rating. 
(b)  The Chief Architect of the City of Jersey City, in consultation with Business Administrator, shall determine the estimated cost of modifying the existing municipal building and implementing the operational procedures necessary to achieve the LEED®-EB Silver Rating. 
(c)  The Business Administrator may waive application of the LEED®-EB Silver Rating requirement for the Existing Municipal Buildings where: 
(i)  The total estimated cost of modifying the existing municipal building and devising and implementing the operational procedures necessary to achieve the LEED®-EB Silver Rating exceeds either one percent (1%) of the building's current market value or twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00). 
(ii)  Modification of the existing municipal building or implementation of operational procedures necessary to achieve the LEED®-EB Silver Rating would be impracticable, or would materially compromise the health, safety, or general welfare of the public. 
(d)  Where the Business Administrator has waived application of LEED®-EB Silver Rating requirement pursuant to section (c) above, A LEED® Accredited Professional must evaluate each existing municipal building to determine if LEED Standards may be applied to achieve, at a minimum, the LEED®-EB Certified Rating. 
(e)  The Business Administrator may waive application of the LEED®-EB Certified Rating requirement for the existing municipal buildings where: 
i.  The total estimated cost of modifying the existing municipal building and devising and implementing the operational procedures necessary to achieve the LEED®-EB Certified Rating exceeds either one percent (1%) of the building's current market value or twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00). 
ii.  Modification of the existing municipal building or implementation of operational procedures necessary to achieve the LEED®-EB Certified Rating would be impracticable, or would materially compromise the health, safety, or general welfare of the public. 
(f)  Exemption for historic buildings. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any historic building; however, green building strategies should be employed where possible.  
ARTICLE II - Green Building Incentives[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 09-002, § 1, adopted January 28, 2009, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion herein as Art. II, § 180-4, was at the discretion of the editor. 
 
§ 180-4. - Green Building Incentives. 
[Added 1-28-2009 by Ord. No. 09-002] 
1.  The City of Jersey City shall promote sustainable green building practices in accordance with U.S. Green Building Council (USGBC) Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED®) guidelines in the municipality through the methods provided in this section. The LEED® standards are incorporated herein by reference, as amended and supplemented, and may be found at http://www.usgbc.org, or by contacting the U.S. Green Building Council, 1015 18th Street, NW, Suite 508, Washington, DC 20036. 
2.  Applications for development are encouraged, but are not required, to comply with LEED® criteria. 
3.  Only projects involving an application for LEED® accreditation meeting a minimum of twenty-six (26) points for LEED® - New Construction, and thirty-two (32) points for LEED® - Existing Buildings on the LEED® rating system, or the minimum rating to be designated an LEED® Certified development, whichever is greater, shall be eligible for the incentives in this section. 
4.  Review of applications proposing to meet a minimum accreditation level of LEED® Certified shall be expedited by City of Jersey City staff by receiving priority review before other applications, except where the other applications are for affordable or workforce housing. 
5.  A refund of building permit and land development application fees required and shall be provided upon the applicant's written request, accompanied by submission of proof of LEED® certification by the USGBC, within one (1) year of such certification, as follows: 
1.  LEED® Platinum = Twenty-five percent (25%) refund of fees; 
2.  LEED® Gold = Twenty percent (20%) refund of fees; 
3.  LEED® Silver = Fifteen percent (15%) refund of fees; and 
4.  LEED® Certified = Ten percent (10%) refund of fees.  
Chapter 181 - ENERGY AUDITS 
_____
 
§ 181-1. - Energy audits. 
[Added 07-15-2015 by Ord. No. 15-089 ] 
In the interest of reducing the City's overall energy consumption and reduce its greenhouse gas emissions, the City shall undertake an audit of all City-owned facilities and all City-owned vehicles and equipment every three (3) years to identify what energy conservation measures can be implemented to realize and maximize energy savings and energy efficiency. 
A.  The City may engage the services of a competent consultant to conduct the audit pursuant to the Local Public Contracts Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:11-4.1 et seq. 
B.  The first energy audit shall be completed within one (1) year of the passage of Ordinance No. 15-089 and next audit shall be completed three (3) years after the date of the first audit's completion. All subsequent audits shall be completed on the third anniversary of the previous audit. 
C.  The City need not conduct an audit if the total cost of the audit exceeds fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00).  
Chapter 182 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City 5-4-1971 as Ch. 12 of the 1971 Jersey City Code, as readopted 9-19-1978 by Ord. No. S-128; amended in its entirety 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050. Subsequent amendments noted where applicable.] 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Division of Health — See Ch. 3, § 3-105. 	Property maintenance — See Ch. 254. 
Food-handling establishments — See Ch. 175. 	Solid waste — See Ch. 287. 
 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 90. 
 
ARTICLE I - General Provisions 
 
§ 182-1. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Public Health and Sanitation Code," hereinafter referred to as the "Health Code."* 
* Editor's Note: For statutory provisions dealing with health-related topics, see Title 26 of the Revised Statutes and the New Jersey State Sanitary Code.  
§ 182-2. - Administration and enforcement. 
[Amended 11-23-1999 by Ord. No. 99-170; amended 9-10-2003 by Ord. No. 03-091] 
A.  The administration and enforcement of this Health Code shall be vested under the authority of the Division of Health and the jurisdiction of said Division shall embrace all sanitation upon any premises. 
B.  The certified animal control officer, appointed by the governing body pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.16b, shall, in addition to enforcing and abiding by the provisions of N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.16, have the power and authority, within the jurisdiction of the City of Jersey City, to do the following: 
1.  Enforce all laws or ordinances enacted for the protection of animals, including, but not limited to, animal control, animal welfare and animal cruelty laws of the State and ordinances of the City; 
2.  Investigate and sign complaints concerning any violation of an animal control, animal welfare or animal cruelty law of the State or ordinance of the City; 
3.  Act, by virtue of the officer's appointment or employment and in addition to any other power and authority, as an officer for the detection, and summonsing of offenders against the animal control, animal welfare or animal cruelty law of the State or ordinance of the City; 
Upon request for assistance by a municipality or other entity that does not employ, or contract for, the certified animal control officer, the certified animal control officer described above may, within the jurisdiction of that municipality or other entity making the request, exercise the powers and authority granted in this section. 
The certified animal control officer described above who signs a complaint, issues a summons, makes an arrest, or otherwise acts pursuant the authority granted in this section shall forward within five business days a copy of that complaint, summons, arrest warrant or report to the New Jersey Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals and shall forward a report of any related court action within thirty (30) calendar days of final disposition.  
§ 182-3. - Construal of provisions. 
This Health Code is hereby declared to be remedial and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interest and purposes thereof, which are public safety, health and welfare, for improved health and sanitation.  
§ 182-4. - Definitions. 
As used herein, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
DIVISION OF HEALTH — The Division of Health, Department of Health and Human Services, or the Board of Health wherever that term may appear. 
HEALTH OFFICER — The chief executive officer of the Division of Health. 
PERMIT or LICENSE — A permit or license shall be construed to mean the permission in writing of the Health Officer or his or her authorized agent, issued in accordance with the provisions of law or ordinance, to carry on a certain activity, except that the licenses required by Chapter 122, Circuses, Carnivals and Public Assemblages, and Chapter 287, Solid Waste, Article I, shall be issued in accordance with the provisions of said chapters.  
ARTICLE II - Milk Licenses 
 
§ 182-5. - License required. 
A.  No person shall engage in the business of selling, transporting or distributing milk or milk products in Jersey City, or shall keep for sale or have in his or her possession with intent to sell any milk or milk products or shall distribute or sell from a vehicle or vending machine any milk or milk products without having first obtained a license to do so from the Division of Health. 
B.  No person shall engage in the business of distributing ice cream or other frozen confections in Jersey City or shall distribute or sell ice cream or frozen confections from a wagon, automobile or other vehicle without first having obtained a license to do so from the Division of Health.  
§ 182-6. - License application. 
Application for such milk license shall be made upon a printed form supplied by the Division of Health and shall contain all the information required by the Division.  
§ 182-7. - Expiration of license; renewal. 
The license referred to in this Article shall be issued for the period from May 1 of any year to April 30 of the following year and shall be renewed annually.  
§ 182-8. - Fees. 
A.  The fee for a milk license shall be as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges. 
B.  The fee for an ice cream license shall be as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges.  
§ 182-9. - Posting of license. 
Licenses to sell milk or milk products shall be kept at all times conspicuously posted in any store, restaurant, bar, soda fountain or other place where milk or milk products are sold, kept for sale or offered for sale, and every wagon, automobile or other vehicle from which milk or milk products are sold or delivered shall have a license plate furnished by the Division of Health securely attached on the right side of the wagon, automobile or other vehicle in a position where it can be readily seen.  
§ 182-10. - Premises or vehicle to satisfy requirements. 
No milk license shall be issued until the Division of Health shall be satisfied that the applicant's store, restaurant, bar, soda fountain or other place where milk or milk products are to be sold, distributed, kept for sale or offered for sale or the applicant's wagon, automobile or other vehicle from which milk or milk products are to be sold or delivered meet the rules, regulations and requirements of the Division of Health and this Article.  
§ 182-11. - Temporary or emergency milk licenses. 
The Division of Health also may issue temporary or emergency permits for limited periods and for limited quantities of milk or milk products to those persons qualified, in the opinion of the Health Officer, in order that a sufficient supply shall always be available.  
§ 182-12. - Standards for license issuance. 
The Division of Health reserves the right to refuse a license to sell, transport, distribute or hold in possession with intent to sell any milk or milk products until satisfied of the following facts: 
A.  The milk or milk products to be sold, transported, distributed or held in possession for sale are of the standard and quality required by and produced, handled, processed and transported in accordance with the rules and regulations established by the State Department of Health of New Jersey, as well as the statutes of New Jersey and the provisions of this Article with relation thereto; 
B.  Unapproved milk or milk products are not permitted entry into any building or place from which milk or milk products are sold, held for sale, transported or distributed for consumption in Jersey City; 
C.  Proper refrigeration facilities are provided and maintained for the storage, transportation or distribution of milk or milk products at a temperature of at least 50° F; and 
D.  Laboratory and field inspection service satisfactory to the Health Officer is maintained at the source of supply.  
§ 182-13. - Suspension or revocation of license; hearing. 
Any license issued by the Division of Health for the sale, holding in possession for sale, distribution or transportation of milk or milk products may be revoked for cause, after a summary hearing before the Health Officer. A printed or written notice setting forth the charges and the time and place of such hearing shall be served upon the person to whom the license was issued, by leaving such notice at the place where the licensee conducts his or her business, at least five days prior to the date of hearing. The Health Officer, pending the hearing, may suspend such license before such hearing if in his or her judgment the protection of the public health and welfare demands. In such event it shall be unlawful for the licensee to engage in the business for which he or she was licensed.  
§ 182-14. - Licenses nontransferable. 
Licenses required by this Article shall not be transferable.  
§ 182-15. - Sale of canned milk. 
Nothing in this Article shall be construed to require a license for the sale or distribution of condensed or evaporated milk in hermetically sealed cans.  
§ 182-16. - Revocation for knowing violations. 
A licensee twice convicted of knowingly violating any of the provisions of this Article governing the adulteration, standards of misbranding of milk or milk products may have his or her license revoked, and no new license shall be granted to such licensee for a period of two years.  
§ 182-17. - Intent to sell or distribute. 
Milk or milk products which are in the possession of, held, kept or offered for sale by a dealer in milk or milk products shall be deemed to be held, kept or offered for sale with intent to be sold or distributed as food for human consumption.  
§ 182-18. - Products from noncomplying dairies. 
The Health Officer may order any person who holds a license to sell, distribute or transport milk or milk products to exclude for a specified period of time the milk from any dairy or the milk or milk products from any milk plant failing to comply with any of the provisions of this Article and may suspend or revoke the license of any licensee for failure to comply with such order.  
§ 182-19. - Use of premises for milk products business. 
No license shall be issued to any person as a distributor of milk or milk products unless his or her premises are used exclusively for milk and milk products business. Any violation of this provision shall be sufficient cause for the revocation of his or her license. Exceptions may be made, however, by the Health Officer when, in his or her judgment, such exceptions will not endanger the wholesomeness of the milk or milk products stored therein.  
§ 182-20. - Right of entry. 
Every person engaged in the sale, holding for sale, storage or distribution of any milk, milk products or other products defined in this Article shall at any time allow the Health Officer or his or her representative or any authorized representative of the Division of Health to make such inspections, take such samples or specimens and examine such records as he or she may consider necessary for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Article.  
§ 182-21. - Prelicensing inspection. 
The Health Officer, before issuing or renewing a license to sell milk and/or cream, shall cause an inspection to be made of every dairy farm where such milk or cream is produced and of every plant in which it is to be received, bottled, pasteurized or otherwise handled, the results to be recorded upon a form or forms prescribed by the Health Officer.  
§ 182-22. - Use of health reports from other sources. 
The Health Officer may, however, in his or her discretion, accept and use in connection with the issuance of such a license and subsequent supervision the reports of the Health Officer of another municipality or of the State Department of Health with reference to inspections, bacterial counts and physical examinations of milking animals, when furnished with official records of the results thereof.  
§ 182-23. - Inspection of dairies, plants and transportation equipment. 
All milk, milk products and all milk and cream used in milk products intended for use in Jersey City shall be subject to inspection at its source of supply and all dairies, milk plants and transportation equipment, wherein such milk or milk products and all milk and cream used in milk products are produced, handled, processed, manufactured or transported, shall likewise be subject to inspection to determine if it or they meet the minimum requirements set forth herein.  
§ 182-24. - Inspection of creameries, shipping stations and pasteurization plants. 
The operator of a creamery, shipping station or pasteurizing plant approved as a source of supply for Jersey City shall cause inspections for compliance with this Article to be made at least once a year of all dairies from which milk has been obtained. Such inspections shall be made by a competent person whose qualifications are acceptable to the Division of Health. Reports of the results of such inspections shall be made upon official dairy report forms approved by the Division of Health. Such reports shall be filed in the creamery, shipping station or pasteurizing plant to which such milk is delivered and shall remain so filed for a period of three years.  
ARTICLE III - Tattooing 
[Amended 8-13-2003 by Ord. No. 03-101] 
 
§ 182-25. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Article is to protect the citizens of the City of Jersey City from the possible spread of infectious diseases, particularly hepatitis, and to prevent allergic reactions from tattooing.  
§ 182-26. - Definitions. 
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
TATTOOING - Any method placing ink or other inert pigment into or under the skin or mucosa by the aid of needles or other instrument used to puncture the skin, resulting in permanent coloration of the skin or mucosa. This includes all form of permanent cosmetics.  
§ 182-27. - Tattooing license required; annual fee. 
No person shall perform tattooing within the City of Jersey City without a license issued by the Jersey City Division of Health. Such license shall be applied for and approved or denied pursuant to N.J.A.C. 8:27-2.1 et seq. The annual fee for a Tattooing license shall be a set forth in Chapter 160 of the Jersey City Code.  
§ 182-28. - Tattooing regulations. 
A person possessing a Tattooing license shall conduct such operation pursuant to the regulations as set forth in Title 8, Chapter 27 (Body Art Procedures) of the New Jersey Administrative Code which is hereby adopted in full.  
§ 182-28.1. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person found guilty of violating this Article shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25.  
ARTICLE IV - Smoking[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13-110, adopted October 9, 2013, amended the Code by, in effect, repealing former Art. IV, § 182-29, and adding a new Art. IV. Former Art. IV pertained to similar subject matter, and carried no history note. 
State Law reference— For statutory provisions related to smoking, see N.J.S.A. 2C:33-13. 
 
§ 182-29. - Definitions. [ .] 
A.  For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
CITY PARK — Any City-owned or leased property designated for public use, including, but not limited to, public playgrounds, baseball diamonds, soccer fields, bleachers and spectator areas, trails, picnic areas, gazebos and other areas set up for active or passive recreation, as well as the streets, parking lots and sidewalks therein. 
INTERNATIONAL NO-SMOKING SYMBOL — A pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a diagonal red line through its cross section. 
SMOKING — The burning of, inhaling from, exhaling the smoke from, or the possession of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or any other matter or substance which contains tobacco or any other matter that can be smoked.  
§ 182-29.1. - Smoking prohibited in city parks. [ .] 
A.  Smoking shall be prohibited in all City parks and within a thirty-five-foot radius of all entrances to City parks. Signs with the words "No Smoking" or the international no-smoking symbol, shall be clearly and conspicuously posted at the entrances to all City parks.  
§ 182-29.2. - No-smoking signs. [ .] 
All signs shall be located so as to be clearly visible to the public and shall contain letters at least one (1) inch in height stating "No Smoking" or the international no-smoking symbol. The letters or symbol should contrast by color with the sign indicating that smoking is prohibited in City parks and within a thirty-five-foot radius of all entrances to City parks. The sign shall also indicate that violators are subject to a fine.  
§ 182-29.3. - Enforcement. [ .] 
This article shall be enforced by the Public Safety Director or his designee or any other person authorized by this Code or under State law.  
§ 182-29.4. - Violations and penalties. [ .] 
A.  A warning may be issued for the first offense. 
B.  Any person who is convicted of a violation of any section of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General provisions, § 1-25.  
ARTICLE V - Rodent and Vermin Infestation; Ragweed, Poison Ivy, High Weeds and Overgrown Brush and Grass [Amended 11-23-1999 by Ord. No. 99-170][3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Property maintenance, Ch. 254; solid waste, Ch. 287, Art. I. 
 
§ 182-30. - Declared nuisances; bait stations required around demolition and construction sites. 
[Amended 7-18-2018 by Ord. No. 18-079 ] 
A.  The infestation of rodents and vermin and the growth or existence of ragweed, poison ivy, high weeds and overgrown brush and grass in or on any building, structure, plot of land, lot, street, highway, right-of-way or any other public or private place is declared to be a nuisance and detrimental to public health. 
B.  No owner, tenant or occupant of any building, structure, plot of land, lot, street, highway, right-of-way or any other public or private place shall cause, allow or permit rodent or vermin infestation, ragweed, poison ivy, high weeds and overgrown brush and grass to grow or exist thereon. 
C.  Prior to the issuance of a construction or demolition permit, the applicant shall have provided at the construction or demolition site sufficient tamper-proof, all-weather bait stations with a tier 1 rating from the Federal Environmental Protection Agenry installed around the perimeter during construction or demolition. During the course of construction or demolition, bait stations shall be checked and restocked with rodent bait blocks by a licensed exterminator on a regular basis throughout the course of construction until a certificate of occupancy is issued or all debris from demolition is removed from the site. A licensed exterminator shall submit quarterly compliance reports to the Division of Health on behalf of the owner throughout the duration of construction or demolition. The report shall attest to the dates and times that the bait stations were checked and restocked. As used in this subsection, the terms "owner," "permit" and "certificate of occupancy" shall have the meanings defined in the Uniform Construction Code Act. N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq. 
D.  Compliance with subsection C shall be considered a "prior approval" as defined at N.J.A.C. 5:23-1.4 [4]. 
E.  The construction official shall assure that a copy of section 182-30 is available to the public with the forms required by the Uniform Construction Code Act [5]. 
F.  The requirement of section 182-30 shall not apply to ordinary maintenance to structures as defined under N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.7, which may be made without filing a permit application with or giving notice to the construction official. 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
N.J.A.C. 5:23-15(a)(5) provides that an application for a construction or demolition permit shall include a statement of compliance with all "prior approvals." 

--- (5) --- 
See N.J.A.C. 5-23:4. 
 
§ 182-31. - Failure to comply; abatement by city. 
A.  Whenever a nuisance, as declared by this article, is found in or on any building, structure, plot of land, lot, right-of-way or any other private premises or place, notice in writing shall be given to the owner thereof to remove or abate the same within such time as specified in the notice, but not less than five days from the date of service of such notice unless, in the case of rodent or insect infestation, the Health Officer or designee determines in writing that such infestation is an imminent danger to health. A duplicate of the notice shall be left with one or more of the tenants or occupants of the premises or place. If the owner resides out of the state or cannot be so notified speedily, such notice shall be left at that place or premises with the tenant or occupant thereof or posted on the premises, and such action shall be considered proper notification to the owner, tenant or occupant thereof. 
B.  If the owner, tenant or occupant upon being so notified does not comply with such notice within the time specified therein and fails to remove or abate such nuisance, the Division of Health shall proceed to abate the nuisance or may cause it to be removed or abated in a summary manner by such means as the Division of Health shall deem proper.  
§ 182-32. - Recovery of costs. 
The Division of Health may institute an action at law to recover costs incurred by it in the removal or abatement of any nuisance as defined above. Action may be brought against any person who has caused or allowed such nuisance to exist or from any owner, tenant or occupant of premises who, after notice and notification, fails to remove and abate the nuisance within the time specified in the notice.  
§ 182-33. - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Division of Health, its agents or employees, unless otherwise provided herein.  
§ 182-34. - Violations and penalties. 
In addition to recovery of costs incurred in the removal or abatement of a nuisance as described above, any person who violates, refuses or neglects to comply with the provisions of this article, unless otherwise herein specified, shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25.  
ARTICLE VI - Lead Testing 
 
§ 182-35. - Lead Testing Notification Program for Day Care Centers. 
[Added 4-23-2008 by Ord. No. 08-048] 
A.  Day Care Centers. 
(1)  A Lead Testing Notification Program for all Day Care Centers licensed by the State of New Jersey pursuant to N.J.S.A. 30:5B-3 is hereby established. 
(2)  The owner or operator of a Day Care Center shall be required to notify the parents or guardians of all children enrolled at the Child Care Center that the State of New Jersey will provide free lead testing to children who are uninsured or underinsured. 
(3)  The owner or operator of a Day Care Center shall be required to notify the parents or guardians of children enrolled at the Child Care Center with health insurance that all primary care physicians are required to screen children for lead. 
(4)  The owner or operator of a Day Care Center shall have the Notice filed in the child's record on or before October 1st of each year, and made readily available to the Jersey City Department of Health auditors during their annual audit.  
Chapter 188 - HOUSING ACCOMMODATIONS AND AFFORDABLE HOUSING COMPLIANCE[1] 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City 6-12-1986 as Ord. No. C-228. Amendments noted where applicable.] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Chapter 188 was retitled May 10, 2017 by Ord. No. 17-055 . 
Cross reference— Construction Codes, Uniform, Ch. 131; discrimination, Ch. 148; Fees and charges, Ch. 160; Multiple dwellings, Ch. 218; rent control, Ch. 260. 
 
ARTICLE I - Housing Accommodations[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— The designation "Article I" was added May 10, 2017 by Ord. No. 17-055 . 
 
§ 188-1. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
CUSTOMER—Any person contracting with any other person for the performance of services regulated by this chapter. 
HOUSING or HOUSING ACCOMMODATION—Any dwelling or dwelling unit, rooming house, apartment or any real property which is offered for rent as a residence. 
PERSON—Any individual, partnership, corporation or any other organization or individuals.  
§ 188-2. - License required; fee. 
A.  No person may sell or offer to sell a list of available housing accommodations without first obtaining a license from the City of Jersey City. This requirement shall not apply to real estate brokers holding license pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:15-1 et seq. 
B.  An applicant for a license shall submit to the license issuing authority a completed application in a form prescribed by the license issuing authority together with a license fee as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges. [3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. 
 
§ 188-3. - Records and reports. 
Any person licensed under this chapter shall make available to customers an accurate listing of all housing accommodations to which customers may be referred. This listing shall include the following information for each housing accommodation: 
A.  The type of unit, whether duplex, triplex, four-plex or multiplex. 
B.  Whether the unit is furnished or unfurnished. 
C.  The date when the unit will be available. 
D.  The date when the housing accommodation was most recently entered on the listing records. 
E.  The date when the housing accommodation was last verified to be available for rent. 
F.  The address of the housing accommodation. 
G.  The name, address and telephone number of the owner or the owner's agent. 
H.  The monthly rent. 
I.  The amount and purpose of any deposit or prepayment required by the landlord. 
J.  The number and types of rooms. 
K.  Whether a written lease is required and, if so, the minimum term required by the landlord. 
L.  Any restrictions as to pets, children, furnishings, occupants or activities imposed by the landlord.  
§ 188-4. - Unlawful acts. 
No person may: 
A.  List or advertise any housing accommodation or otherwise offer or provide information about any housing accommodation without the prior written consent of the owner. 
B.  Refer a customer to any housing accommodation or list any housing after receiving notice that it is unavailable for rent. 
C.  Use any contract or furnish any receipt to any customer or prospective customer which does not disclose all material information about the services to be provided to the customer. 
D.  Publish or cause to be published any advertisement for a particular housing accommodation without including in the advertisement a page, line or other code number through which the particular housing accommodation can be easily located in the rental agency's listing records.  
§ 188-5. - Inspections. 
Each applicant for a license shall sign the following agreement, which shall be submitted with each application for a license or a renewal of a license: 
The undersigned agrees that any inspector working for the City Director of Consumer Affairs may enter the premises where the books and records of the undersigned are kept, at any time during business hours, for the purpose of inspection.  
§ 188-6. - Violations and penalties. 
A.  Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25. [4] 
B.  In addition to the penalty provided in Subsection A, a licensee who violates any provision of this chapter may have his or her license suspended or revoked. 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. 
 
ARTICLE II - Affordable Housing 
 
§ 188-7. - Definitions. 
[Added 5-10-2017 by Ord. No. 17-055 ] 
The following words and terms, when used in this article, shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
ACT—The Fair Housing Act, N.J.S.A. 52-27D-301 et seq. 
AFFIRMATIVE MARKETING PLAN (AMP)—The plan for marketing the affordable housing units as set forth herein. 
AFFORDABLE—A sales price or rent within the means of a low- or moderate-income household as defined herein. 
AFFORDABILITY CONTROLS—May include maximum sale and rental prices, maximum resale prices, dispute resolution, use of deed restrictions and disposition covenants, terms of the affordable housing agreement, and any other information that the City deems necessary to ensure that all low- or moderate-income housing units under this article remains affordable to eligible applicants. 
AFFORDABLE HOUSING—Residential unite that have been restricted for occupancy by households whose combined annual income for all members does not exceed 80 percent of the area median income level for Hudson County as adjusted for households of the same size as established by the Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
AFFORDABLE HOUSING AGREEMENT (AHA)—The written agreement between the developer/owner of an affordable housing unit or units and the City which imposes restrictions on the units to ensure that they remain affordable to households of low and moderate income as defined herein, for a specified period of time and which is recorded with the deed to the unit in the office of the County Register. 
ANNUAL INCOME—Income as defined in 24 CFR Part 5 of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development's (HUD) General HUD Program Requirements. 
APPLICATION FOR AFFORDABLE HOUSING—The application forms to occupy an affordable housing unit in the format approved by the Corporation Counsel and made available by a developer to potential occupants. 
AREA MEDIAN INCOME—The median income levels as established by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, for Jersey City, NJ HUD Metro FMR Area, adjusted for household size. 
DEVELOPER—Any person or corporate entity that has built or is selling affordable housing units. 
DIRECTOR—The Director of the Office of Tax Abatement and Compliance or his or her designee. 
HOUSEHOLD—The person whose name is recorded on the unit's lease. 
LOW INCOME—The combined annual income for all members of a household which total does not exceed 50 percent of the HUD area median income for Jersey City, NJ HUD Metro FMR Area as adjusted for households of the same size, as established by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
LOW-INCOME HOUSING—Residential units that are municipally mandated to be built by the developer as a condition of receiving a tax exemption, or as a condition of a redevelopment area or redevelopment plan, and that have been restricted for occupancy by households whose combined annual income qualifies as "low income" as defined in this article. 
MANUAL—The document entitled "The Regulations Governing Municipally-Mandated Affordable Housing" promulgated by the Office of Tax Abatement and Compliance containing all affordable housing regulations pursuant to this article. 
MODERATE INCOME—Combined annual income for all members of a household which total is greater than 50 percent but does not exceed 80 percent of the HUD area median income for Jersey City, NJ HUD Metro FMR Area as adjusted for households of the same size, as established by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development 
MODERATE-INCOME HOUSING—Residential units that are required as a condition of receiving a tax exemption, or as a condition of a redevelopment plan, and that have been restricted for occupancy by households whose combined annual income qualifies as "moderate income" as defined in this article. 
OFFICE—Shall mean the Office of Tax Abatement and Compliance. 
OPEN APPLICATION PERIOD—The 30-day period of time during which a developer must publicize the availability of any unoccupied affordable housing units. 
RESIDENT—Shall any person who currently lives in Jersey City and who has lived in Jersey City for the previous 12 months. 
TENANT—An applicant who has been approved to occupy a affordable housing unit, for rent, subject to the signing of a lease and the payment of any required security deposit. 
UNIT—Shall mean an affordable housing unit(s).  
§ 188-8. - Purpose and general provisions. 
[Added 5-10-2017 by Ord. No. 17-055 ] 
The purpose of this article is to regulate affordable housing created as a condition of receiving a tax exemption, as a condition of a redevelopment plan, or as a condition of receiving a grant from the Affordable Housing Trust Fund. This article also establishes a preference for Jersey City residents for such affordable housing. 
Except when otherwise stated, the affordability controls required by a redevelopment plan in effect prior to the approval of this article will govern. Except when otherwise stated, the affordability controls required of any affordable housing units that receive funds and/or subsidies from any of the following state and/or federal programs including the Department of Housing and Urban Development's HOME, CDBG, Section 8 Rental Certificate, and Housing Choice Voucher Programs; the Federal Low-Income Housing Tax Credit Program as administered by the New Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency; and the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs' Section 8 Housing Choice Voucher Program, shall govern.  
§ 188-9. - Duties of the office of tax abatement and compliance. 
[Added 5-10-2017 by Ord. No. 17-055 ] 
The Office of Tax Abatement and Compliance shall be responsible for the administration of this article and shall monitor compliance with all Affordable Housing Agreements. The Office shall also be responsible for the following: 
A.  Promulgation of the Affordable Housing Manual. The Office shall promulgate a manual entitled "The Regulations Governing Municipally-Mandated Affordable Housing" which shall include the forms and documents required for all affordable housing applications. The Office shall update the manual on a regular basis. The manual shall be available to the public and shall be on file in the Office of the City Clerk. 
B.  Recordkeeping. The Office shall maintain a comprehensive recordkeeping system of each development that contains affordable housing units including the size of each unit, improvements, if any, the names of occupants and any other such information as required by the manual. The Office has the right to review all records and files kept by any developer related to affordable housing. 
C.  Reviewing Affirmative Marketing Plans and Annual Reports. The Office shall review each developer's affirmative marketing plan and any reports or submissions required of developers by the manual. 
D.  Conduct Determination Appeals. The Office is empowered hear appeals of applicants regarding their eligibility in accordance with the procedures set forth in the manual.  
§ 188-10. - Duties of the developer. 
[Added 5-10-2017 by Ord. No. 17-055 ] 
Developers, as defined herein shall: 
A.  Maintain Quarterly Affordable Units Lists and an Affordable Unit Waiting List. The developer shall submit a list of all affordable housing units in each of the developer's developments on a quarterly basis, noting which units are unoccupied and available for rent or purchase and a waiting list for all affordable housing units in each development on a quarterly basis. The developer shall not accept any applications for affordable housing outside of the open application period. 
B.  Develop an Affirmative Marketing Plan for Unoccupied Units. The developer shall submit an affirmative marketing plan for any affordable housing units in any of the developer's properties that are unoccupied and available for rent or purchase. Once an affordable unit(s) receives its certificate of occupancy, the developer shall create an affirmatives marketing plan for that unit(s) and submit the affirmative marketing plan to the Director. 
C.  Provide an Annual Report. The developer shall submit an annual report which shall include a list of affordable housing units in each of the developer's developments that are unoccupied and available for rent or purchase; a list of affordable housing units in each of the developer's developments that are occupied; a list of total units in each of the developer's developments which include affordable housing; and a waiting list for all affordable housing units in each development. 
D.  Maintain Affordability Controls. The developer shall comply with the affordability controls prescribed in the affordable housing agreement, which may include but are not limited to, maximum sale and rental prices, maximum resale prices, dispute resolution and use of deed restrictions and disposition covenants. 
E.  Non-discrimination. Marketing to and placement of tenants in affordable housing units shall be in compliance with all applicable federal, state and local laws related to fair housing rules. Income review, applicant eligibility review, and placement procedures shall not discriminate against any person on the basis of race, religion, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, health status, source of income such as disability insurance, social security, TANF, or any other basis prohibited by federal, state or local law. 
F.  Public Information. The developer must make its affirmative marketing plan and quarterly affordable units lists available to the public consistent with the manner prescribed in the manual and consistent with all pertinent laws and regulations. Published notices of availability must be translated into the top five languages spoken in Jersey City public schools as specified in the manual. 
G.  The applicant shall be advised that all information and material provided as part of the application for affordable housing and income review process shall be kept confidential and shall be used by the developer, mortgage lenders and City agencies and departments only as needed to determine the applicant's eligibility for affordable housing. Information will not be disclosed to any other parties without the written permission of the applicant.  
§ 188-11. - Jersey City resident preference. 
[Added 5-10-2017 by Ord. No. 17-055 ] 
Preference in marketing, sale, or rental of affordable housing units shall be given to those classes of individuals defined as residents herein. If affordable housing units become available for which there are no applicants who are residents, then the developer must create a waiting list of nonresidents until such time as all affordable housing units are filled.  
§ 188-12. - Affordable housing agreement. 
[Added 5-10-2017 by Ord. No. 17-055 ] 
A.  General Provisions. The following provisions shall be part of all affordable housing agreements: 
1.  Each affordable housing unit shall he restricted by an affordable housing agreement (AHA), signed by the developer/owner and the City's Business Administrator, which shall mandate that the unit remain affordable to low-/moderate-income households for a set term of years. 
2.  Upon resale of an affordable housing unit, a new AHA must be created and signed by the developer/owner and the City's Business Administrator, which shall mandate that the unit remain affordable to low-/moderate-income eligible households for the remaining term of affordability. 
3.  The AHA shall address occupancy requirements and require that all affordable housing units remain the primary residence of the household of record listed on the lease. 
4.  The AHA shall address resale of units (if applicable), pricing of resale units (if applicable), recertification of tenants, and removal or reclassification of tenants for non-eligibility. 
5.  All AHAs, deeds, and mortgagees, as necessary approved by the Corporation Counsel. 
B.  Term. The AHA shall contain an expiration date at which time the unit shall no longer be subject to the affordability restrictions. 
C.  Deeds. Any master deed that includes affordable housing units subject to this article shall reference the affordable housing unit(s) and the AHA(s). A copy of the recorded deed and the AHA(s) for each unit shall be filed with the Office of Tax Abatement and Compliance. 
D.  Certificate of Occupancy. No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued for an affordable housing unit unless the Director shall certify that the sale or rental complies with the terms of this agreement and these regulations and has executed the AHA for that unit.  
§ 188-13. - Applicant eligibility determination procedures. 
[Added 5-10-2017 by Ord. No. 17-055 ] 
Prospective applicants for affordable housing must demonstrate to the developer adequate documentation of low- or moderate- income status as set forth in the manual. 
Appeals by Applicants. If an applicant contests a decision by the developer regarding income classification or denial or revocation of certification, then the applicant shall have the right to appeal such decision to the Director of Tax Abatement and Compliance. The Director may, at his or her discretion, conduct a hearing about the dispute following the procedures set forth in the manual.  
§ 188-14. - Violation, default and remedies. 
[Added 5-10-2017 by Ord. No. 17-055 ] 
Upon a violation of any of the provisions of the affordable housing agreement, the deed, the mortgage or this article, the Director of Tax Abatement and Compliance shall give written notice to the developer specifying the nature of the violation and require corrective action within a reasonable period of time as set forth in the manual. If the developer does not reply or correct the violation within the time specified, the Director may declare the developer in default and seek any remedy available to the City at law in a court of competent jurisdiction.  
Chapter 193 - ICE 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City 5-4-1971 as Ch. 8, Art. VII, of the 1971 Jersey City Code, as readopted 9-19-1978 by Ord. No. S-128. Amendments noted where applicable.] 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Division of Health - See Ch. 3, § 3-105. 	Food-handling establishments - See Ch. 175. 
Fees and charges - See Ch. 160. 	Health and sanitation - See Ch. 182. 
 
 
§ 193-1. - Licenses required. 
Every person desiring to engage in the business of selling ice, either at wholesale or retail, within the city shall first obtain an ice business license in the form of a separate ice vehicle license for each vehicle used in such business and an ice depot license where such ice is handled or sold.  
§ 193-2. - Ice depot license plate. 
With each ice depot license issued, one (1) ice depot license plate, bearing a number, shall be provided by the Board of Health, to be located in a conspicuous place in the depot by the licensee, and, with each ice vehicle license issued, one (1) ice vehicle license plate bearing a number shall be provided by the Board of Health to be placed by the licensee on the right side of the vehicle licensed, where it can readily be seen.  
§ 193-3. - License application. 
Before any ice vehicle license or ice depot license shall be granted, an application shall be made to the Board of Health by the person seeking such license giving the location of the business, the name under which the business is conducted, whether it is a retail or wholesale business, how many vehicles will be operated, whether natural or manufactured ice or both is to be handled or sold and the name and address of the person from whom the ice is to be procured.  
§ 193-4. - Inspection of ice vehicles. 
Prior to the issuance of an ice vehicle license to sell or transport ice in a vehicle, the ice vehicle shall be brought to the office of the Board of Health to be inspected for suitability as to the sanitary keeping or delivery of ice. If found unsuitable for such purpose, a license shall be denied until the conditions have been corrected.  
§ 193-5. - Ice business licenses. 
The ice business licenses referred to in this chapter shall be issued for the period from May 1 of one (1) year to April 30 of the following year and shall be renewed annually.  
§ 193-6. - Ice depot license fee.[1] 
The fee for an ice depot license shall be as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. 
 
§ 193-7. - Ice vehicle license fee.[2] 
The fee for an ice vehicle license shall be as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges. 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. 
 
§ 193-8. - Ice depot and vehicle licenses nontransferable. 
Licenses to conduct ice depots or operate ice vehicles are not transferable.  
§ 193-9. - Suspension or revocation of ice business license. 
The Division of Health or the Health Officer reserves the right to suspend or revoke a license to conduct an ice business, either depot or vehicle, after a hearing and may suspend the operation of such ice business pending a hearing when, in the judgment of the Health Officer, such suspension is necessary for the protection of the public health.  
§ 193-10. - Wholesale ice dealers. 
Every wholesale dealer in ice shall keep the premises where ice is stored, or from which ice is delivered to retailers, in a clean and sanitary condition and well drained, and no ice shall be received at any depot or platform from any boat, barge, scow, railway car or other vehicle which was not in a sanitary condition at the time the ice was placed therein.  
§ 193-11. - Purity of ice. 
All ice to be sold in Jersey City for domestic use or for use in any place where an article of food or drink may come directly in contact with the ice shall be pure and wholesome, shall be cut from a pure and uncontaminated lake or stream or manufactured from pure and uncontaminated water and transported in vehicles maintained in a sanitary manner.  
§ 193-12. - Manner of delivery. 
In the delivery of such ice to retailers, the ice shall not at any time be deposited in the street, nor on the sidewalk, unless a clean piece of canvas or sailcloth has first been placed on the sidewalk where the ice is to be deposited.  
Chapter 196 - INSURANCE 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City: Art. I, 2-20-1979 as Ord. No. S-189. Amendments noted where applicable.] 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Department of Public Safety — See Ch. 3, Art. XI.  
ARTICLE I - Fire Insurance Proceeds 
[Adopted 2-20-1979 as Ord. No. S-189] 
 
§ 196-1. - Payment of proceeds to insured; restriction. [Amended 1-26-1984 by Ord. No. MC-557; 11-24-1992 by Ord. No. 92-168] 
A.  No insurance company authorized to issue fire insurance policies in the State of New Jersey shall pay any claims in excess of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.) on any real property located in this city unless: 
(1)  The city issues to the insured: 
(a)  An official certificate of search for municipal liens pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-12, certifying that all taxes, assessments and other municipal liens and charges levied and assessed and due and payable against the property covered by such insurance policy have been paid; and 
(b)  An official certification on a form prescribed and certified by the city that demolition is not required or that the cost of demolition has been paid. 
(2)  The city submits to the insurance company the certification required under Subsection A(1)(b) and a certified copy of a resolution duly adopted by the city approving an agreement between the city and the owner of the insured property, in which said owner agrees to pay in full all delinquent taxes, assessments and other municipal liens by installments pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-19 or pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-65. No such resolution approving such agreement shall be adopted unless said owner shall agree, in writing, to use the proceeds from the policy to restore or improve the fire-damaged property. 
B.  Upon receiving copies of the certifications required under Subsection A(1)(a) and (b) or a certified copy of the aforesaid resolution, the insurance company is authorized to make full payment of the claim to the insured person. 
C.  The official certificates of search required by Subsection A(1) above may, from time to time, be altered by the authorized official of the city in order to correct any errors or omissions or to add any municipal liens or related charges due and payable subsequent to the preparation of the original official certificate. 
D.  Any request pursuant to this section for an official certificate of search for municipal liens shall specify that the search concerns fire-damaged property.  
§ 196-2. - Payment of proceeds to city. [Amended 11-24-1992 by Ord. No. 92-168] 
A.  If the insurance company does not receive an official certificate of search showing that all taxes, assessments, demolition charges and other municipal liens and charges have been fully paid; and an official certification on a form prescribed and certified by the city that demolition is not required; or a certified copy of the resolution described in § 196-1 of this chapter and the certification that demolition is not required; then the insurance company is hereby authorized and required, prior to the payment of any claims for fire damages which are in excess of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.) to the owner of property in this city, to pay to the city the anticipated demolition costs and the amount of the liens appearing on said official certificate and such other recorded liens and related charges as may be certified to the insurance company. 
B.  In the event that an appeal is taken on the amount of any lien or charge, other than an appeal on the assessed valuation of the realty involved pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:3-21, the insurance company shall withhold seventy-five percent (75%) of the full amount of the lien or charge being contested pending termination of all proceedings, at which time such moneys and all interest accruing thereon at the rate paid on interest-bearing accounts in banking institutions or savings and loan associations in this state shall be disbursed in accordance with the final order or judgment of the court.  
§ 196-3. - Claim on proceeds; priority. [Amended 1-26-1984 by Ord. No. MC-557] 
A.  A claim of the city upon the proceeds of a fire insurance policy made by the city pursuant to N.J.S.A. 17:36-8 et seq. and this chapter shall be paramount to any other claims on the proceeds except the claims: 
(1)  The holder of a purchase money mortgage held as a first mortgage; and 
(2)  An institutional lender which is a holder of a mortgage on the fire-damaged property, where the policy lists the mortgagee as the holder of an insurable interest as provided for by N.J.S.A. 17:36-12 and any amendments thereto. 
B.  Claims enTitled to priority under Subsection A(1) and (2) shall be paramount to the city's lien only to the extent of the amount due and owing on the mortgage.  
§ 196-4. - Limitation of liability. 
A.  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to obligate the insurance company for any amount in excess of the value of the policy; nor shall said company be liable for payment of any liens not appearing on the official certificate of search or on any changes made thereon which had been submitted to the company. 
B.  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed so as to affect the authority of the city to enforce the payment of a municipal lien under any other law of this state but shall be in addition to such other remedies.  
§ 196-5. - Applicability. 
All fire insurance policies covering real property in this city shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter as though fully set forth in each such policy of fire insurance.  
§ 196-6. - Required reports; duties of Tax Collector. [ ] 
A.  The Director of the Department of Public Safety shall cause a written report to be issued and filed with the Tax Collector as to each fire occurring in this city containing the following information: 
(1)  The address of the property whereon the fire occurred. 
(2)  The name of the fire insurance company insuring the property if it can be ascertained. 
(3)  The approximate estimate of the cost of the damage to the realty, if it can be ascertained. 
B.  Said report shall be filed with the Tax Collector immediately after each fire no matter how much the amount of the damaged caused by the fire. 
C.  Upon receipt of the report of the Department of Public Safety, the Tax Collector shall cause to be made an official search of all taxes, assessments and other municipal liens and charges and shall issue an official certificate of all such liens or charges which are due and payable. Said Collector shall then submit said certificate to the insurance company involved. In the event that the Department of Public Safety shall not be able to ascertain the name and address of the fire insurance company, it shall be the duty of the Tax Collector to ascertain such information. 
D.  The Tax Collector shall install a clerical system for the issuance of supplemental certificates and the submission of the same to the insurance company setting forth on such supplemental certificates any additional taxes or other municipal charges which have become due and payable subsequent to the issuance of the original certificate. Supplemental certificates shall be issued immediately as each new charge becomes due and payable. 
E.  Upon receipt of the notice of a fire, the Tax Collector shall notify each department and division of the city charged with the duty of certifying municipal charges which are unpaid to the Tax Collector who shall include the same on the official certificate of search. Such other departments and divisions are charged with the duty of installing clerical systems so that any charges which become due and payable on a fire-damaged property subsequent to the original certification shall be submitted to the Tax Collector forthwith as such new charges become due. [1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's Note: Former Sec. 19-7, entitled "Commissioner of Insurance; date of filing of Ordinance," which immediately followed this section, was deleted 1-26-1984 by Ord. No. MC-557. 
 
Chapter 202 - JUNKYARDS 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City 5-4-1971 as Ch. 8, Art. VIII, of the 1971 Jersey City Code, as readopted 9-19-1978 by Ord. No. S-128. Amendments noted where applicable.] 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Fees and charges — See Ch. 160. 	Sale of tires — See Ch. 313. 
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 182. 	Used car dealers — See Ch. 324. 
Property maintenance — See Ch. 254. 	Zoning — See Ch. 345. 
Secondhand metals dealers — See Ch. 275. 	
 
 
§ 202-1. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
JUNKYARD, SCRAP YARD or WASTE YARD - Any lot, plot, premises or building used for the scrapping, storing, dismantling or baling of scrap, waste or reclaimable material, motor vehicles, automotive equipment, construction or industrial equipment, combustible or noncombustible, whether the same is to be scrapped and baled for removal from the premises or sold on the premises at retail or wholesale, now existing and which was so being operated and conducted on or before January 1, 1962.  
§ 202-2. - License required. 
No person shall conduct an existing junkyard, scrap yard or waste yard without first having obtained a license, hereafter called a "junkyard license," to do so.  
§ 202-3. - License application. 
A.  Any person desiring to obtain a junkyard license, as herein required, shall make application in writing to the license issuing authority of the city setting forth the name, address and the premises at which it is proposed to establish a junk shop or junkyard, or setting forth the premises where a junkyard, scrap yard or waste yard business is presently being conducted, including a full description of such premises and whether the applicant owns the premises or leases them, together with the deed or lease thereon and a description of the building and the classes of materials which it is proposed to store thereon. 
B.  Such application shall be accompanied by the sum equaling the annual license fee which shall be returned by the license issuing authority in the event that the license is refused. 
C.  Such application shall state the number of years a junkyard, scrap yard or waste yard business has been conducted on the premises and whether the applicant has been convicted of the crime of larceny or removing stolen goods or any other crime involving moral turpitude. 
D.  Such application shall state whether all city taxes, both real and personal, on said premises have been fully paid.  
§ 202-4. - Investigation; license issuance. 
If, after investigation, the license issuing authority is reasonably satisfied that the statements contained in the application are true, and the applicant has fully complied with the terms and conditions of this chapter and any other applicable ordinance of the city and if the proper fee has been paid the license issuing authority shall issue to the applicant a license for the premises specified in the application effective from the date of issuance.  
§ 202-5. - License fee. [Amended 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050] 
The license fee hereunder for junkyards, scrap yards, junk dealers, scrap yard dealers and waste yard dealers is as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges, payable in advance.  
§ 202-6. - Expiration of license. [Amended 2-11-1998 by Ord. No. 98-004] 
All licenses shall expire on May 31 of each year. The initial license fee following the change in expiration date will be subject to proration by the Division of Licenses and Fees.  
§ 202-7. - Suspension or revocation of license. 
A.  Any license issued hereunder may be suspended or revoked by the license issuing authority for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  The licensee has knowingly made any false or materially incorrect statement in the application. 
(2)  The licensee knowingly violates or knowingly permits or countenances the violation of any provision of this chapter. 
(3)  The licensee knowingly violates or knowingly permits or countenances the violation of any provision of any penal law or ordinance regarding theft, larceny or conversion of junk, scrap or waste or the receiving of stolen goods. 
B.  No suspension or revocation of any license shall be made until a ten-day written notice of the charges preferred against the licensee shall have been given to him or her personally, or by mailing the same by registered mail addressed to him or her at the licensed premises, and a reasonable opportunity to be heard thereon afforded to him or her. The hearing shall be held before and conducted by the Director of Public Safety or by the license issuing authority when so designated by the Director of Public Safety. If the hearing is held before the license issuing authority he or she shall report his or her findings and recommendations to the Director of Department of Public Safety. All suspensions or revocations of licenses shall be effected by notice in writing of such suspension or revocation, designating the effective date thereon, and, in case of suspension, the term of such suspension, which notice may be served upon the licensee personally or by mailing the same by registered mail addressed to him or her at the licensed premises. Such suspension or revocation shall apply to the licensee and to the licensed premises. Any revocation shall render the licensee ineligible to receive any other license under this chapter for a period of one year from the effective date thereof and may, in the discretion of the Director, render the licensed premises ineligible to become a subject for any future license under this chapter. [ Amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ]  
§ 202-8. - License transfers. 
The transfer of any license provided for in this chapter to any other person shall be subject to the approval of the license issuing authority and shall be approved, provided that the applicant complies with all the terms and conditions of this chapter.  
§ 202-9. - Records to be kept. [Amended 5-12-1988 by Ord. No. C-758] 
A.  All junkyard, scrap yard or waste yard dealers and junkyard, scrap yard or waste yard operators shall keep books in which records of all purchases are made, which books shall be open to public inspection so that stolen goods may be traced and other probable violations of law may be investigated. 
B.  No junkyard, waste yard or scrap yard dealer and no operator of a junkyard, waste yard or scrap yard shall knowingly purchase or receive, or attempt to purchase or receive, or have in its possession or on its premises any goods, materials or equipment, whether intended for scrapping or resale, which are sold by any person from any shopping cart or wheeled conveyance normally used by customers of retail food establishments. [1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's Note: See also Ch. 284, Shopping Carts. 
 
§ 202-10. - Compliance with other regulations. 
All junkyards, scrap yards or waste yards, junkyard dealers, scrap yard dealers and waste yard dealers operating in the city shall be governed and controlled by this chapter and by the ordinances and codes of any and all departments in the city as though the same were fully set forth herein.  
§ 202-11. - Violations and penalties.[2] 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. 
 
Chapter 203 - KEY LOCK BOX SYSTEM 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City 3-11-1998 by Ord. No. 98-018. Amendments noted where applicable.] 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Multiple dwellings — See Ch. 218. 	Retail and commercial premises — See Ch. 263. 
 
 
§ 203-1. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
CABINET STYLE VAULTS - In addition to the contents of the basic key lock box, the cabinet style vault contains building floor plans, site plans, hazardous material information and material safety data sheets. 
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS - Flammable solids, flammable and combustibles liquids, corrosive liquids, radioactive materials, oxidizing materials, explosive materials, highly toxic materials, fumigants, unstable (reactive) chemicals and poisonous gases as defined in N.J.A.C. 5:18-3.2. 
KEY LOCK BOX SYSTEM - A box designed to contain building entrance keys and keys to other areas of a building, such as locked rooms and storage areas. 
MSDS - Material Safety Data Sheet. 
UL - Underwriters Laboratories.  
§ 203-2. - Requirements; structures subject to the use of a key lock box system. 
A.  The following structures shall be equipped with a key lock box at or near the main entrance or such other location specified by the Fire Official: 
(1)  Structures protected by automatic alarm system or automatic suppression system; or 
(2)  Structures secured in a manner that restricts access during an emergency. 
B.  All newly constructed structures subject to this section shall have the key lock box installed and operational before issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
C.  The owners of structures in existence shall have one year from the effective date of this chapter to have a key lock box system installed and operational. 
D.  The owner or operator of the structure required to have a key lock box shall, at all times, keep a key in the lock box that will allow access to the structure. 
E.  The Fire Official shall designate the type of key lock box to be implemented within the city and shall have the authority to require all structures to use the designated system. 
F.  Owners or operators of controlled vehicle parking areas which use mechanical parking gates to control motor vehicle ingress and egress shall install and maintain an emergency override control device on each gate. Said device shall be a master key-operated-type switch approved by the Fire Official of the City of Jersey City. 
G.  Cabinet style vaults shall be required when deemed necessary by the Fire Official at premises containing hazardous material. These cabinets shall contain hazardous material information and material safety data sheets, site plans, floor plans and other information required by the Fire Official. 
H.  Cabinet style vaults for document storage shall be available with two separate locks. The key to either lock shall open the vault. 
I.  Upon examination of the physical condition and characteristics of any property and upon notice, in writing, to the assessed owner and principal occupant, the Fire Official may further require a key lock box in a specific location whenever access to or within a structure is unduly difficult because of secured openings or where immediate access is necessary for lifesaving or fire fighter purposes. 
J.  All costs associated with the purchase and installation of the key lock box system shall be the responsibility of the owner of the premises.  
§ 203-3. - Exceptions. 
A.  Any property protected by on-site, twenty-four-hour, seven-day-a-week security guard service or maintenance personnel shall be exempt. 
B.  All residential properties of six stories or less shall be exempt.  
§ 203-4. - Specifications. 
A.  Key box contents shall be as follows: 
(1)  Keys to locked points of egress, whether on interior or exterior of such buildings. 
(2)  Keys to the locked mechanical rooms. 
(3)  Keys to the locked elevator rooms. 
(4)  Keys to the elevator controls. 
(5)  Keys to any fence or secured areas. 
(6)  Keys to any other areas as directed by the Fire Official. 
(7)  A floor plan of the rooms within the building. 
(8)  When applicable, MSDS. 
B.  Key box type(s)/specifications. 
(1)  The key box shall be of a UL-type and shall be installed in a location approved by the Jersey City Fire Official. 
(2)  Locks shall be Medeco Biaxial Level 7 or equivalent. 
(3)  Key vaults shall have the ability to be master keyed. 
(4)  Locks shall be designed for high resistance to drilling, picking, pushing and pulling. 
(5)  Lock code and key section shall be unconditionally restricted by the key vault manufacturer for use by the Department of Public Safety only. [ Amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] 
(6)  Locks shall be listed under UL 437, the standard for safety key locks. 
(7)  Key lock boxes shall offer key vaults which are listed under UL 1610, the standard for Central Station Alarm Units for use with UL-listed alarm systems. 
(8)  Key lock boxes shall offer key vaults which are listed under UL 1037, the standard for antitheft alarms and devices. 
(9)  A fully inserted key shall withstand a minimum of pounds per square inch of torque. 
(10)   Key vaults shall have weatherproof gasket seals of neoprene material or better around openings. 
(11)   Key vaults shall have covered locked openings constructed of heavy gauge steel designed to resist vandalism. 
(12)   Key vaults shall have minimum wall thickness of 1/4 inch and door thickness of one-half-inch plate steel. 
(13)   Cabinet-style vaults for document storage shall have a minimum wall and door thickness of one-eighth-inch plate steel with an additional drill resistance hard plate to protect the lock mechanism.  
§ 203-5. - Administration; recordkeeping; notification; registration. [ ] 
A.  Recordkeeping. The Fire Official shall record all pertinent data regarding each property protected by a key lock box. The Fire Official shall include whatever information is necessary for recordkeeping purposes. 
B.  Registration fee. There shall be a twenty-five-dollar registration fee when a lock box is initially installed. 
C.  The Department of Public Safety shall be in complete control of the key lock box system authorization and operation. 
D.  Each key lock box system shall utilize approved signature(s) from the Department of Public Safety for release of keys and all lock products from the manufacturer. 
E.  Notification. If locks are changed at any location with a key lock box system, the Fire Official shall be notified immediately. 
F.  Enforceability. This chapter may be enforced by the Department of Public Safety and the Building Division.  
§ 203-6. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person found guilty of violating this chapter shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25.  
Chapter 207 - LAUNDRIES AND DRY CLEANERS 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City: Art. I, 5-4-1971 as Ch. 8, Art. VI, of the 1971 Jersey City Code, as readopted 9-19-1978 by Ord. No. S-128; Art. II, 5-4-1971 as Ch. 8, Art. IX, of the 1971 Jersey City Code, as readopted 9-19-1978 by Ord. No. S-120. Amendments noted where applicable.] 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Fees and charges — See Ch. 160. 	Zoning — See Ch. 345. 
Noise — See Ch. 222. 	
  
ARTICLE I - Coin-Operated Dry Cleaners 
[Adopted 5-4-1971 as Ch. 8, Art. VI, of the 1971 Jersey City Code, as readopted 9-19-1978 by Ord. No. S-128] 
 
§ 207-1. - Definitions. 
As used herein; the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
COIN-OPERATED or SELF-SERVICE DRY CLEANING ESTABLISHMENTS - Hereafter called a "coin-operated dry cleaning establishment" or a "coin-operated dry cleaner," premises wherein devices for the cleaning of textiles, fabrics, garments or other articles by the use of any solvent, other than water, are installed for use by the general public. 
CUSTOMER AREA - That portion of the establishment to which the general public is permitted access. 
HEALTH AUTHORITY - The Division of Health, Department of Health and Human Services, or an authorized representative thereof. 
MAINTENANCE AREA - That portion of the establishment to which the customer is not permitted access and used for general maintenance and storage purposes. 
SOLVENT - Any cleaning fluid which is free of additives to mask the odor, classified by the American Insurance Association as nonflammable at ordinary temperatures, and not more toxic than the generally accepted threshold limit value for perchlorethylene as promulgated by the American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists.  
§ 207-2. - Permit required; application. 
Any person desiring a coin-operated dry cleaner permit to operate a coin-operated dry cleaning establishment shall make application therefor in writing to the Division of Health.  
§ 207-3. - Contents of application. 
Applications for coin-operated dry cleaner permits shall contain the following information: 
A.  The applicant's full name, residence, telephone number and post office address and whether such applicant is an individual, firm or corporation. If a partnership, the names and addresses of the partners shall be included. If a corporation, the names and addresses of the officers and the registered agent of the corporation shall be included. 
B.  The proposed location of the establishment, a floor plan showing the building outline, location of the equipment, drainage, toilet and washing facilities. 
C.  The manufacturer of the machine, the trade name and manufacturer's agent. 
D.  The name, address and authorized officer of the person engaged to install the equipment. 
E.  Name or names of maintenance personnel and their telephone numbers. 
F.  The signature of the applicant or its authorized officer.  
§ 207-4. - Inspection of equipment; fee; renewal. [Amended 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050; 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052; ] 
Following receipt of such application, coin-operated dry cleaning equipment locations shall be inspected by the Division of Construction Code Official, the Department of Public Safety and the Health Division prior to the installation of dry cleaning equipment. If approved by all three agencies and the Director of the Department of Health and Human Services, the health authority shall make such investigation as may be necessary of maintenance and storage facilities, as well as machines and their locations in and about the premises, to determine compliance with the provisions of this article. Upon approval of the application, a coin-operated dry cleaner permit shall be issued after payment of a fee as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges, to the Division of Health, which permit shall expire on April 30 of each year and shall be renewed annually.  
§ 207-5. - Maintenance area. 
The public shall only be permitted access to that portion of coin-operated dry cleaning machines necessary for the use of those machines. The remaining portion of each machine shall be separated from the customer area by a partition in which there are grills or similar ventilation devices. This partitioned-off area shall be called the "maintenance area." The access door to the maintenance area shall be self-closing and locked to prevent access by the public.  
§ 207-6. - Entry to maintenance area. 
No person other than the permit holder or his or her representative shall enter the maintenance area of a coin-operated dry cleaner.  
§ 207-7. - Interconnection of maintenance area and heating devices. 
The maintenance area of a coin-operated dry cleaner shall not be interconnected with the area containing heating devices requiring air for combustion, such as gas dryers, water heaters and comfort heating devices.  
§ 207-8. - Installation of heating devices. 
Heating devices in coin-operated dry cleaners requiring air for combustion shall be installed in such fashion as to obtain air for combustion from the outside atmosphere.  
§ 207-9. - Ventilation; exhaust fans required. 
A.  Ventilation of coin-operated dry cleaning establishments shall be accomplished by the drawing of air from the customer area through grills or other openings in the partition by means of an exhaust fan or fans operating in the maintenance area. 
B.  Exhaust fans shall have a rated capacity of 400 cubic feet per minute (cfm) per machine for normal use and 1,000 cubic feet per minute (cfm) per machine for use in emergencies. The rated capacities of exhaust fans shall appear on this equipment or its nameplate. 
C.  If air is being constantly exhausted as a built-in feature of the equipment, the rated capacity of the fan can be reduced by this amount.  
§ 207-10. - Ventilation; temperature of replenishing air. 
In the ventilation of coin-operated dry cleaning establishments, air shall be replenished at a temperature not less than 60° F. as quickly as it is exhausted from the customer area.  
§ 207-11. - Machine exhaust system. 
Each coin-operated dry cleaning machine shall be equipped with an exhaust system that maintains a minimum of 100 feet per minute velocity through the loading door whenever the door is open. The duct work connections to this system shall be sealed (soldered or taped) and the discharge outlet extended to a minimum height of five feet above the roof line and shall be located so that the effluent may not re-enter the premises or become a nuisance to occupants of adjoining buildings.  
§ 207-12. - Metal pan to collect machine spillage. 
A concrete dike or metal pan or similar facility shall be installed at the location of each machine to collect and contain spillage.  
§ 207-13. - Floor covering in customer area. 
The floor covering in the customer area shall be made of concrete or a material similarly resistant to the solvents used in such machines.  
§ 207-14. - Hours of operation. 
The operation of a coin-operated dry cleaning establishment shall not commence earlier than 8:00 a.m. and shall not continue after 10:00 p.m.  
§ 207-15. - Maintenance employee on duty. 
There shall be on duty at all times during the hours of operation at every coin-operated dry cleaning establishment at least one adult maintenance employee who has been instructed as to solvent hazards and who is familiar with all necessary emergency repairs.  
§ 207-16. - Compliance with other regulations. 
All coin-operated dry cleaning establishments shall meet the requirements of all established state and local laws, codes and regulations, including but not limited to air pollution, electrical wiring, plumbing, fire prevention, waste disposal, sanitation, solvent storage, food or beverage vending, hours of operation and presence of an attendant.  
§ 207-17. - Location in dwelling prohibited. 
No coin-operated dry cleaning establishment shall be located in a building occupied in whole or in part as a dwelling.  
§ 207-18. - Respirator to be provided. 
A respirator, approved by the United States Bureau of Mines as affording protection against organic solvent vapors, shall be provided for and used by maintenance personnel during correction of leakages, cleaning of the system, removal of lint and muck bags and at all times when the odor of solvent is noticeable.  
§ 207-19. - Fire extinguisher in customer area. 
The customer area shall be equipped with a fire extinguisher approved for use against electrical or oil fires by the American Insurance Association.  
§ 207-20. - Posting of instructions. 
A step-by-step, readily legible, instruction list for operation of the machines shall be posted in a conspicuous location near the machine in the customer area. These instructions shall include a list of items not to be dry cleaned in coin-operated dry cleaning machines, such as those made in part or completely of plastic, rubber, leather, paper, fur, angora and urethane.  
§ 207-21. - Posting of emergency telephone number. 
Each coin-operated dry cleaning establishment shall post in a conspicuous location, readily visible from the outside of these premises, the telephone number or numbers to be called in the event of an emergency.  
§ 207-22. - Interlock system on machine door. 
Each coin-operated dry cleaning machine shall be provided with an interlock system to prevent the loading door from being opened during the normal cycle or in the event of a power failure. This system may be either electrical or mechanical, or a combination of the two.  
§ 207-23. - Elimination of solvent vapors from cleaned items. 
No coin-operated dry cleaning machine shall be permitted to be operated in a coin-operated dry cleaning establishment which in normal operation fails to eliminate all vapors from the cleaned items upon completion of the dry cleaning cycle.  
§ 207-24. - Elimination of solvent odor. 
Immediate action shall be taken to eliminate solvent odor in the customer area of a coin-operated dry cleaning establishment. Failure to take such action shall be just cause for closing the establishment. Vapors or odors from such establishments shall be exhausted in such manner as not to constitute air pollution.  
§ 207-25. - Flammable spotting equipment prohibited. 
No person shall use spotting equipment containing flammable material in a coin-operated dry cleaning establishment.  
§ 207-26. - Daily inspections and maintenance record. 
Each coin-operated dry cleaning machine shall be inspected each day it is in operation and kept in good repair by maintenance personnel. A record shall be kept in the maintenance area of all inspections and repairs made.  
§ 207-27. - Storage of solvents. 
Solvents shall be kept in closed air-tight containers and handled in such manner as to prevent the escape of odors.  
§ 207-28. - Disposal of filter residue containing solvents. 
Filter residue and other residues containing solvents shall be disposed of so as not to create a health hazard or nuisance.  
§ 207-29. - Drainage of solvent to sewer prohibited. 
Coin-operated dry cleaning solvent shall not be permitted to drain into the sewer.  
§ 207-30. - Inspections; right of entry. 
The health authority shall inspect coin-operated dry cleaning establishments as often as deemed necessary. The permit holder or his or her representative shall allow access to any portion of the establishment for the purpose of making such an inspection.  
§ 207-31. - Nuisances. 
Any coin-operated dry cleaning establishment constructed, operated or maintained in violation of this article is hereby declared to be a nuisance and detrimental to public health.  
ARTICLE II - Laundries 
[Adopted 5-4-1971 as Ch. 8, Art. IX, of the 1971 Jersey City Code, as readopted 9-19-1978 by Ord. No. S-128] 
 
§ 207-32. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
LAUNDRY BUSINESS: 
A.  Any place, building, structure, room, establishment or portion thereof which is used for washing, drying, starching or ironing shirts, dresses, underwear, collars, cuffs or other wearing apparel, table, bed or other household linens, towels, curtains, draperies or other washable fabrics and where such work is done for the general public for profit. 
B.  Any laundry maintained or operated in connection with any hotel, restaurant or public institution where no charge is made for laundry services. 
DRY CLEANERS - Any place, building, structure, room, establishment or portion thereof which is used for the cleaning of textiles, fabrics, garments or other articles by the use of any solvent, other than water, and where such work is done for the general public for profit or where operated in connection with any hotel, restaurant or public institution where no charge is made for dry-cleaning services. 
[Added 8-16-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068]  
§ 207-33. - Changes in location. 
In the event that a laundry business moves the location of its business, a new registration with the Health officer shall be made within 10 days after completion of the move, and a new laundry license shall not be issued unless the new place of business complies with all sanitary requirements contained in this article.  
§ 207-34. - Registration required. 
Every person conducting a laundry business shall register with the Health Officer the name or Title by which the business is known, together with the address where the business is carried on. If the laundry does business under a trade name, there shall be registered, as well, the names and addresses of the individuals comprising the firm and, if the laundry is a corporation, there shall be registered the names and addresses of the directors and the agent upon whom process may be served. If the owners or operators of a laundry doing business in the city are nonresidents of the city, all such persons shall name a person resident of Jersey City upon whom process may be served.  
§ 207-35. - Sanitary conditions; inspections. 
The Health Officer shall regularly inspect all licensed laundries as to the sanitary conditions prevailing therein, and such officer may recommend and order changes in any laundry establishment where sanitary conditions do not satisfy the sanitary regulations of the Health Officer. In the event of failure to comply with the order of the Health Officer within a reasonable time, the Health Officer may revoke the license of the offending licensee.  
§ 207-36. - Display of license. 
All laundry licenses shall be prominently displayed in the establishment where laundry work is done. [1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's Note: Original Sec. 8-121, entitled "Nonresident laundries; license required; sanitary requirements and license fee applicable," which immediately followed this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. 
 
§ 207-37. - License required; exception. 
No person shall conduct or carry on any laundry, launderette, cleaning or dyeing business, or operate or conduct any laundry, launderette, cleaning or dyeing establishment or installation where articles are processed in or on any premises in the city except installations in buildings erected solely and exclusively for residential purposes and for the sole use of tenants thereof, until he has first obtained a license therefor from the Health Officer.  
§ 207-38. - License fee. [Amended 4-28-1988 by Ord. No. C-730; 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050] 
Every person operating or conducting any laundry, launderette, cleaning or dyeing business or establishment or installation, including coin-operated establishments as defined in § 207-1 of this Code, shall pay an annual license fee as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges. All licenses or renewals shall expire on April 30 in each year.  
§ 207-39. - License application. [Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052; ] 
Applications for laundry and dry cleaning licenses, and annual renewals thereof, shall be made on forms to be provided by the Division of Health, and filed by the applicant with the Division of Health. The license fee shall accompany each application for a license or renewal thereof. The approval of the Department of Public Safety and Division of Construction Code Official, in accordance with ordinances and regulations governing the same, shall be condition precedent to the issuance of each license and each annual renewal.  
§ 207-40. - Revocation of license. 
The Health Officer may suspend or revoke any license issued hereunder for a violation of any of the provisions hereof or of any regulation or order of the Health Officer made in accordance with and to carry out the provisions of this article, after the licensee has been given notice of the violation and an opportunity to show cause before the Health Officer why the license should not be suspended or revoked.  
§ 207-41. - General sanitary requirements. 
All places and spaces used for laundries, launderettes, cleaning or dyeing establishments or installations shall be sufficiently or properly covered with nonabsorbent paint or cement or other impervious material. There shall be an adequate supply of water for flushing and cleaning available and such flooring shall be properly graded to a trapped inlet having direct connection with the house drain. Sufficient toilet facilities for male and female employees of such establishments shall be provided. [2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's Note: Original Sec. 8-127, entitled "Laundry and dry cleaning; articles from quarantined houses," and Sec. 8-128, entitled " Laundry and dry cleaning from quarantined houses; compliance with provision," which immediately followed this section, were deleted 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050. 
 
§ 207-42. - Cleanliness of machines. 
Machines used for washing, laundering, cleaning or dyeing, shall be kept thoroughly washed and cleaned and shall be kept clean at all times.  
§ 207-43. - Temperature of water. 
Water shall be heated to a temperature of not less than 180° F. and shall be maintained at that temperature during the cleansing process, unless some other method which will produce equal results and acceptable to the Division of Health is employed.  
§ 207-44. - Ventilation and light. 
The rooms in which any washing or laundering facilities are located shall be adequately ventilated and shall have a sufficient amount of light.  
§ 207-45. - Hours of operation. 
The operation of any laundry, launderette, cleaning or dyeing establishment shall commence not earlier than 8:00 a.m. and shall not continue after 10:00 p.m.  
§ 207-46. - Noise. 
No machinery used in any laundry, launderette, cleaning or dyeing establishment shall be operated so as to create any noises or vibrations to the detriment of the families on premises in the surrounding neighborhood.  
§ 207-47. - Use of residential buildings. 
A.  No laundry, launderette, cleaning or dyeing establishment shall be conducted in any building devoted exclusively to residential occupation or in any residential portion of a building, except there may be established in any such building one or more washing or laundry facilities which shall be used solely by and for the convenience and service of the residents of the residential building. Such washing and laundering facilities for use by residents of a building shall be constructed and operated in accordance with the regulations and conditions set forth in this article. 
B.  No license shall be required for the operation of washing and laundering facilities in any such residential building or portion thereof, but this exception shall not apply to store units in buildings occupied in part for residential purposes.  
§ 207-48. - Additional rules and regulations. 
The Health Officer may promulgate such rules and regulations as may be necessary to effectuate the sanitary, health and plumbing provisions of this chapter.  
Chapter 215 - MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR SHOPS 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City 7-22-1982 as Ord. No. MC-192. Amendments noted where applicable.] 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Fees and charges — See Ch. 160. 	Sale of tires — See Ch. 313. 
Junkyards — See Ch. 202. 	Used car dealers — See Ch. 324. 
Property maintenance — See Ch. 254. 	Zoning — See Ch. 345. 
 
 
§ 215-1. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
MOTOR VEHICLE - An automobile, truck, motorcycle or any other trackless self-propelled vehicle designed primarily to transport persons or property over public streets and highways. 
MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR SHOP: 
A.  Any place, indoors or outdoors, where motor vehicles are repaired for a fee; or where the work of repairing motor vehicles is carried on as an incident to: 
(1)  The business of selling new or used motor vehicles; 
(2)  New or used motor vehicle parts; or 
(3)  Any other traffic in motor vehicles or their parts or equipment. 
B.  "Motor vehicle repair shop" does not include places where only the following work is done: 
(1)  Tire changing or repairing. 
(2)  Lamp globe changing. 
(3)  Charging of batteries. 
(4)  Installing minor parts or making trivial repairs customarily done in connection with the business of selling motor fuel, oil or motor vehicle accessories. 
PERSON - Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation or organization of any kind. 
REPAIR WORK ON MOTOR VEHICLES - Any work done on the premises of a motor vehicle repair shop which requires direct or indirect physical contact with a motor vehicle or any part of a motor vehicle.  
§ 215-2. - License required. 
No person may operate a motor vehicle repair shop within the City of Jersey City without first obtaining a license from the license issuing authority in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. A person who operates more than one motor vehicle repair shop within the city shall obtain a separate license for each shop.  
§ 215-3. - License application. 
A.  An applicant for a motor vehicle repair license shall file an application with the license issuing authority upon forms provided by the license issuing authority. The application form shall be signed by the applicant, by all partners if the applicant is a partnership or by the president or chief officer if the applicant is a corporation. Each person signing the application shall swear before a notary public to the truth of all information contained in the application. 
B.  Applications shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name, resident address and telephone number of each individual owner, partner or, if a corporation or other organization, each officer and director. 
(2)  Trade names and exact locations and descriptions of any businesses operated by the applicant and each person signing the application within the past five years. 
(3)  Names and addresses of employers of each person signing the application within the past five years. 
(4)  A statement as to whether the applicant and each person whose name appears on the application has been convicted of any crime, the nature of the offense and the date of the conviction. 
(5)  The trade name and telephone number of the business of the applicant. 
(6)  The name, resident address and telephone number of each person employed or intended to be employed in the business as of the time of the application. 
(7)  The address of the place where the business is to be conducted. 
(8)  Any other information which the supervisor of licenses finds reasonably necessary to enforce this chapter.  
§ 215-4. - Investigation; license issuance. 
A.  Upon receipt of a completed application the license issuing authority shall investigate the business responsibility and moral character of the applicant and shall inspect the premises and equipment with which the motor vehicle repair shop is to be conducted. 
B.  The license issuing authority shall approve the application only if he or she finds that: 
(1)  The applicant's business responsibility and moral character are satisfactory and that all partners, directors and officers of the applicant who will participate in the applicant's business are of good character and reputation and are capable of operating the business in a manner consistent with the public welfare. 
(2)  The proposed or existing premises and equipment with which the business is to be conducted conform to the requirements of the Building Code, applicable health and fire prevention codes and this chapter. 
C.  If either of the findings in Subsection B of this section are unfavorable to the applicant, the license issuing authority shall notify the applicant within 30 days after the filing of his or her application that no license will be issued. This notification shall be accompanied by a written statement of the grounds upon which the application was disapproved. 
D.  All licenses shall contain the following language: 
IMPORTANT. This license is valid only for the address listed on the license. It authorizes the holder of this license to operate a motor vehicle repair shop in a lawful place and manner. It is not a substitute for a certificate of occupancy or any other license or permit required by applicable laws; nor does it relieve the holder of this license of the responsibility to have all permits and certificates required by law at all times or to comply with all laws affecting the operation of its business.  
§ 215-5. - Expiration; renewal. 
A.  All licenses shall expire on October 31 of each year. The initial license fee following the change in expiration date will be subject to proration by the Division of Licenses and Fees. 
[Amended 2-11-1998 by Ord. No. 98-004] 
B.  An applicant for a renewal license shall file with the license issuing authority a written application which conforms in all respects to the original application.  
§ 215-6. - License fees. 
A.  The annual fee for all licenses and renewal licenses shall be as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges. 
[Amended 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050] 
B.  All license fees shall be paid when the applicant files his or her application and are to be computed as of the date of filing of the application.  
§ 215-7. - Establishments to be separately licensed. 
A separate license shall be obtained in the manner prescribed by this chapter for each branch or separate location of the applicant's business as if each branch or separate location were a separate business.  
§ 215-8. - License nontransferable. 
No license issued under this chapter shall be transferred, assigned or used by any person other than the one to whom it is issued; nor shall any license be used for any location other than the one for which it is issued.  
§ 215-9. - General operating requirements. 
A.  No partially dismantled, nonoperable or wrecked motor vehicle shall be stored or dismantled on the repair shop premises except as a direct, immediate and necessary incident to its repair unless the storage or dismantling is necessary to some business in which the licensee is lawfully engaged in conjunction with the motor vehicle repair business. 
B.  The following general operating requirements shall apply to all motor vehicle repair shops: 
(1)  The license issued under this chapter shall be plainly displayed on the business premises. 
(2)  No noxious weeds or appreciable amounts of refuse shall be allowed to accumulate on the premises. 
(3)  A record must be kept showing the address and signature of every person from whom any secondhand parts are bought or obtained. This record shall be available for inspection by any law enforcement officer for a period of at least one year. 
(4)  An itemized statement of parts and labor used in repairing a motor vehicle shall be furnished to the owner of the motor vehicle or upon the request of the insurance company which has insured the vehicle, its owner or operator. 
(5)  If secondhand parts are used for any repair or alteration of a motor vehicle, the customer must be informed that the parts are not new and that fact noted on any written estimate or bill. 
(6)  A written report shall be made to the Chief of Police within 24 hours when any motor vehicle with gun shot damage is brought to the repair shop. This report shall include, if available, the license number, serial number, engine number, make, model, year and color of the vehicle and the name and address, sex, race and approximate age of the person who brought the vehicle.  
§ 215-10. - Suspension or revocation of license. 
The license issuing authority may suspend or revoke any motor vehicle repair shop license if he or she finds, after investigation, that: 
A.  The licensee or any agent, officer or employee of the licensee who takes part in the operation of the licensed business has failed to comply with this chapter or any law applicable to the premises, equipment or operation of the licensed business. 
B.  The licensee or any agent, officer or employee of the licensee has in the course of the licensed business: 
(1)  Mutilated or altered the engine or serial number of any motor vehicle; 
(2)  Made wrongful use of any motor vehicle entrusted to the licensee; or 
(3)  Willfully or through gross negligence endangered the life or safety of any person. 
C.  The licensee or any agent, officer or employee of the licensee has defrauded or attempted to defraud any person by means of charging or attempting to charge for any unnecessary or unauthorized repairs by intentionally misstating the nature or probable cost of any repair or by any other means. 
D.  The licensee has obtained his or her license through any fraud or misstatements. 
E.  The licensed business is being conducted in a manner detrimental to the health, safety or general welfare of the public or is no longer being operated.  
§ 215-11. - Hearings. 
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the license issuing authority granting, denying, renewing, suspending or revoking a license for a proposed or existing motor vehicle repair shop may file a request for a hearing before the Business Administrator within 10 days after the issuance of the supervisor's decision. The Business Administrator shall schedule a hearing no later than 10 days after he or she receives notice of the request. The Business Administrator shall also give notice of the hearing to other persons directly interested in the decision subject to the hearing. At the hearing, the Business Administrator shall decide whether the decision of the license issuing authority was in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. He or she shall issue written findings of fact, conclusions of law and an order to carry out his or her findings and conclusions. A copy of this order shall be sent to all parties appearing before the Business Administrator.  
§ 215-12. - Grace period. 
Each person operating a motor vehicle repair shop on the effective date of this chapter shall have a period of 90 days after the effective date to apply for the license required by this chapter.  
§ 215-13. - Violations and penalties.[1] 
In addition to the suspension or revocation of his or her license, any person found guilty of violating this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. 
 
Chapter 218 - MULTIPLE DWELLINGS 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City as indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.] 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 131. 	Property maintenance — See Ch. 254. 
Elevators — See Ch. 155. 	Property transfers — See Ch. 257. 
Housing accommodations — See Ch. 188. 	Rent control — See Ch. 260. 
	Taxation — See. Ch. 304. 
  
ARTICLE I - Security Service and Security Cameras [Adopted 9-9-1982 by Ord. No. MC-220; amended in entirety 4-26-2006 by Ord. No. 06-056] 
 
§ 218-1. - Uniformed security service. [Amended 11-27-1985 by Ord. No. C-75; 9-11-1986 by Ord. No. C-282; 4-26-2006 by Ord. No. 06-056; 06-14-2006 by Ord. No. 06-071] 
A.  Every owner or agent of an owner of a multiple dwelling of one hundred (100) or more dwelling units shall furnish a minimum of one uniformed security guard upon its premises twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven days a week. 
B.  Each uniformed guard shall make a periodic patrol inspection of the premises and shall undertake all actions necessary to assure the personal safety and privacy of the residents of each dwelling unit and their guests. 
C.  The cost of furnishing uniformed security guards shall be a deductible expense for the purpose of computing net income and fair return on equity under Chapter 260, Rent Control. 
D.  An owner or agent of a multiple dwelling subject to this article may apply to the Director of Public Safety for an exemption. The Director of Public Safety shall conduct an inspection of the multiple dwelling and shall grant an exemption if he or she finds that existing security arrangements are adequate to protect the safety and property of the residents. If the Director rejects such application for an exemption he or she may recommend to an applicant what additional security measures would be necessary to meet the minimum requirements for an exemption. Every multiple dwelling which is granted an exemption under this section shall be subject to an inspection at least once each year. [ Amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ]  
§ 218-2. - Security cameras. [Added 4-26-2006 by Ord. No. 06-056; Amended 06-14-2006 by Ord. No. 06-071] 
A.  All newly constructed residential dwelling units, including condominium complexes of more than twenty-five (25) dwelling units and all newly constructed commercial and industrial structures of more than ten thousand (10,000) square feet shall provide for the installation and maintenance of security cameras in accordance with a plan to be approved by the Construction Official. 
B.  Any such security cameras shall be installed so as to maintain continuous surveillance of the public streets adjacent to such dwelling units and shall conform to standards adopted by the City for CCTV cameras. 
C.  Recordings from the surveillance cameras required by this Article shall be maintained for not less than one week and shall be made available to members of the Department of Public Safety in the event the recordings are needed for an investigation. [ Amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] 
D.  It shall be the responsibility of the owner to install, maintain and operate the security camera. However, it shall be within the sole discretion of the owner to determine whether personnel shall be assigned to monitor the cameras in real time.  
§ 218-2.1. - Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050; 4-26-06 by Ord. No. 06-056; 06-14-2006 by Ord. No. 06-071] 
An owner or managing agent who fails to comply with the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25.  
ARTICLE II - Registration of Vacant Dwelling Units 
[Adopted 3-13-1986 by Ord. No. C-35] 
 
§ 218-3. - Reporting requirements. [Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
A.  Owners of multifamily dwellings of five units or more shall report any vacancy or unrented apartment to the Division of Construction Code Official if the vacancy or nonrental continues for ten (10) continuous days. 
B.  Owners will report the rental of the unit to the Division of Construction Code Official. The rental report shall include the address of the building, designation of the unit, date of rental, rent charged, name of new tenant and date of move in by the new tenant.  
§ 218-4. - Inspection of vacant units. [Amended 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050] 
A.  If a unit is not rented within ninety (90) days the recording agency will notify the Division of Construction Code Official, Division of Health and Division of Fire and Emergency Services. The above divisions shall send inspectors to the building to inspect the entire building and the unrented unit in particular to assure compliance with all applicable codes. If violations are found or if a dangerous or unsafe condition exists proper measures are to be taken. 
[Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
B.  The above divisions will continue to inspect both the building and the individual unrented unit on a regular basis.  
§ 218-5. - Processing of code violations. 
A.  The Housing Court shall process all code violations on these buildings and units on an expedited basis. Fines are to be levied as permitted by law on any and/or all code violations as permitted by law. 
B.  The Housing Court shall be empowered to seek remedies or aid through any appropriate city agency including the Rent Receivership Program to maintain the health, well being and safety of the citizens of Jersey City.  
§ 218-6. - Violations and penalties.[1] 
Violation of any part of this article by an owner shall, upon conviction, be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. 
 
ARTICLE III - Harassment and Eviction 
[Adopted 12-11-1986 as Ord. No. C-291] 
 
§ 218-7. - Findings. 
A.  The City Council finds that some owners and developers of residential buildings have engaged in the practice of harassing tenants in an effort to vacate the buildings so as to obtain substantially higher rentals for the dwelling units. Such practices often include the using or threatening to use force, disrupting or discontinuing essential services, failing to abate serious and often life-threatening code violations and removing a tenant's possessions. 
B.  Although state law protects tenants from unlawful evictions, a tenant's remedy for a landlord's unlawful acts is not always quick and efficient; and most tenants are unfamiliar with state judicial procedures. 
C.  The City Council believes that through appropriate regulations and restrictions, such unlawful practices can be curbed or prevented and the safety and welfare of tenants protected.  
§ 218-8. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
DWELLING UNIT - A dwelling unit within a multiple dwelling as such terms are defined in Chapter 254, Property Maintenance. 
OWNER - An owner as defined in Chapter 254, Property Maintenance. 
PERSON - Any natural person or legal entity such as a corporation or partnership. For the purposes of this article, a "person" shall not include a government employee acting within the scope of employment.  
§ 218-9. - Unlawful eviction. 
A.  No person may evict or attempt to evict a lawful occupant of a multiple dwelling except to the extent permitted by law pursuant to a warrant of eviction or other order of a court of competent jurisdiction or a governmental vacate order. 
B.  The following acts are illegal if done with the intention of evicting a lawful occupant from a dwelling unit: 
(1)  Using or threatening to use force; 
(2)  Disturbing or threatening to disturb the quiet enjoyment of an occupant; 
(3)  Interrupting or discontinuing essential services; 
(4)  Removing an occupant's possessions; 
(5)  Removing the entrance door or the lock to the entrance door; and 
(6)  Changing the lock or rendering it inoperable. 
C.  If an occupant vacates a dwelling unit on account of any of the acts listed in Subsection B, an owner shall take all reasonable and necessary steps to provide the occupant with a dwelling unit at a comparable rent within the dwelling suitable for occupancy, if the occupant makes such a request, and: 
(1)  The owner or an agent of the owner committed the unlawful acts; 
(2)  The owner knew or had reason to know about the unlawful acts; or 
(3)  The acts occurred within seven days prior to the occupant's request.  
§ 218-10. - Nonapplicability. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to owner-occupied residential rental properties containing two rental units or less or a hotel, motel or other guesthouse or part thereof rented to transient guests or seasonal tenants.  
§ 218-11. - Violations and penalties. 
A.  A violation of this article shall be punishable by a fine or imprisonment as set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25. [2] 
B.  Each violation of this article shall constitute a separate violation independent of any other section or any order issued pursuant to this chapter. Each day's failure to comply with this article or subsection shall constitute a separate violation. 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. 
 
ARTICLE IV - Withholding Units from Rental Market 
[Adopted 2-11-1987 as Ord. No. C-388] 
 
§ 218-12. - Exempt dwellings. 
A.  The owner of any dwelling unit, other than those exempted below, shall be subject to the provisions of this article. 
B.  The following are exempt from the provisions of this article: 
(1)  Units in owner-occupied dwellings where there are three units or less and one of the units is owner-occupied. 
(2)  Units in newly constructed buildings which are being rented for the first time. After the first rental, such units will be subject to the provisions of this article. 
(3)  Units in a dwelling where the owner has transmitted his or her first sixty-day notice of his or her intention to convert the building into a condominium or cooperative and his or her full plan of conversion to the City Clerk pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:18-61.8, so long as the conversation plan is not abandoned. 
(4)  Units in dwellings, the owners of which have transmitted notice under N.J.S.A. 2A:18-61.1g or 2A:18-61.1h. This exemption shall remain in effect so long as the owner is in compliance with the provisions of the section under which notice was given. 
(5)  Units in hotels or motels.  
§ 218-13. - Occupancy required. 
All such units shall be rented and occupied by a tenant within 60 days after the end of the preceding tenancy, which shall be defined as the last day of residence by the preceding tenant(s), except where an extension has been granted by the Housing Clinic under the provisions of § 218-14E below, in which event the unit shall be rented and occupied within the time period specified in the extension. Failure to comply with the requirements of § 218-14E shall be considered a violation of this article and subject the owner to the penalties set forth in § 218-15 below.  
§ 218-14. - Extension of time period. 
A.  An owner may apply for an extension of the time period set forth in § 218-13 where the condition of the unit or other special circumstances make rental within such time period impossible. In order to obtain an extension, the owner must submit an application in writing to the Housing Clinic, within 30 days or less from the date the preceding tenancy ended, setting forth with specificity: 
(1)  The reasons that the unit cannot be rented within such time period; 
(2)  The steps the owner shall take to remedy the conditions that make it impossible to rent the dwelling unit; and 
(3)  The date by which the dwelling unit shall be rented and occupied. 
B.  The owner shall provide the Housing Clinic with all documentation necessary to support the application, including but not limited to code violation reports, engineering or inspection reports, copies of advertisements, etc. 
C.  Any extension granted by the Housing Clinic shall specify the date by which the dwelling unit must be rented and occupied. Additional extensions may be sought by the owner, but the total extension permitted in the aggregate shall not extend beyond six months from the date the previous tenancy ended, except as provided in Subsection E below. 
D.  The following circumstances shall constitute grounds for the granting of an extension pursuant to Subsection A above by the Housing Clinic: 
(1)  An owner wishes to reserve a vacant dwelling unit for a family member. The owner shall provide in the extension application full documentation, including the name of the future tenant, the family relationship and the date of occupancy. 
(2)  An owner desires to maintain a dwelling unit vacant in order to improve the conditions of said dwelling unit. The owner shall provide full documentation in the application, including up-to-date building and housing inspection reports, improvement plans, all related required permits and the date by which the unit shall be rented and occupied. 
(3)  An owner maintains a vacant dwelling unit in order to correct code violations in said unit. The owner shall provide in the application full documentation such as code violation reports, correction plans, permits and the date by which the dwelling unit shall be rented and occupied. 
E.  Extension of the time period provided in § 218-13 of this article beyond the maximum time prescribed by Subsection D above shall only be granted upon a clear and convincing showing by the owner that a good faith effort has been made to rent the dwelling unit at the legal rent and that no tenant can be found. In this circumstance, the maximum extension granted beyond the maximum time provided in Subsection D above shall be 60 days, renewable upon a new showing by the owner.  
§ 218-15. - Violations and penalties. 
A.  Any individual affected by the action or inaction of an owner of a dwelling unit subject to the provisions of this article, any civic organization and any appropriate municipal agency may file a complaint of violation of this article with the Housing Clinic. If the Housing Clinic finds probable cause that a violation has occurred, the Housing Clinic shall file a complaint in the Municipal Court. 
B.  A first violation of § 218-13 of this article or the conditions upon which an extension has been granted by the Housing Clinic pursuant to § 218-14 of this article shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Art. I, § 1-25. Subsequent violations shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100 or more as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Art. I,§ 1-25. Each day during which an owner is in violation of § 218-13 or the conditions upon which a waiver has been granted by the Housing Clinic pursuant to § 218-14 of this article shall constitute a separate violation hereunder. [3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. 
 
§ 218-16. - Conflicts with state law. 
This Article is intended and shall be construed to avoid any conflict with state law, in particular but not limited to state statutes regulating the possession of apartments and regulating the conversion of rental units into other forms of ownership.  
ARTICLE V - Seating for Senior Citizens 
[Adopted 8-20-1987 as Ord. No. C-542] 
 
§ 218-17. - Findings. 
A.  The City Council finds that the general welfare of our residents in senior citizens' buildings is advanced by the availability of facilities which provide comfort and opportunities for social interaction and that the lack of such facilities can lead to feelings of isolation and anomie. 
B.  The City Council finds that the cost to owners of providing such seating is minimal in comparison to the benefits senior citizens will derive from the availability of seating in the lobby of senior citizens' buildings.  
§ 218-18. - Seating requirements. 
Owners of multiple dwellings in which there are 30 or more dwelling units and at least 90% of the units are reserved exclusively for residents 55 years of age or older by any law, regulation or agreement and the building contains an interior lobby of at least 625 square feet or of at least 500 square feet of floor space discharging directly into a street level exit shall provide seating in the lobby sufficient to accommodate at least 15 residents or 10 residents, respectively. Such seating shall consist of chairs, lounge chairs, sofas or benches with backs.  
Chapter 222 - NOISE 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City: Art. I, 5-4-1971 as Ch. 16, Art. I, of the 1971 Jersey City Code, as readopted 9-19-1978 by Ord. No. S-128; Art. II, 5-4-1971 as Ch. 26, Art. VI, of the 1971 Jersey City Code, as readopted 9-19-1978 by Ord. No. S-128. Amendments noted where applicable.] 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Animals — See Ch. 90 	Noise in parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 239. 
Circuses, carnivals and public assemblages — See Ch. 122. 	Peace and good order — See Ch. 242. 
Fees and charges — See Ch. 160. 	Peddling, soliciting and canvassing — See Ch. 245. 
  
ARTICLE I - Noise Restrictions[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-007 , § 1, adopted January 25, 2017, amended the Code by repealing former Art. I, §§ 222-1—222-5, and adding a new Art. I. Former Art. I pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ch. 16, Art. I of the 1971 Jersey City Code, and readopted by Ord. No. S-128, adopted September 19, 1978, and amended by Ord. No. MC-29, adopted September 22, 1981; Ord. No. C-750, adopted June 9, 1988; Ord. No. C-792, adopted August 18, 1988; Ord. No. 92-051, adopted June 10, 1992; Ord. No. 92-161, adopted November 10, 1992; Ord. No. 92-192, adopted December 22, 1992; Ord. No. 95-020, adopted March 22, 1995; and Ord. No. 13-081, adopted September 11, 2013. 
 
§ 222-1. - Declaration of findings and policy. 
[Added 1-25-2017 by Ord. No. 17-007 ] 
A.  Excessive sound is a serious hazard to the public health, welfare, safety, and the quality of life; and, 
B.  A substantial body of science and technology exists by which excessive sound may be substantially abated; and, 
C.  The people have a right to, and should be ensured of, an environment free from excessive sound; 
D.  It is the policy of the City of Jersey City to prevent excessive sound that may jeopardize the health, welfare, or safety of the citizens or degrade the quality of life. 
E.  This article shall apply to the control of sound originating from sources within the City of Jersey City.  
§ 222-2. - Definitions. 
[Added 1-25-2017 by Ord. No. 17-007 ] 
The following words and terms, used in this ordinance, shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. Terms not defined in this ordinance have the same meaning as those defined in N.J.A.C. 7:29. 
CONSTRUCTION means any site preparation, assembly, erection, repair, alteration or similar action of buildings or structures. 
dBC means the sound level as measured using the "C" weighting network with a sound level meter meeting the standards of ANSI S1.4-1983 or its successors. The unit of reporting is dB(C). The "C" weighting network is more sensitive to low frequencies than the "A" weighting network. 
DEMOLITION means any dismantling, destruction or removal of buildings, structures, or roadways. 
DEPARTMENT means the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection. 
EMERGENCY WORK means any work or action necessary at the site of an emergency to restore or deliver essential services including, but not limited to, repairing water, gas, electricity, telephone, sewer facilities, or public transportation facilities, removing fallen trees on public rights-of-way, dredging navigational waterways, or abating life threatening conditions or a state of emergency declared by a governing agency. 
IMPULSIVE SOUND means either a single pressure peak or a single burst (multiple pressure peaks) that has a duration of less than one (1) second. 
MINOR VIOLATION means (1) a violation that is not the result of the purposeful, reckless or criminally negligent conduct of the violator; and (2) the activity or condition constituting the violation has not been the subject of an enforcement action by the City, the County, or the State against the violator within the immediately preceding three hundred sixty-five (365) days for the same or substantially similar violation. 
MOTOR VEHICLE means any vehicle propelled other than by human or animal power on land. 
MUFFLER means a properly functioning sound dissipative device or system for abating the sound on engines or equipment where such device is part of the normal configuration of the equipment. 
MULTI-DWELLING UNIT BUILDING means any building comprising two (2) or more dwelling units, including, but not limited to, apartments, condominiums, co-ops, multiple family houses, townhouses, and attached residences. 
MULTI-USE PROPERTY means any distinct parcel of land that is used for more than one (1) category of activity. Examples include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  A commercial, residential, industrial or public service property having boilers, incinerators, elevators, automatic garage doors, air conditioners, laundry rooms, utility provisions, or health and recreational facilities, or other similar devices or areas, either in the interior or on the exterior of the building, which may be a source of elevated sound levels at another category on the same distinct parcel of land; or 
(2)  A building, which is both commercial (usually on the ground floor) and residential property, located above, below or otherwise adjacent to. 
NOISE CONTROL OFFICER (NCO) means an employee of a local, county or regional health agency which is certified pursuant to the County Environmental Health Act ( N.J.S.A. 26:3A2-21 et seq.) to perform noise enforcement activities or an employee of a municipality with a Department-approved model noise control ordinance. All NCOs must receive noise enforcement training as specified by the Department in N.J.A.C. 7:29 and be currently certified in noise enforcement. The employee must be acting within his or her designated jurisdiction and must be authorized to issue a summons. 
NOISE CONTROL INVESTIGATOR (NCI) means an employee of a municipality, county or regional health commission that has a Department-approved model noise control ordinance and the employee has not received noise enforcement training as specified by the Department in N.J.A.C. 7:29. However, they are knowledgeable about the model noise ordinance and enforcement procedures. A noise control investigator may only enforce sections of the ordinance that do not require the use of a sound level meter. The employee must be acting within his or her designated jurisdiction and must be authorized to issue a summons. 
PLAINLY AUDIBLE means any sound that can be detected by an NCO or an NCI using his or her unaided hearing faculties of normal acuity. As an example, if the sound source under investigation is a portable or vehicular sound amplification or reproduction device, the detection of the rhythmic bass component of the music is sufficient to verify plainly audible sound. The NCO or NCI need not determine the title, specific words, or the artist performing the song. 
PRIVATE RIGHT-OF-WAY means any street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, sidewalk, alley or easement that is owned, leased, or controlled by a non-governmental entity. 
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY means any street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, sidewalk, alley or easement that is owned, leased, or controlled by a governmental entity. 
PUBLIC SPACE means any real property or structures thereon owned, leased, or controlled by a governmental entity. 
REAL PROPERTY LIKE means either: 
(a)  The vertical boundary that separates one parcel of property (i.e., lot and block) from another residential or commercial property; 
(b)  The vertical and horizontal boundaries of a dwelling unit that is part of a multiple dwelling unit building; or 
(c)  On a multi-use property as defined herein, the vertical or horizontal boundaries between the two portions of the property on which different categories of activity are being performed (e.g., if the multi-use property is a building which is residential upstairs and commercial downstairs, then the real property line would be the interface between the residential area and the commercial area, or if there is an outdoor sound source such as an HVAC unit on the same parcel of property, the boundary line is the exterior wall of the receiving unit). 
Note - This definition shall not apply to a commercial source and a commercial receptor which are both located on the same parcel of property (e.g., a strip mall). 
SOUND PRODUCTION DEVICE means any device whose primary function is the production of sound, including, but not limited to, any musical instrument, loudspeaker, radio, television, digital or analog music player, public address system or sound amplifying equipment. 
SOUND REDUCTION DEVICE means any device, such as a muffler, baffle, shroud, jacket, enclosure, isolator, or dampener provided by the manufacturer with the equipment, or that is otherwise required that mitigates the sound emissions of the equipment. 
WEEKDAY means any day that is not a federal holiday, and beginning on Monday at 7:00 a.m. and ending on the following Friday at 6:00 p.m. 
WEEKENDS means beginning on Friday at 6:00 p.m. and ending on the following Monday at 7:00 a.m.  
§ 222-3. - Applicability. 
[Added 1-25-2017 by Ord. No. 17-007 ] 
A.  This noise ordinance applies to sound from the following property categories: 
1.  Industrial facilities; 
2.  Commercial facilities; 
3.  Public service facilities; 
4.  Community service facilities; 
5.  Residential properties; 
6.  Multi-use properties; 
7.  Public and private rights-of-ways; 
8.  Public spaces; and 
9.  Multi-dwelling unit buildings. 
B.  This noise ordinance applies to sound received at the following property categories: 
1.  Commercial facilities; 
2.  Public service facilities; 
3.  Community service facilities (i.e. non-profits and/or religious facilities); 
4.  Residential properties; 
5.  Multi-use properties; and 
6.  Multi-dwelling unit buildings. 
C.  Sound from stationary emergency signaling devices shall be regulated in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:29-1.4, except that the testing of the electromechanical functioning of a stationary emergency signaling device shall not meet or exceed 10 seconds.  
§ 222-4. - Exemptions. 
[Added 1-25-2017 by Ord. No. 17-007 ] 
A.  Except as provided in 222-9 and 222-10 below, the provisions of this ordinance shall not apply to the exceptions listed at N.J.A.C. 7:29-1.5. 
B.  Sound production devices required or sanctioned under the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), FEMA or other government agencies to the extent that they comply with the noise requirement of the enabling legislation or regulation. Devices which are exempted under N.J.A.C. 7:29-1.5 shall continue to be exempted. 
C.  Construction and demolition activities are exempt from the sound level limits set forth in Tables I and II and III except as provided for in 222-5.4 below.  
§ 222-5. - Enforcement officers. 
[Added 1-25-2017 by Ord. No. 17-007 ] 
A.  Noise control officers shall have the authority within their designated jurisdiction to investigate suspected violations of any section of this ordinance and pursue enforcement activities. 
B.  Noise control investigators shall have the authority within their designated jurisdiction to investigate suspected violations of any section of this ordinance that do not require the use of a sound level meter (i.e., plainly audible, times of day and/or distance determinations) and pursue enforcement activities. 
C.  Noise control officers and investigators may cooperate with NCOs and NCIs of an adjacent municipality in enforcing one another's municipal noise ordinances. 
D.  For purposes of City of Jersey City municipal enforcement, the following officers and agents of the City shall have the power and authority to enforce this chapter: construction code official(s), zoning officers, health officer(s), environmental health specialist(s), police officers and the Office of Emergency Management. These individuals must complete the noise enforcement certification training from the Rutgers Noise Technical Assistance Center. 
E.  No person shall refuse to allow an authorized employee of the City or other authorized City employee who presents appropriate credentials to perform reasonable sound testing on any device or devices, including but not limited to requiring the temporary shutting down of said device or devices for the purposes of such testing except that upon a showing that the inspection would produce a noticeable interruption of services that would cause discomfort to employees or customers or require a building engineer or other professional to work with the equipment, such authorized employee shall reschedule the inspection for a more convenient time.  
§ 222-5.1. - Measurement protocols. 
[Added 1-25-2017 by Ord. No. 17-007 ] 
A.  Sound measurements made by a Noise Control Officer shall conform to the procedures set forth at N.J.A.C. 7:29-2, except that interior sound level measurements shall also conform with the procedures set forth in 222-6.B of this ordinance and with the definition of "real property line" as contained herein. 
B.  When conducting indoor sound level measurements across a real property line, the measurements shall be taken at least three (3) feet from any wall, floor or celling and all exterior doors and windows may, at the discretion of the investigator, be closed. The neighborhood residual sound level shall be measured in accordance with N.J.A.C, 7:29-2.9(b)2. When measuring total sound level, the configuration of the windows and doors shall be the same, and all sound sources within the dwelling unit must be shut off (e.g., television, stereo). Measurements shall not be taken in areas which receive only casual use such as hallways, closets and bathrooms. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-007 , added January 25, 2017, amended the Code by adding new §§ 222-6—222-12. In order to prevent duplication of section numbers, the sections have been redesignated §§ 222-5.1—222-5.7 at the discretion of the editor.  
§ 222-5.2. - Maximum permissible sound levels. 
[Added 1-25-2017 by Ord. No. 17-007 ] 
A.  No person shall cause or permit the operation of any source of sound on any source property listed in 223-A above in such a manner as to create a sound level that equals or exceeds the sound level limits in Tables I, II or III when measured at or within the real property line of any of the receiving properties listed in Tables I, II or III except as specified in 222-6B. 
B.  Impulsive sound. Between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., impulsive sound shall not equal or exceed 80 decibels. Between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., impulsive sound which occurs less than four times in any hour shall not equal or exceed 80 decibels. Impulsive sound which repeats four or more times in any hour shall be measured as continuous sound and shall meet the requirements as shown in Tables I and II. 
Table I
Maximum Permissible A-Weighted Sound Levels When Measured Outdoors 
Receiving Property Category 	Residential Property, or Residential Portion of a Multi-Use Property 	Commercial Facility, Public Service Facility, Nonresidential Portion of a Multi-Use Property, or Community Service Facility 
Time 	7:00 a.m.—10:00 p.m. 	10:00 p.m.—7:00 a.m. 	24 hours 
Maximum A-weighted sound level standard, dB 	65 	50 	65 
 
Table II
Maximum Permissible A-Weighted Sound Levels When Measured Indoors 
Receiving Property Category 	Residential Property, or Residential Portion of a Multi-Use Property 	Commercial Facility, or Nonresidential Portion of a Multi Use Property, or Community Service Facility 
Time 	7:00 a.m.—10:00 p.m. 	10:00 p.m.—7:00 a.m. 	24 hours 
Maximum A-weighted sound level standard, dB 	55 	40 	55 
 
Note: The time period in Tables I and II is subject to any different times specified in Section 222-9. 
Note: Table II shall only apply when the source and the receptor are separated by a real property line and they also share a common or abutting wall, floor or ceiling, or are on the same parcel of property. 
Table III 
Maximum Permissible Octave Band Sound Pressure Levels in Decibels 
Receiving Property Category 	Residential Property, or Residential Portion of a Multi-Use Property 
(Outdoors) 	Residential Property, or Residential Portion of a Multiuse Property 
(Indoors) 	Commercial Facility, Public Service Facility, Nonresidential Portion of a Multi-Use Property, or Community Service Facility 
(Outdoors) 	Commercial Facility of Nonresidential Portion of a Multi-Use Property 
(Indoors) 
Octave Band Center Frequency, Hz, 	Octave Band Sound Pressure Level, dB 	Octave Band Sound Pressure Level, dB 	Octave Band Sound Pressure Level, dB 	Octave Band Sound Pressure Level, dB 
Time 	7:00-a.m.—10:00 p.m. 	10 p.m.—7:00 a.m. 	7:00 a.m.—10:00 p.m. 	10 p.m.—7:00 a.m. 	24 hours 	24 hours 
31.5 	96 	26 	86 	76 	96 	86 
63 	82 	71 	72 	61 	82 	72 
125 	74 	61 	64 	51 	74 	64 
250 	67 	53 	57 	43 	67 	57 
500 	63 	48 	53 	38 	63 	53 
1,000 	60 	45 	50 	35 	60 	50 
2,000 	57 	42 	47 	32 	57 	47 
4,000 	55 	40 	45 	30 	55 	45 
8,000 	53 	38 	42 	28 	53 	43 
 
Note: When octave measurements are made, the sound from the source must be constant in level and character. If octave band sound pressure level variations exceed plus or minus 2 dB in the bands containing the principal source frequencies, discontinue the measurement. 
Note— See editor's note, § 222-5.1.  
§ 222-5.3. - Sound production devices. 
[Added 1-25-2017 by Ord. No. 17-007 ] 
No person shall cause or permit the operation of any sound production device in such a manner that the sound crosses a property line and raises the total sound levels above the neighborhood residual sound level by more than the permissible sound level limits set forth in Table IV when measured within the residence of a complainant according to the measurement protocol in 222-5.1.B of this article. These sound level measurements shall be conducted with the sound level meter set for "C" weighting, "fast" response. 
TABLE IV
MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE INCREASE IN TOTAL SOUND LEVELS WITHIN A RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY 
Week nights 10:00 p.m.—7:00 a.m. 
Weekend nights 11:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. 	All other times 
3 dB(C) 	6 dB(C) 
 
  
Note— See editor's note, § 222-5.1.  
§ 222-5.4. - Restricted uses and activities. 
[Added 1-25-2017 by Ord. No. 17-007 ] 
The following standards shall apply to the activities or sources of sound set forth below: 
A.  Excluding emergency work, power tools, home maintenance tools, landscaping and yard maintenance equipment used by a residential property owner or tenant shall not be operated between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., unless such activities can meet the applicable limits in Tables I, II or III. At all other times the limits set forth in Tables I, II or III do not apply. All motorized equipment used in these activities shall be operated with a muffler and or sound reduction device. 
B.  Excluding emergency work, power tools, landscaping and yard maintenance equipment used by nonresidential operators (e.g. commercial operators, public employees) shall not be operated on a residential, commercial, industrial or public (e.g. golf course, parks, athletic fields) property between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on weekdays, or between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on weekends or federal holidays unless such activities can meet the limits set forth in Tables I, II or III. At all other times the limits set forth in Tables I, II or III do not apply. All motorized equipment used in these activities shall be operated with a muffler and/or sound reduction device. Emergency work, as defined in this section, is excluded from the above restrictions. 
C.  Excluding emergency work, construction and demolition activity shall not be performed between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays, or between the hours 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on weekends and federal holidays, unless such activities can meet the limits in Tables I, II or III. At all other times the limits in Tables I, II and III do not apply. All motorized equipment used in construction and demolition activity shall be operated with a muffler and/or sound reduction device. 
D.  Alterations or repairs to existing owner-occupied or rental dwellings, community service facilities, or schools may be performed on Saturdays and Sundays between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. subject to compliance with Tables I, II and III as applicable. 
E.  Motorized snow removal shall be operated with a muffler or a sound reduction device when being used for snow removal. At all times the limits set forth in Tables I, II or III do not apply. However, in the event of an emergency, equipment operated by the City or contractors employed by the City are exempt from noise regulations. 
F.  All interior and exterior burglar alarms of a building or motor vehicle must be activated in such a manner that the burglar alarm terminates its operation within five (5) minutes for continuous airborne sound, and fifteen (15) minutes for intermittent sound after it has been activated. At all times the limits set forth in Tables I, II or III do not apply. 
G.  Self-contained, portable, non-vehicular music or sound production devices shall not be operated on a public space or public right-of-way in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet in any direction from the operator between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., sound, operated on a public space or public right-of-way, from such equipment shall not be plainly audible at a distance of 25 feet in any direction from the operator. 
H.  Reserved. 
I.  It shall be unlawful for any property owner or tenant to allow any domesticated or caged animal to create a sound across a real property line which unreasonably disturbs or interferes with the peace, comfort, and repose of any resident, or to refuse or intentionally fail to cease the unreasonable noise when ordered to do so by a noise control officer or noise control investigator. Prima facie evidence of a violation of this section shall include but not be limited to: 
(1)  Vocalizing (howling, yelping, barking, squawking etc.) for five (5) minutes without interruption, defined as an average of four (4) or more vocalizations per minute in that period; or, 
(2)  Vocalizing for twenty (20) minutes intermittently, defined as an average of two (2) vocalizations or more per minute in that period. 
It is an affirmative defense under this subsection that the dog or other animal was intentionally provoked to bark or make any other noise. 
Note— See editor's note, § 222-5.1.  
§ 222-5.5. - Motor vehicles. 
[Added 1-25-2017 by Ord. No. 17-007 ] 
Violations of paragraphs A through D of this section shall be considered purposeful and therefore not a minor violation. 
A.  No person shall remove or render inoperative, or cause to be removed or rendered inoperative or less effective than originally equipped, other than for the purposes of maintenance, repair, or replacement, of any device or element of design incorporated in any motor vehicle for the purpose of noise control. No person shall operate a motor vehicle or motorcycle which has been so modified. A vehicle not meeting these requirements shall be deemed in violation of this provision if it is operated stationary or in motion in any public space or public right-of-way. 
B.  No motorcycle shall be operated stationary or in motion unless it has a muffler that complies with and is labeled in accordance with the Federal Noise Regulations under 40 CFR Part 205. 
C.  Personal or commercial vehicular music amplification or reproduction equipment shall not be operated in such a manner that it is plainly audible at distance of 25 feet in any direction from the operator between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
D.  Personal or commercial vehicular music amplification or reproduction equipment shall not be operated in such a manner that is plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet in any direction from the operator between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. Ice cream and other food vending trucks, while in residential neighborhoods, are prohibited from the playing of jingles while stationary. Jingles may only be played when the vehicle is in motion. 
Note— See editor's note, § 222-5.1.  
§ 222-5.6. - Enforcement. 
[Added 1-25-2017 by Ord. No. 17-007 ] 
A.  Violation of any provision of this ordinance shall be cause for a notice of violation (NOV) or a notice of penalty assessment (NOPA) document to be issued to the violator by the noise control officer or noise control investigator. 
B.  Any person who violates any provision of this ordinance shall be subject to a civil penalty for each offense of not more than the maximum penalty pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-5, which is $2,000.00. If the violation is of a continuing nature, each day during which it occurs shall constitute an additional, separate, and distinct offense. 
C.  Upon identification of a violation of this article the noise control officer or noise control investigator shall issue an enforcement document to the violator. The enforcement document shall identify the condition or activity that constitutes the violation and the specific provision of this article that has been violated. It shall also indicate whether the violator has a period of time to correct the violation before a penalty is sought. 
D.  If the violation is deemed by the noise control officer or noise control investigator to be a minor violation (as defined in section 222-2 of this article), an NOV shall be issued to the violator. 
(1)  The document shall indicate that the purpose of the NOV is intended to serve as a notice to warn the responsible party/violator of the violation conditions in order to provide them with an opportunity to voluntarily investigate the matter and voluntarily take corrective action to address the identified violation. 
(2)  The NOV shall identify the time period (up to ninety (90) days), pursuant to the Grace Period Law, N.J.S.A. 13:1D-125 et seq. where the responsible party's/violator's voluntary action can prevent a formal enforcement action with penalties issued by the City, or the Hudson Regional Health Commission. It shall be noted that the NOV does not constitute a formal enforcement action, a final agency action or a final legal determination that a violation has occurred. Therefore, the NOV may not be appealed or contested. 
E.  If the violation is deemed by the noise control officer or noise control investigator to be a non-minor violation the violator shall he notified that if the violation is not immediately corrected a NOPA with a civil penalty of no more than the maximum penalty allowed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-5, which is two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) will be issued. If a non-minor violation is immediately corrected a NOV without a civil penalty shall still be issued to document the violation. If the violation occurs again (within three hundred sixty-five (365) days of the initial violation) a NOPA shall be issued regardless of whether the violation is immediately corrected or not. 
F.  The violator may request from the noise control officer or noise control investigator, an extension of the compliance deadline in the enforcement action. The noise control officer or noise control investigator shall have the option to approve any reasonable request for an extension (not to exceed 180 days) if the violator can demonstrate that a good faith effort has been made to achieve compliance. If an extension is not granted and the violation continues to exist after the grace period ends, a NOPA shall be issued. 
G.  The recipient of a NOPA shall be entitled to a hearing in a municipal court having jurisdiction to contest such action. 
H.  The noise control officer or noise control investigator may seek injunctive relief if the responsible party does not remediate the violation within the period of time specified in the NOPA issued. 
I.  Any claim for a civil penalty may he compromised and settled based on the following factors: 
(1)  Mitigating or any other extenuating circumstances; 
(2)  The timely implementation by the violator of measures which lead to compliance; 
(3)  The conduct of the violator; and 
(4)  The compliance history of the violator. 
J.  No provision of this ordinance shall be construed to impair any common law or statutory cause of action, or legal remedy there from, of any person for injury or damage arising from any violation of this ordinance or from other law. 
Note— See editor's note, § 222-5.1.  
§ 222-5.7. - Consistency, severability and repealer. 
[Added 1-25-2017 by Ord. No. 17-007 ] 
If any provision or portion of a provision of this ordinance is held to unconstitutional, preempted by Federal or State law, or otherwise invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions of the ordinance shall not be invalidated. 
Note— See editor's note, § 222-5.1.  
ARTICLE II - Sound Trucks 
[Adopted 5-4-1971 as Ch. 26, Art. VI, of the 1971 Jersey City Code, as readopted 9-19-1978 by Ord. No. S-128] 
 
§ 222-6. - Definitions. 
As used herein, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
MOBILE AMUSEMENT DEVICE - A carousel, whip, merry-go-round or any other movable vehicle capable and used in transporting the same from point to point throughout the city. 
SOUND-AMPLIFYING EQUIPMENT - Any machine or device for the amplification of the human voice, music or any other sound. "Sound-amplifying equipment" shall not be construed as including standard automobile radios, when used and heard only by occupants of the vehicle in which installed, or warning devices on authorized emergency vehicles or horns or other warning devices on other vehicles used only for traffic safety purposes. 
SOUND TRUCK - Any motor vehicle or horse-drawn vehicle having mounted thereon or attached thereto any sound-amplifying equipment.  
§ 222-7. - Noncommercial use of sound trucks. 
A.  Registration required. No person shall use or cause to be used a sound truck with its sound-amplifying equipment in operation, excepting mobile amusement devices, for noncommercial purposes in the city before filing a registration statement with the City Clerk in writing. This registration statement shall be filed in duplicate and shall state the following: 
(1)  The name and home address of the applicant. 
(2)  The address of the place of business of the applicant. 
(3)  The license number and motor number of the sound truck to be used by the applicant. 
(4)  The name and address of the person who owns the sound truck. 
(5)  The name and address of the person having direct charge of the sound truck. 
(6)  The names and addresses of all persons who will use or operate the sound truck. 
(7)  The purpose for which the sound truck will be used. 
(8)  A general statement as to the section or sections of the city in which the sound truck will be used. 
(9)  The proposed hours of operation of the sound truck. 
(10)   The number of days of proposed operation of the sound truck. 
(11)   A general description of the sound-amplifying equipment which is to be used. 
(12)   The maximum sound producing power of the sound-amplifying equipment to be used in or on the sound trucks. State the following: 
(a)  The wattage to be used. 
(b)  The volume in decibels of the sound which will be produced. 
(c)  The approximate maximum distance for which sound will be thrown from the sound truck. 
B.  Registration statement and amendment. All persons using or causing to be used sound trucks for noncommercial purposes shall amend any registration statement filed pursuant to this section within forty-eight (48) hours after any change in the information therein furnished. 
C.  Registration and identification. The City Clerk shall return to each applicant under this section of this Article one (1) copy of said registration statement duly certified by the Clerk as a correct copy of said application. Said certified copy of the application shall be in the possession of any person operating the sound truck at all times while the sound truck's sound-amplifying equipment is in operation, and said copy shall be promptly displayed and shown to any police officer of the city upon request. 
D.  Regulations for use. Noncommercial use of sound trucks with sound-amplifying equipment in operation shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  The only sounds permitted shall be music or human speech. 
(2)  Operations shall be permitted for four (4) hours each day, except on Sundays and legal holidays when no operations shall be authorized. The permitted four (4) hours of operation shall be between the hours of 11:30 a.m. and 1:30 p.m. and between the hours of 4:30 p.m. and 6:30 p.m. 
(3)  Sound-amplifying equipment shall not be operated unless the sound truck upon which such equipment is mounted is operated at a speed of at least ten (10) miles per hour, except when said truck is stopped or impeded by traffic. Where stopped by traffic, the sound-amplifying equipment shall not be operated for longer than one (1) minute at each such stop. 
(4)  Sound shall not be issued within one hundred (100) yards of hospitals, schools, churches or courthouses during the hours when such buildings are in actual use. 
(5)  No sound truck with its amplifying device in operation shall be operated on the following streets between the points designated: Journal Square, Bergen Avenue, between Journal Square and Montgomery Street; Kennedy Boulevard between Cottage Street and Tonnele Avenue; Newark Avenue between Coles Street and Henderson Street; Grove Street between Newark Avenue and Montgomery Street; Henderson Street between Newark Avenue and Montgomery Street; Brunswick Street between Newark Avenue and Grand Street; West Side Avenue between Montgomery Street and Culver Avenue; Martin Luther King Drive between Communipaw Avenue and McAdoo Avenue; Ocean Avenue between Bramhall Avenue and Merritt Street; Monticello Avenue between Storms Avenue and Communipaw Avenue; Pacific Avenue between Communipaw Avenue and Grand Street; Central Avenue between Hoboken Avenue and the Union City boundary lines. 
(6)  The human speech and music amplified shall not be profane, lewd, indecent or slanderous. 
(7)  The volume of sound shall be controlled so that it will not be audible for a distance in excess of one hundred (100) feet from the sound truck and so that volume is not unreasonably loud, raucous, jarring, disturbing or a nuisance to persons within the area of audibility.  
§ 222-8. - Commercial advertising by sound truck. 
A.  License required. No person shall operate or cause to be operated any sound truck in the city for commercial advertising purposes with sound-amplifying equipment in operation, excepting mobile amusement devices, unless a license has been obtained from the City Clerk. The fee for said license shall be as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges. [2] 
B.  Application for license. Persons applying for the license required under this section shall file with the City Clerk an application in writing giving in the application the information required in the registration statement under § 222-7 of this Article. 
C.  Issuance of license. The City Clerk shall issue a license under this section upon payment of the required license fee unless the application required in this section reveals that the applicant would violate the regulations prescribed in this section or the provisions of some other ordinance of this city. 
D.  Possession and display of license. A licensee shall keep such license in his or her possession in the sound truck during the time the sound truck's sound-amplifying equipment is in operation. The license shall be promptly displayed and shown to any police officer of the City of Jersey City upon request. 
E.  Regulations for use. No person shall operate, or cause to be operated, any sounds truck for commercial sound advertising purposes in violation of the regulation set forth in this Article. 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. 
 
Chapter 225 - NUCLEAR-FREE ZONE 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City 9-12-1985 as Ord. No. C-30. Amendments noted where applicable.] 
 
§ 225-1. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
NUCLEAR-FREE ZONE - Defined by the following requirements: 
A.  No nuclear weapons, delivery systems for such weapons or components expressly intended to contribute to the operation, guidance or delivery of a nuclear weapon shall be produced or stored within the city or its port. 
B.  No waste from the production of nuclear weapons, their components or commercial nuclear power shall be stored within the city or its port. 
C.  No research furthering nuclear weapons development shall be conducted within the city, subject to rights guaranteed under the First Amendment to the United States Constitution. 
D.  The Mayor and Council of the City of Jersey City shall request the United States Department of Transportation and the New Jersey Department of Transportation to provide the city with advance notification of any radioactive waste shipment through the city limits. Upon such notification, the Mayor and Council shall act to prevent transportation of radioactive waste through the city by seeking an exemption from preemption by Department of Transportation regulations or using other legal means at their disposal. 
E.  The Mayor and Council of the City of Jersey City shall not do business with or award any municipal contract to any person, firm or organization engaged in the production of nuclear weapons. 
F.  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit or regulate in any manner the research, development and application of nuclear medicine or the use of fissionable materials for smoke detectors, light-emitting timepieces and other applications, the principal purposes of which are unrelated to the development or fabrication of nuclear weapons.  
§ 225-2. - Zone established. 
The City of Jersey City shall be established as a Nuclear-Free Zone.  
Chapter 230 - PAGING DEVICES 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City 3-9-1989 as Ord. No. C-912. Amendments noted where applicable.] 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Communication systems — See Ch. 125. 	Peace and good order — See Ch. 242. 
	Use of pay phones — See Ch. 296, Art. IX. 
 
 
§ 230-1. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
ELECTRONIC PAGING DEVICE - Includes devices described generally as electronic pagers, display pagers, numerical display pagers, electronic beepers and beepers, as well as any device used for paging which is activated by a telephone signal or any other electrical signal. 
MINOR - Any person under eighteen (18) years of age.  
§ 230-2. - Sale to minors; records to be kept. 
A.  No person may sell or offer for sale or otherwise transfer any electronic paging device to a minor unless the minor is accompanied by a parent or legal guardian and provides written verification that the device is required by his employer. The required verification shall be in the form of a letter or memorandum on the letterhead of the employer and shall be kept on file by the seller. 
B.  Any person maintaining or operating a business engaged in the sale of electronic paging devices and any person who engages in the sale of such devices shall keep at his or her place of business records of the day and time of each sale of an electronic paging device to a minor, the name, residence and age of any minor purchasing the device, the name and address of the minor's parent or guardian and a copy of the written verification of employment furnished by the minor. This information shall be kept on file for a period of two (2) years after the sale. 
C.  All records required by this section shall be at all times available for inspection to all police officers and to all other officers of the city having police power. 
D.  Absent express permission by the Principal or other person having control of a school, no minor may possess an electronic paging device in any public school, playground or on any other school property.  
§ 230-3. - Violations and penalties.[1] 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. 
 
Chapter 233 - PAINT STRIPPING 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City 10-27-1988 as Ord. No. C-771. Amendments noted where applicable.] 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Fees and charges — See Ch. 160. 	Disclosure of presence of lead-based paint — See Ch. 257. 
Property maintenance (use of lead paint) — See Ch. 254. 	
 
 
§ 233-1. - Definitions. 
As used herein, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
PERSON - Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association or entity.  
§ 233-2. - Permit required. 
No person may remove paint from the facade, back or sides of any building by any method unless he has first secured a permit for each building from the Construction Official.  
§ 233-3. - Permit application. 
A.  Application for a cleaning/stripping permit shall contain the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant. If the applicant is a partnership or cooperation, the names and addresses of all partners or stockholders and their respective interests. If the paint cleaning/stripping is to be performed by any person other than the applicant, the information required by this subsection shall be given as to that person as well. 
(2)  The nature of the cleaning/stripping method to be employed. 
(3)  The method to be used to contain wash solutions and solvents and the manner in which the acidity or alkalinity of the wash solutions is to be neutralized, as in accordance with the N.J.A.C. 
(4)  The means to be used to dispose of filtered paint chips. 
(5)  Any other information which the Construction Official shall consider relevant and necessary for the full protection and interests of the public. 
B.  The Construction Official may deny the permit if information requested is not in conformance with this chapter.  
§ 233-4. - Permit fee; nontransferability. 
A.  The fee for a paint cleaning/stripping permit shall be as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges. [1] 
B.  No paint cleaning/stripping permit shall be transferable from person to person or from place to place. Permits shall be valid only for the person and place designated in the permit. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. 
 
§ 233-5. - Hours of operation. 
Permits for paint cleaning/stripping shall specify that the work shall be done only during the weekdays of Monday through Friday between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.  
§ 233-6. - Environmental hazard monitoring instructions. 
The Construction Official, in conjunction with the Health Official, shall issue printed instructions to each applicant, detailing the environmental hazards to be monitored by the applicant.  
§ 233-7. - Enclosure of work area.[2] 
The building area from which paint is to be cleaned or stripped shall be enclosed with a membrane material. The membrane material shall be either noncombustible or flame-resistant as defined in the BOCA Code. The membrane material shall shroud the building area to be cleaned or stripped in such a way as to prevent the release of dust, sand and acid or alkaline mists and vapors into the air. 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. 
 
§ 233-8. - Disposal of washings. 
All washings must be captured and contained and disposed of as follows: 
A.  All paint and solid particles must be allowed to settle and/or be filtered out of the washings. Along with old paint particles, those filtered solid particles and the material used to capture the wash should be disposed of according to the Solid Waste Management Act, N.J.S.A. 13:1E-1 et seq. 
B.  All washings shall be neutralized to a pH of six (6) to eight (8) before being discharged into the Jersey City Sewer System.  
§ 233-9. - Inspections; violations and penalties.[3] 
Any project for which a permit is issued under this chapter shall be subject to inspection by the Construction Official throughout the duration of the project. Any violation of these regulations shall be cause for immediate suspension of the project and shall, upon conviction, be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25. 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. 
 
Chapter 236 - PARKING LOTS AND GARAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
History— Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City: Art. I, adopted May 4, 1971 as Ch. 8, Art. XI, of the 1971 Jersey City Code, as readopted September 19, 1978 by Ord. No. S-128; Art. II, May 23, 1984 as Ord. No. MC-330; amended June 8, 2005 by Ord. 05-063. Amendments noted where applicable. 
Cross reference— Fees and charges, Ch. 160; fire lanes, Ch. 166; towers and towing, Ch. 319; vehicles and traffic, Ch. 332. 
 
ARTICLE I - Licensing of Parking Lots and Public Garages[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
History— Adopted May 4, 1971 as Ch. 8, Art. XI, of the 1971 Jersey City Code, as readopted September 19, 1978 by Ord. No. S-128. 
 
§ 236-1. - Definitions. 
As used herein, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
GARAGE - Any covered and enclosed space, or any portion thereof, where more than five motor vehicles are exhibited for sale, stored, parked, housed or located. 
MOTOR VEHICLE - Any automobile, truck, motor scooter or other self-propelled vehicle not operated on tracks or from trolleys. 
PARKING LOT - Any outdoor space or uncovered plot of ground, place, lot, parcel, yard or enclosure, or any portion thereof, where more than five motor vehicles are exhibited for sale, stored, parked, housed or located.  
§ 236-2. - Parking license required. 
A.  No person shall operate a parking lot or garage without having obtained a parking license. 
B.  No licensee may park a customer's vehicle or permit a customer's vehicle to be parked on a public street or at any location other than the licensed premises. A violation of this section shall be presumed if a vehicle is permitted to remain off the licensed premises for a period in excess of five minutes.  
§ 236-3. - License application. 
[Amended 1-24-2018 by Ord. No. 18-002 ] 
Applications for parking licenses shall be made upon forms provided by the license issuing authority, shall be signed and verified under oath by the individual or the partner where the applicant is an individual or a partnership, or by a duly authorized agent if the applicant is a corporation, and shall furnish the following: 
A.  If an individual, the name and address of the applicant. 
B.  If a partnership, the name, residence and business address of each partner. 
C.  If a corporation, the name, date and state under whose laws such corporation was organized and, if a foreign corporation, whether authorized to do business in the State of New Jersey, the names of the principal officers, directors and local representatives and their residence and business addresses. 
D.  A true and complete copy of the applicant's deed to the parking lot or garage or, in the case of lessees, a true and complete copy of the lease or other instrument showing a right to possession of the parking lot or garage. 
E.  A plot or drawing of the parking lot or garage showing the location, size, capacity and walls or harriers surrounding said premises, the number and location of all security cameras, if any, and the location, size and construction of the attendant's station, if any. 
F.  The hours for parking of vehicles and whether night parking is to be maintained upon the licensed premises. 
G.  The hours during which parking attendants, if any, will be on duty. 
H.  A complete schedule of the rates to be charged for the parking of vehicles. 
I.  Whether the parking lot or garage is to be used for parking by the public or is to be restricted to private use. 
J.  If the parking garage is operated as a self-park/robotic facility, the name, address and telephone number of the person responsible for resolving any service or customer issues on a 24-hour basis and a description of the procedure utilized to assure that parked vehicles are safely returned to customers upon payment of the required fee.  
§ 236-4. - License fees; expiration. 
A.  The annual license fee for a parking lot or garage shall be as provided by Chapter 160, Fees and Charges. Such license shall run for a period of one year, commencing January 1 and ending December 31 of any year. If at any time of application for a license less than six months of the current year have expired, the applicant shall be required to pay the full fee for the year. If six months or more shall have expired, the applicant shall be required to pay 1/2 of the full fee for the year. 
B.  Where a parking lot or garage is used exclusively by the patrons of a business that is seasonal in its nature, such as amusement or athletic parks, the license issuing authority may issue a seasonal license in lieu of the annual license. Such seasonal license shall run for the number of months for which it is contemplated to use such parking lot or garage, but in no event shall it run for less than two months. The fee for such seasonal license shall be determined by multiplying the number of months from which said seasonal license is issued by 1/10 of the annual license fee for operating said parking lot or garage. 
C.  All licenses are revocable by the license issuing authority for the violation of any of the terms of this article upon due notice and hearing.  
§ 236-5. - License issuance; revocation. 
If after an investigation the license issuing authority is reasonably satisfied that the applicant has a good reputation and the statements set forth in the application are correct and if the proper fee shall have been paid, the license issuing authority shall issue to the applicant a license for a parking lot or a garage, which license shall continue in full force and effect until December 31 following the issuance of the license or until revoked by order of the Business Administrator. The Business Administrator shall keep a record of all applications and licenses issued, indexed alphabetically and by location. License fees shall be fixed according to the provisions of this article.  
§ 236-6. - Transferability of licenses. 
No parking license issued under this article shall be transferred or assigned or used by any person other than the one to whom it is issued or at any location other than the one for which it is issued without the consent and approval of the license issuing authority.  
§ 236-7. - Suspension or revocation of license; hearing. 
A.  Any parking license issued hereunder may be suspended or revoked by the license issuing authority for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  The licensee has knowingly made any false and materially incorrect statement in the application. 
(2)  The licensee knowingly violates or knowingly permits or countenances the violation of any provision of this Article. 
(3)  The licensee has made a charge for parking a vehicle less than the minimum set forth in the license application or has made a charge in excess of the maximum set forth in the license application without permission in writing from the license issuing authority or someone designated to give such permission. 
(4)  The licensee knowingly violates or knowingly permits or countenances the violation of any provision of any penal law or ordinance regarding theft, larceny or conversion of a motor vehicle or the operation of a motor vehicle without the owner's consent, whether such licensee or other person has been convicted of such offense or not. 
(5)  The licensee fails to keep an attendant on duty during the time specified in the application. 
(6)  The licensee fails to remit timely payment of parking taxes to the City of Jersey City. 
B.  No suspension or revocation of any license shall be made until a ten-day written notice of the charges preferred against the licensee has been given to the licensee personally or by mailing the same by certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the licensee at the licensed premises and a reasonable opportunity to be heard thereon afforded. The hearing shall be held before and conducted by the Director or by an official of said Division of Commerce, when so designated by the Director. All suspensions or revocations of licenses shall be effected by notice in writing, designating the effective date thereon and, in case of suspension, the term of such suspension, which notice may be served upon the licensee personally or by mailing the same by registered mail addressed to the licensee at the licensed premises. Such suspension or revocation shall apply to the licensee and to the licensed premises. Any revocation shall render the licensee ineligible to receive any other license under this article or under any article supplemental hereto for a period of one year from the effective date thereof and may, in the discretion of the Director, render the licensed premises ineligible for any future license under said article.  
§ 236-8. - Parking rates to be filed. 
Every applicant for a parking license shall file with the license issuing authority at the time of application a complete schedule of rates and charges.  
§ 236-9. - Changes in rates. 
No licensee shall make any charge for parking any vehicle in a parking lot or garage in excess of that set forth in the application for a license, unless the licensee has: 
A.  Notified the license issuing authority in writing of the new schedule of rates. 
B.  Posted signs showing such increase in the same manner as required herein.  
§ 236-10. - Parking signs; resolution of customer and service issues. 
[Amended 1-24-2018 by Ord. No. 18-002 ] 
A.  Each licensee shall maintain at each entrance to such parking lot or garage a permanently affixed sign suitable to apprise persons using the same of the name of the licensee, the hours of the day or night when such places are open for parking motor vehicles, the rates charged and the closing hours of such parking lot or garage, and the name and telephone number of the person responsible for resolving any service or customer issues during all hours of operation. Where more than one rate is charged for parking, the figures for each rate shall be of the same size and dimensions, and such figures shall measure not less than six inches in height, and the letters and figures indicating the closing hours shall be not less than six inches in height. All such signs shall be subject to the approval of the Director of Zoning or his or her authorized representative. 
B.  Where separate rates or charges are made for day parking and night parking, the night rate shall become effective at 6:30 p.m. and notice thereof shall be posted on signs described in the preceding subsection. 
C.  All signs shall be erected two feet by three feet in size and shall be at least near all entrances, exits and payment locations, so that they are clearly legible to customers at the sidewalk level on parking lots, and the same shall apply above the floors of garages and shall not be erected in such manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic.  
§ 236-11. - Refusal to park vehicles unlawful. 
If public parking is permitted under the license, then no parking licensee shall refuse to park any vehicle for which there shall be accommodation in such parking lot or garage on tender of the stated fee.  
§ 236-12. - Parking claim checks; return of vehicle. 
A.  When a vehicle is left for parking in a garage or parking lot which has an attendant on duty, the licensee of the parking lot or garage or the licensee's agent, servant or employee shall furnish the owner or operator of the vehicle with a distinctive claim check which shall have printed thereon the full name and address of the parking lot or garage and a number corresponding to a coupon placed upon the vehicle and shall have written or stamped thereon the date and license number of the motor vehicle. The licensee shall not deliver any vehicle without the proper claim check being presented or without satisfactory proof of ownership of the vehicle. This provision shall not apply where vehicles are parked on a weekly or monthly fee basis. In a self-park, automated/robotic garage which has no attendant on duty, the licensee shall furnish the customer with a receipt or other device to identify the parked vehicle and assure that the vehicle is safely returned to the customer upon payment of the required parking fee. 
[Amended 1-24-2018 by Ord. No. 18-002 ] 
B.  No parking coupon shall be affixed upon any vehicle so as to obliterate, in whole or in part, any portion of the license plates on such vehicle.  
§ 236-13. - Insurance requirements. 
Each parking licensee shall file with the license issuing authority a certificate showing that the licensee has insurance against fire, theft and liability for the protection of the owners of the cars parked in his or her parking lot or garage.  
§ 236-14. - Entrances and exits. 
Each parking lot or garage shall have at least one entrance and one exit, which may or may not be combined, and the operator of a parking lot or garage shall keep such entrance and exit properly secured at all times during the period the parking lot or garage is in operation. 
[Amended 1-24-2018 by Ord. No. 18-002 ]  
§ 236-15. - Barriers. 
Except for places of entrance and exit, every parking lot or garage shall be completely enclosed by barriers constructed and maintained so as to withstand the shocks and stresses to which they will normally be subjected by vehicles using the premises and shall be of such height as to engage the bumper of any motor vehicle parked on the lot or garage so that no portion of the vehicles extends over the property lines. When a parking lot abuts upon a building, barriers shall be erected, as provided herein, to prevent motor vehicles from striking such building.  
§ 236-16. - Maintenance of premises. 
A.  Every operator of a parking lot or garage shall keep the sidewalk surrounding the premises free from dirt, ice, sleet and snow and shall keep the sidewalks and driveways in a safe condition for the travel of pedestrians. 
B.  The ground space of each parking lot or garage, if made of dirt, sand, cinders or other loose mixture, shall at all times be kept thoroughly sprinkled or treated with water, calcium chloride or other means so that the dust, sand, cinders or other substance of which the ground space is made will not be raised, carried or blown by the wind, movement of vehicles or other causes into or upon public property or the adjacent property of others. The surface of a parking lot shall be constructed so as to prevent retention of water thereon. 
C.  No person shall distribute literature or place handbills in or upon any vehicle while parked in a parking lot or a garage. 
D.  The loading or unloading of passengers or drivers of vehicles across or upon a public sidewalk is prohibited, and no operator or employee shall receive or deliver any vehicle at or to a location outside the property line of the parking lot or garage in such a way as to block any sidewalk or street. 
E.  No licensee shall sublet, sublease or otherwise permit any parking lot or garage or portion thereof to be used by any vendor of goods, wares or merchandise or services for the conduct of such vendor's business unless the same is conducted in a permanent building or structure licensed by the city for that purpose. This section shall not be construed to prohibit the maintenance and use of cigarette, candy and soft drink vending machines on any licensed parking lot or garage.  
§ 236-17. - Notification of claims for damage or loss. 
[Amended 1-24-2018 by Ord. No. 18-002 ] 
A.  Every parking licensee shall immediately notify the license issuing authority of every claim made by reason of loss, theft or conversion or any damage or injury to person or property from the operation of a parking lot or garage which occurs during the hours the premises are regularly opened for business as posted upon the premises and printed upon the regular receipt furnished the owner or operator of the parked vehicle. 
B.  All automated, self-park and unattended garages shall post signage of the same dimensions as that required by Section 236-10 at all kiosks and pay stations informing customers of the procedures for filing a claim for damages arising from any damage to the vehicle or loss or injury to the customer. The sign shall include: 
(1)  An email address where a customer may make a claim before leaving the facility as well the name, address and 24-hour telephone number where a claim may be filed thereafter; 
(2)  A concise explanation of the information required to validate a claim such as a photo or other appropriate proof of the damage, loss or injury and a copy of the customer's parking receipt. 
C.  The owner or operator of an automated, self-park and unattended garage shall respond to any claim within two business days after receipt of the information required to validate the claim. Such response may be by email if the claimant has provided an email address.  
§ 236-18. - Notification at unclaimed parked vehicles. [ ] 
Every parking licensee shall immediately notify the license issuing authority and the Department of Public Safety, in writing, of the license number, make and, if available, the name of the owner of every vehicle left in a parking lot or garage for a period of more than forty-eight (48) consecutive hours, unless the name and address of the owner of such vehicle are personally known to the licensee.  
§ 236-19. - Unauthorized use or removal of parked vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for any licensee of a parking lot or garage to use or permit any use for any purpose of any parked vehicle unless the use shall have first been authorized by the owner or operator thereof. No licensee shall transfer or cause to be moved or transferred any parked vehicle through or upon the streets or alleys without the consent of the owner or operator thereof.  
§ 236-20. - Care of vehicles after closing time. 
[Amended 1-24-2018 by Ord. No. 18-002 ] 
When vehicles are not called for at closing time, if the customer's keys have been left with an attendant, the attendant shall leave the keys and parking coupon for safekeeping at a place within a reasonable distance of the parking lot or garage with a responsible person whose name and address shall be posted in a conspicuous place at the lot or garage. Such person shall release the vehicle only upon proper identification by the person claiming it.  
§ 236-21. - Fire protection and closed circuit TV systems in robotic/automated parking garages. 
[Amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ; 1-24-2018 by Ord. No. 18-002 ] 
A.  Every parking lot or garage shall be equipped with proper fire extinguishing apparatus subject to the approval of the Department of Public Safety, and all vehicles shall be so parked that they may be reached readily in case of fire or other emergency. 
B.  All automated, self-park and unattended parking garages shall be equipped with a closed circuit television system capable of monitoring during hours of operation, all areas available to customers as well as all locations where vehicles are stored and transferred to customers. Recordings from such systems shall be maintained for a period of at least 30 days from the date of recording.  
§ 236-21.1. - Enforcement and penalties. 
[Added 1-24-2018 by Ord. No. 18-002 ] 
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Jersey City Division of Commerce. All penalties shall be governed by the Jersey City Code.  
ARTICLE II - Shopping Center Parking Lots[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Note— Adopted 5-23-1984 as Ord. No. MC-330. 
 
§ 236-22. - Definitions. 
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
SHOPPING CENTER PARKING LOT - A parking lot used in conjunction with a store or stores catering principally to retail sales customers, commonly known as a "shopping center," with parking spaces for 100 or more vehicles.  
§ 236-23. - Uniformed security guards to be provided. 
A.  The owner or operator of a shopping center parking lot, as defined in § 236-22, shall provide one or more uniformed security guards who shall be on duty whenever the shopping center is open for business. 
B.  The uniformed security guard or guards shall patrol the parking lot periodically and shall report all incidents of crime to the Jersey City Department of Police. Uniformed security guards provided by the owners of shopping center parking lots shall not be required to undertake the duties of the Jersey City Department of Police in investigating crimes and apprehending and prosecuting criminal offenders. [ Amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] 
C.  An owner or agent of a shopping center parking lot subject to this Article may apply to the Director of Public Safety for an exemption from the requirements of subsection A, above. By application for an exemption on a form to be devised by the Director, the applicant must demonstrate to the Director's satisfaction that the level of security in operation is equivalent to the use of the uniform security guards in accordance with subsection B, above and is adequate for the protection and safety of the customers of the shopping center. [ Added 11-26-2013 by Ord. No. 13-128 .] 
D.  The Director of Public Safety shall conduct an inspection of the shopping center parking lot and shall grant an exemption if he or she finds that the proposed security arrangements are adequate in his or her reasonable discretion to protect the safety and property of the customers of the shopping center. If the Director of Public Safety denies such application for an exemption, the Director may also recommend to applicant other safety measures deemed adequate to meet the minimum requirements for an exemption in his or her reasonable discretion. [ Added 11-26-2013 by Ord. No. 13-128 .] 
E.  The exemption may be withdrawn by the Director at any time upon notice to the owner or agent of the shopping center parking lot and an opportunity to be heard. Notice is effective upon leaving at or posting upon the premises a written notice so stating the withdrawal. An exemption shall be withdrawn upon a finding by the Director that the shopping center parking lot no longer meets the criteria for an exemption outlined above. [ Added 11-26-2013 by Ord. No. 13-128 .]  
§ 236-24. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Article shall, upon conviction, be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25. 
Editor's note— Added at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.  
Chapter 239 - PARKS 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City 5-4-1971 as Ch. 18 of the 1971 Jersey City Code, as readopted 9-19-1978 by Ord. No. S-128; amended in its entirety 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052. Subsequent amendments noted where applicable.] 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Advertising materials; littering — See Ch. 81. 	Peace and good order — See Ch. 242. 
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 84. 	Peddling, soliciting and canvassing — See Ch. 245. 
Animals — See Ch. 90. 	Trees — See Ch. 321. 
Fees and charges — See Ch. 160. 	Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 332. 
Firearms and weapons — See Ch. 163. 	Waterfront — See Ch. 340. 
Peace and good order — See Ch. 242. 	
 
 
§ 239-1. - Definitions. 
As used herein, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
ATHLETIC ACTIVITY - Any activity in which a ball and other athletic equipment is used, including baseball, basketball, football, handball, soccer, tennis and ice skating. 
DIRECTOR - The head of the Department of Public Works. 
PARK - A park, reservation, playground, ballfield, beach, recreation center or any other area in the city, owned or used by the city, and devoted to active or passive recreation and/or athletic activities. 
VEHICLE - Any wheeled conveyance, whether motor-powered, animal-drawn or self-propelled. The term shall include any trailer in tow of any size, kind or description. Exception is made for baby carriages and vehicles in the service of the city parks.  
§ 239-2. - Injuring buildings or park property. 
No person in a park shall: 
A.  Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with or displace or remove any buildings, bridges, tables, benches, fireplaces, railings, paving or paving material, water lines or other public utilities or parts or appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or placards, whether temporary or permanent, monuments, stakes, posts or other boundary markers, or other structures or equipment, facilities or park property or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal. 
B.  Fail to cooperate in maintaining rest rooms and wash rooms in a neat and sanitary condition. No person over the age of five years shall use the rest rooms and wash rooms designated for the opposite sex. 
C.  Dig or remove any beach sand, whether submerged or not, or any soil, rocks, stones, trees, shrubs or plants, down-timber or other wood or materials or make any excavation by tool, equipment, blasting or other means or agency. 
D.  Construct or erect any building or structure of whatever kind, whether permanent or temporary in character, or run or string any public service utility into, upon or across such lands, except on special written permit issued hereunder.  
§ 239-3. - Damage to trees, shrubbery or lawns. 
No person in a park shall: 
A.  Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant or injure the bark or pick the flowers or seeds of any tree or plant, nor shall any person attach any rope, wire or other contrivance to any tree or plant. A person shall not dig or otherwise disturb grass areas or in any other way injure or impair the natural beauty or usefulness of any area. 
B.  Climb any tree or walk, stand or sit upon any monuments, vases, fountains, railings, fences or gun-carriages or upon any other property not designated or customarily used for such purposes. 
C.  Tie or hitch a horse or other animal to any tree or plant.  
§ 239-4. - Molestation of animals or birds. 
No person in a park shall: 
A.  Hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, chase, tease, shoot or throw missiles at any animal, reptile or bird; nor shall any person remove or have in his or her possession the young of any wild animal or the eggs, nest or young of any reptile or bird; nor shall any person collect, remove, have in his or her possession, give away, sell or offer to sell or buy or offer to buy or accept as a gift any specimen alive or dead of any of the of the group of tree snails. Exception to the foregoing is made in that snakes known to be deadly poisonous, such as rattlesnakes, moccasins, coral snakes or other deadly reptiles, may be killed on sight. 
B.  Give or offer or attempt to give to any animal or bird any tobacco, alcohol or other known noxious substances.  
§ 239-5. - Pollution; depositing materials. 
No person in a park shall: 
A.  Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay or other body of water in or adjacent to any park, or any tributary, stream, storm sewer or drain flowing into such waters, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of said waters. 
B.  Have brought in or shall dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, refuse or other trash. No such refuse or trash shall be placed in any waters in or contiguous to any park or left anywhere on the grounds thereof, but shall be placed in the proper receptacles where these are provided. Where receptacles are not so provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere.  
§ 239-6. - Traffic regulations. 
No person in a park shall: 
A.  Fail to comply with all applicable provisions of the state motor vehicles traffic laws in regard to equipment and operation of vehicles together with such regulations as are contained in this chapter and other ordinances. [1] 
B.  Fail to obey all traffic officers and park employees, such persons being hereby authorized and instructed to direct traffic whenever and wherever needed in the parks and on the highways, streets or roads immediately adjacent thereto in accordance with the provisions of these regulations and such supplementary regulations as may be adopted. 
C.  Fail to observe carefully all traffic signs indicating speed, direction, caution, stopping or parking, and all others posted for proper control and to safeguard life and property. 
D.  Ride or drive a vehicle at a rate of speed exceeding 15 miles an hour, except upon such roads as the Director may designate, by posted signs, for speedier travel. 
E.  Drive any vehicle on any area except the paved park roads or parking areas or such other areas as any on occasion are specifically designated as temporary parking areas. 
F.  Park a vehicle in other than an established or designated parking area, and such use shall be in accordance with the directions posted there and with the instructions of any attendant who may be present. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 39:1-1 et seq. and Ch. 332, Vehicles and Traffic, of this Code. 
 
§ 239-7. - Use of bicycles. [ ] 
No person in a park shall: 
A.  Ride a bicycle on other than a paved vehicular road or path designated for that purpose. A bicyclist shall be permitted to wheel or push a bicycle by hand over any grassy area or wooded trail or on any paved area reserved for pedestrian use. 
B.  Leave a bicycle in a place other than a bicycle rack when such is provided and there is a space available. 
C.  Leave a bicycle lying on the ground or paving, set against trees or in any place or position where other persons may trip over or be injured by it.  
§ 239-8. - Bathing and swimming. 
No person in a park shall: 
A.  Swim, bathe or wade in any waters or waterways in or adjacent to any park, except in such waters and at such places as are provided therefor and in compliance with such regulations as are herein set forth or may be hereafter adopted; nor shall any person frequent any waters or places customarily designated for the purpose of swimming or bathing or congregate there when such activity is prohibited upon a finding that such use of the water would be dangerous or otherwise inadvisable. 
B.  Frequent any waters or places designated for the purpose of swimming or bathing, or congregate there, except between such hours of the day as shall be designated for such purposes for each individual area. 
C.  Erect, maintain, use or occupy on or in any beach or bathing area any tent, shelter or structure of any kind unless there shall be an unobstructed view into said tent, shelter or structure from at least two sides; nor shall any guy wire, rope or extension or exterior brace or support be connected or fastened from any such structure to any other structure, stake, rock or other object outside thereof. 
D.  Dress or undress on any beach or in any vehicle, toilet or other place, except in such bathing houses or structures as may be provided for that purpose.  
§ 239-9. - Boating. 
No person in a park shall: 
A.  Bring into or operate any boat, raft or other watercraft, whether motor-powered or not, upon any waters, except at places designated for boating. Such activity shall be in accordance with applicable regulations as are now or may hereafter be adopted. 
B.  Use the public docks for dockage or other purposes without first making arrangements for such accommodations with the Department of Recreation and Cultural Affairs, who shall assign space and collect reasonable rental charges in conformity with established regulations and rates. 
C.  Navigate, direct or handle any boat in such a manner as to unjustifiably or unnecessarily annoy or frighten or endanger the occupants of any other boat. 
D.  Launch, dock or operate any boat of any kind on any waters between the closing hour of the park at night and opening hour the following morning, nor shall any person be on or remain on or in any boat during the said closed hours of the park.  
§ 239-10. - Fishing and hiking. 
A.  No person shall: 
(1)  Engage in commercial fishing or the buying or selling of fish caught in any waters in a park. 
(2)  Fish in any waters (except for Jersey City reservoir property waters), whether fresh or salt and whether by the use of hook-and-line, net, trap or other device, except in waters designated by the Director for that use and under such regulations and restrictions as may have been or may be prescribed by the Director. 
(3)  Fish in any Jersey City reservoir property waters, whether by the use of hook-and-line, net, trap or other device, except upon permit obtained from the Jersey City Watershed Office, 739 Greenbank Road, Lake Parsippany, New Jersey, or the City Clerk's Office of Jersey City, 280 Grove Street, Jersey City, New Jersey, upon payment of maintenance fee as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges, and under such other regulations and restrictions as may have been or may be prescribed by that office and other applicable state and local laws and regulations. Persons 17 and under shall be accompanied by an adult. 
(4)  Hike on any Jersey City reservoir property except upon permit obtained from the Jersey City Watershed Office, 739 Greenbank Road, Lake Parsippany, New Jersey, or the City Clerk's Office of Jersey City, 280 Grove Street, Jersey City, New Jersey, upon payment of maintenance fee as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges, and under such other regulations and restrictions as may have been or may be prescribed by that office and other applicable state and local laws and regulations. Persons 17 and under shall be accompanied by an adult.  
§ 239-11. - Hunting and firearms. 
No person in a park shall hunt, trap or pursue wildlife at any time. No person shall use, carry or possess firearms of any description or air rifles, spring-guns, bows and arrows, slings or any other forms of weapons potentially inimical to wildlife and dangerous to human safety, or any instrument that can be loaded with and fire blank cartridges or any kind of trapping device. Shooting into park areas from beyond park boundaries is forbidden.  
§ 239-12. - Picnic areas; camping; horseback riding. 
No person in a park shall: 
A.  Picnic or lunch in a place other than those designated for that purpose. Attendants shall have the authority to regulate the activities in such areas when necessary to prevent congestion and to secure the maximum use for the comfort and convenience of all. Visitors shall comply with any directions given to achieve this end. 
B.  Violate the regulations that use of the individual fireplaces, together with tables and benches, follows generally the rule of "first come, first served." 
C.  Use any portion of the picnic areas or of any of the buildings or structures therein for the purpose of holding picnics to the exclusion of other persons, nor shall any person use such area and facilities for an unreasonable time if the facilities are crowded. 
D.  Leave a picnic area before the fire is completely extinguished and before all trash in the nature of boxes, paper, cans, bottles, garbage and other refuse is placed in the disposal receptacles where provided. If no such trash receptacles are available, then refuse and trash shall be carried away from the park area by the picnicker to be properly disposed of elsewhere. 
E.  Camp in other than permanent cabins for organized camping and used by groups of persons under adequate supervision. No person shall set up tents, shacks or any other temporary shelter for the purpose of overnight camping, nor shall any person leave in a park after closing hours any movable structure or special vehicle to be used or that could be used for such purpose, such as house-trailer, camp-trailer, camp-wagon or the like. 
F.  Take part in or abet the playing of any games involving thrown or otherwise propelled objects such as balls, stones, arrows, javelins or model airplanes except in areas set apart for such forms of recreation. The playing of rough or comparatively dangerous games such as football, baseball and quoits is prohibited except on the fields and courts or areas provided therefor. Roller-skating shall be confined to those areas specifically designated for such pastime. 
G.  Ride a horse except on designated bridle trails. Where permitted, horses shall be thoroughly broken and properly restrained, ridden with due care and shall not be allowed to graze or go unattended, nor shall they be hitched to any rock, tree or shrub.  
§ 239-13. - Alcoholic beverages; firecrackers; loitering; soliciting alms; fires; gambling. 
No person in a park shall: 
A.  Have brought alcoholic beverages or drink alcoholic beverages at any time in the park. At certain specifically designated recreation centers where meals or lunches are served under concession privileges, the sale of alcoholic beverages by such concessionaire will be permitted under the strict regulation and control of the Director. Sales of alcoholic beverages shall be made only in individual drinks (not in original packages or otherwise in bulk) and shall be served for consumption on the immediate premises of the concession. 
B.  Have entered or be under the influence of intoxicating liquor. 
C.  Brought or have in his or her possession or set off or otherwise cause to explode or discharge or burn any firecrackers, torpedo, rocket or other fireworks or explosives of flammable material or discharge them or throw them into any such area from land or highway adjacent thereto. This prohibition includes any substance, compound, mixture or article that in conjunction with any other substance or compound would be dangerous from any of the foregoing standpoints. 
D.  Occupy any seat or bench or enter into or loiter or remain in any pavilion or other park structure or section thereof which may be reserved and designated for the use of the opposite sex. Exception is made for children under 10 years of age. 
E.  Solicit alms or contributions for any purpose, whether public or private. 
F.  Build or attempt to build a fire except in such areas and under such regulations as may be designated by the Director. No person shall drop, throw or otherwise scatter lighted matches, burning cigarettes or cigars, tobacco paper or other flammable material within any park area or on any highway, road or street abutting or contiguous thereto. 
G.  Enter an area posted as closed to the public, nor shall any person use or abet the use of any area in violation of posted notices. 
H.  Gamble or participate in or abet any game of chance. 
I.  Go onto the ice on any of the waters, except such areas as are designated as skating fields and provided that a safety signal is displayed. 
J.  Sleep or protractedly lounge on the seats or benches or other areas or engage in loud, boisterous, threatening, abusive, insulting or indecent language or engage in any disorderly conduct or behavior tending to a breach of the public peace. 
K.  Fail to produce and exhibit any permit from the Director he claims to have upon request of any authorized person who shall desire to inspect the same for the purpose of enforcing compliance with any ordinance or rule. 
L.  Disturb or interfere unreasonably with any person or party occupying any area or participating in any activity under the authority of a permit.  
§ 239-14. - Merchandising, advertising and signs. 
No person in a park shall: 
A.  Expose or offer for sale any article or thing nor shall he station or place any stand, cart or vehicle for the transportation, sale or display of any such article or thing. Exception is here made as to any regularly licensed concessionaire acting by and under the authority and regulation of the Division of Recreation. 
B.  Announce, advertise or call the public attention in any way to any article or service for sale or hire. 
C.  Paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement or inscription whatever, nor shall any person erect or cause to be erected any sign whatever on any public lands or highways or roads adjacent to a park.  
§ 239-15. - Hours of operation; permits; farmers' markets. [Amended 4-28-1999 by Ord. No. 99-056] 
A.  Except for unusual and unforeseen emergencies, parks shall be open to the public every day of the year between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. daily. (J. Owen Grundy Park, however, is exempt from the 10:00 p.m. closing time.) The opening and closing hours for each individual park shall be posted therein for public information. 
B.  Any section or part of any park may be declared closed to the public by the Director at any time and for any interval of time, either temporarily or at regular and stated intervals (daily or otherwise) and either entirely or merely to certain uses as the Director shall find reasonably necessary. 
C.  All activity is prohibited in the parks between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., except in the case of an exemption or special activity sponsored or approved by the City Council. 
D.  The finding of lost articles by park employees shall be reported to the person in charge of the park, who shall make every reasonable effort to locate the owners. The employees shall make every reasonable effort to find articles reported as lost. 
E.  A permit shall be obtained from the Director before participating in any park activity. 
F.  A person seeking issuance of a permit hereunder shall file an application with the Director or his or her designee. The application shall state: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  The name and address of the person, persons, corporation or association sponsoring the activity, if any. 
(3)  The day and hours for which the permit is desired. 
(4)  The park or portion thereof for which such permit is desired. 
(5)  An estimate of the anticipated attendance. 
(6)  Any other information which the Director shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should issue hereunder. 
G.  The Director or his or her designee shall issue a permit hereunder where he finds: [Amended 3-11-2015 by Ord. No. 15-026 ] 
(1)  That the proposed activity or use of the park will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the general public enjoyment of the park. 
(2)  That the proposed activity and use will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare, safety and recreation. 
(3)  That the proposed activity or use is not reasonably anticipated to incite violence, crime or disorderly conduct. 
(4)  That the proposed activity will not entail unusual, extraordinary or burdensome expense or police operation by the city. 
(5)  That the facilities desired have not been reserved for other use at the day and hour required in the application. 
(6)  In the case of farmers' markets, a non-profit corporation seeking a permit for same shall, in addition to all other applicable requirements and restrictions in this chapter and Code, obtain any and all applicable prior approvals from state or local government, including but not limited to any food establishment licenses required pursuant to Section 175-16 et seq. of this Code. 
H.  Within five days after receipt of an application, the Director shall apprise an applicant in writing of his or her reasons for refusing a permit, and any aggrieved person shall have the right to appeal in writing within 10 days to the Director, who shall consider the application under the standards set forth in Subsection B hereof and sustain or overrule the decision with 10 days, but no later than two days before the date sought for the permit. The decision of the Director shall be final. 
I.  A permittee shall be bound by all park rules and regulations and all applicable ordinances fully as though the same were inserted in the permit. 
J.  The person or persons to whom a permit is issued shall be liable for any loss, damage or injury sustained by any person whatever by reason of the negligence of the person or persons to whom such permit shall have been issued. 
K.  A permit may be revoked upon a finding of violation of any rule or ordinance or upon good cause shown.  
§ 239-16. - Enforcement. 
A.  The Director, the police and park employees shall, in connection with their duties imposed by law, diligently enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  The Director, the police and any park employee shall have the authority to eject from the park any person acting in violation of this chapter. 
C.  The Director, the police and any park employee shall have the authority to seize and confiscate any property, thing or device in the park or used in violation of this chapter.  
§ 239-17. - Skateboarding facilities. [Added 3-25-2015 by Ord. No. ] 
A.  Hours of Operation. The hours of operation for a skate park are from 6:00 a.m. until 10:00 p.m. The skate park will be closed during wet, snow or icy conditions or during park maintenance periods. The City reserves the right to close the skate park if it determines that any other condition renders the skate park unsafe for use. 
B.  Signage. Signs that display the rules and regulations for usage of the skate park shall be conspicuously posted throughout the skate park. At a minimum, all signs shall inform the public that safety equipment, including helmets, elbow and knee pads, appropriate footwear and wrist guards must be used in the skate park. 
C.  Rules. 
1.  Participants twelve (12) and under must have an adult present. Know your ability and skate accordingly. 
2.  All persons entering the skate park are deemed to have knowledge that the skate park is a non-supervised activity site designed for skateboarding only, and that all use of the skate park is at the risk of the user. 
3.  All persons entering the skate park are deemed to have agreed to indemnify, defend and save harmless the City, its officers, employees, agents and volunteers for, from and against any accident, injury, including death, and/or loss of property or damage thereto sustained as a result of using the skate park. 
4.  Helmets, kneepads, elbow pads, appropriate footwear and wrist guards are required for skaters within the park. Helmets must have an annual registration sticker issued by the Recreation Department. Each user of the skate park shall have personal identification that includes name, address, and telephone number in his/her possession at all times during use of the skate park. 
5.  All bicycles, scooters, roller skates, inline skates, motorized vehicles of any kind, and skateboards with wheelbases longer than twenty (20) inches are prohibited. 
6.  Personal ramps, rails, boxes, other apparatus or modifications to the skate surface are prohibited. 
7.  No food or beverages are allowed inside the skate park. Spectators and pets are prohibited in the skate park area. 
8.  All users of the skate park are to act in an orderly, safe and considerate manner while on the premises and in the skating area. Everyone is to wait his or her turn. Reckless or dangerous skaters will be requested to leave the skating area and the premises immediately. Smoking, use of drugs, alcohol or vandalism is strictly prohibited and shall result in automatic and/or permanent expulsion from this facility. 
9.  Use of radios, stereos or any type of amplified sound must be in accordance with the City noise ordinance and must remain outside of the skate park. Head phones are prohibited. 
10.  Violation of these rules may result in expulsion from this facility and revocation of any privileges for its use. 
11.  The Department of Public Safety, Division of Police, shall have the authority and responsibility for enforcing the rules and regulations governing the use of the skate park.  
§ 239-18. - Inventory of Recreation and Open Space (ROSI). 
[Added 3-26-2008 by Ord. No. 08-030; amended 6-17-2009 by Ord. No. 09-046; 3-25-2015 by Ord. No. 15-028 ] 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of the section is to codify the Inventory of Recreation and Open Space which should also insure that there is formal public notice of all additions to the State Mandated Recreation and Open Space Inventory. 
B.  Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:8A-35 et seq., the State of New Jersey requires the City to maintain an inventory, including a map, of all land held by it for recreation and conservation purposes. The City's Recreation and Open Space Inventory cannot be amended or modified in any way except by the adoption of an ordinance. 
C.  The Inventory is as follows: 
[Amended 10-09-2013 by Ord. No. 13-108 ] 
	Municipal Location 	Name 	Former Block 	New Block 	Former Lot 	New Lot 	Acres 
#1 	York St. & Exchange Pl. 	York St. Park 	8 	11605 	Portion 	2 	0.5 
#2 	Hudson River 	J. Owen Grundy Park (aka Exchange Pl. Park) 	8 	11605 	6 portion 	2 	0.39 
#3 	226 Washington St. 	Paulus Hook Park 	68 	14304 	1 	1 	0.92 
#4 	236 Washington St. 		69 	14303 	50 	4 	
#5 	93-99 Grand St. 		100 	14305 	D 	8 	
#6 	92-98 Grand St. 		101 	14306 	M 	12 	
#7 	280 Grove St. 	City Hall Park 	201 	12904 	CH portion 	1 	0.48 
#8 	111 Newark Ave. 	Fitzgerald Holola Park (aka Grove St. Park) 	204 	13004 	1 	1 	0.14 
#9 	17 Laurel Ct. 		208 	11501 	65 	9 	0.05 
#10 	450 Manila Ave. 	(aka Philippine Plaza) 	213 	11601 	A 	1 	1.84 
#11 	268 Erie St. 	Sixteenth St. Park 	258 	7102 	19 	1 	0.46 
#12 	270 Erie St. 		258 	7102 	20 	1 	
#13 	272 Erie St. 		258 	7102 	21 	1 	
#14 	274 Erie St. 		258 	7102 	22 	1 	
#15 	276 Erie St. 		258 	7102 	23 	1 	
#16 	278 Erie St. 		258 	7102 	24 	1 	
#17 	215 16th St. 		258 	7102 	25 	1 	
#18 	213 16th St. 		258 	7102 	26 	1 	
#19 	257-287 Montgomery St. 	Van Vorst Park 	270.5 	12805 	5 	1 	1.84 
#20 	84 Wayne St. 	Angel Ramos Park (formerly Wayne St. Park) 	273 	12705 	22 	17 	0.23 
#21 	86 Wayne St. 		273 	12705 	23 	18 	
#22 	88 Wayne St. 		273 	12705 	24 	19 	
#23 	90 Wayne St. 		273 	12705 	25 	20 	
#24 	25 W. Hamilton Pl. 	Hamilton Park 	283.1 	10003 	PK 	1 	5.57 
#25 	366 Grand St. 	Alexander F. Santora Path 
(formerly Meluso Park) 	303 	13905 	A.1 	1 	0.15 
#26 	364 Grand St. 		303 	13905 	A.2 	1 	
#27 	362 Grand St. 		303 	13905 	A.3 	1 	
#28 	360 Grand St. 		303 	13905 	A.4 	1 	
#29 	174 Brunswick Street 		389 	9905 	19 	8 	0.0565 
#30 	176 Brunswick Street 		389 	9905 	20 	9 	0.0459 
#31 	388 1st St. 	First St. Park 	410 	11006 	25 	26 	0.12 
#32 	386 1st St. 		410 	11006 	26 	25 	
#33 	384 1st St. 		410 	11006 	27 	24 	
#34 	237 Brunswick St. 	Roberto Clemente Sports Complex 	418 	8504 	A.PL 	11 	6.43 
#35 	8th St. 	(aka Enos Jones Park) 	418 	8504 	PL.F 	11 	
#36 	376 8th St. 	(includes Oakley Oval) 	418 	8504 	9 	11 	
#37 	378-380 8th St. 	(includes Ed Franco Field) 	418 	8504 	10 	11 	
#38 	381 8th St. 	(includes John DeSalvo Plgnd.) 	418 	8504 	12.A 	11 	
#39 	Newark & Merseles 	Mary Benson Park Complex 	439 	10901 	A 	119 	2.95 
#40 	Merseles & 3rd St. 		439 	10901 	PT.3 	132 	
#41 	96 Palisade Ave. 	Sgt. Anthony Park 	551 	6901 	17 	11 	0.58 
#42 	90 Palisade Ave. 		551 	6901 	18 	10 	
#43 	109-115 Ogden Ave. 	Janet Moore Park 
(formerly Cuneo Pl. Park) 	722.B 	5202 	3.99 	29 	0.3 
#44 	105-107 Ogden Ave. 		722.B 	5202 	7.A 	28 	
#45 	285 Ogden Ave. 	Riverview-Fisk Park 	768 	3002 	54 	2 	0.0342 
#46 	Riverview Park 		768 	3002 	VAR 	1 	5.53 
#47 	Riverview Park 		769 	3003 	VAR 	1 	
#48 	201 Central Ave. 	Pershing Field 	835 	4802 	N 	2 	13.45 
#49 	Hillside Rd. 	Edward Crincoli, R.A., Park 
(formerly Terrace Ave. Park) 	922 	2002 	19 	13 	0.45 
#50 	Terrace Ave. 		922 	2002 	19 	13 	
#51 	Hillside Rd. 		922 	2002 	19 	13 	
#52 	Terrace Ave. 		922 	2002 	19 	13 	
#53 	Terrace Ave. 		922 	2002 	19 	13 	
#54 	Hillside Rd. 		922 	2002 	19 	13 	
#55 	Terrace Ave. 		922 	2002 	19 	13 	
#56 	Terrace Ave. 		922 	2002 	19 	13 	
#57 	Terrace Ave. 		922 	2002 	19 	13 	
#58 	Terrace Ave. 		922 	2002 	19 	13 	
#59 	Hillside Rd. 		922 	2002 	19 	13 	
#60 	Terrace Ave. 		922 	2002 	19 	13 	
#61 	3305-65 Kennedy Blvd. 	Leonard Gordon Park 	935 	3501 	30 	14 	5.81 
#62 	30 Sycamore Rd. 	Thomas McGovern Park (formerly County Village Park, includes College LL Field) 	1253.7 	29003 	A.1 	1 	2.5 
#63 	259-265 Linden Ave. 	Woodland Ave. Park 	1267 	28003 	105 	1 	0.17 
#64 	179 West Side Ave. 	Metro Field (includes C. Fricchione playground) 	1275.1 	21902 	1 	11 	2.33 
#65 	103-129 Bergen Avenue 	Audubon Park (aka Maj. John Desmond Park) 	1283.5 	2390 	4 	1 	3.43 
#66 	Broadman Pkwy. 	Lt. R.B. Grover Memorial Park 	1300.A 	22201 	84.B 	16 	0.39 
#67 	Broadman Pkwy. 		1300.B 	22302 	10.D 	29 	
#68 	146 Wilkinson Ave. 	Dr. Edith Bland Phillips Park 
(formerly Wilkinson Ave. Park) 	1304 	23501 	A.6 	76 	0.3 
#69 	152 Wilkinson Ave. 		1305 	23501 	D.7 	78 	
#70 	150 Wilkinson Ave. 		1305 	23501 	D.8 	77 	
#71 	125 ML King Dr. 	Fulton Ave. Park 	1337 	24903 	6.B 	16 	0.29 
#72 	90 Van Nostrand Ave. 	Muhammad Ali Path 	1342 	25801 	15.DUP 	38 	0.5 
#73 	92 Van Nostrand Ave. 		1342 	25801 	16.A 	39 	
#74 	102 Van Nostrand Ave. 		1342 	25801 	21.DUP 	44 	
#75 	104-106 Van Nostrand Ave. 		1342 	25801 	22.A 	1 	
#76 	108 Van Nostrand Ave. 		1342 	25701 	24.A 	22 	
#77 	110 Van Nostrand Ave. 		1342 	25701 	25 	23 	
#78 	93 Armstrong Ave. 		1342 	25801 	43 	8 	
#79 	91 Armstrong Ave. 		1342 	25801 	44 	9 	
#80 	66 ML King Dr. 	Vernater Watson Park 
(formerly Stevens Ave. Park) 	1346 	26402 	29.B 	36 	0.24 
#81 	64 ML King Dr. 		1346 	26402 	31.B 	35 	
#82 	62 ML King Dr. 		1346 	26402 	32.B 	34 	
#83 	13 Ludlow St. 	Ralph Taylor Memorial Park 	1360.75 	28201 	A.1 	10 	0.26 
#84 	9 Ludlow St. 		1360.75 	28201 	A.3 	12 	
#85 	7 Ludlow St. 		1360.75 	28201 	A.4 	13 	
#86 	5 Ludlow St. 		1360.75 	28201 	A.5 	14 	
#87 	3 Ludlow St. 		1360.75 	28201 	A.6 	15 	
#88 	1 Ludlow St. 		1360.75 	28201 	A.7 	16 	
#89 	250 Old Bergen Rd. 	Ferris Triangle Park 	1366.1 	28205 	62.B 	1 	0.23 
#90 	1628-38 Kennedy Blvd. 	Columbia Park (aka Greenville Memorial Park) 	1374 	29202 	WB 	1 	4.72 
#91 	31 Old Bergen Rd. 	Martiniak-Enright Park (aka Pamrapo Ave. Park) 	1379 	29801 	2E3.99 	47 	
#92 	480 Garfield Ave. 	Bayside Park 	1466 	26001 	8 	1 	9.23 
#93 	Ft. of Richard St. 		1466 	26001 	8 	1 	
#94 	16 Wilkinson Ave. 	Skinner Memorial Park 	1485 	23703 	3.99 	1 	0.14 
#95 	Chapel Ave. & Caven Pl. Rd. 	Caven Point Complex 	1500 	27401 	16 	27 	17.81 
	Property of the Jersey City Board of Education. Leased, managed and maintained by the City of Jersey City. 
#96 	2565 Kennedy Blvd. 	Boyd McGuiness Park 	1825.1 	16302 	C.1 	40 	0.22 
#97 	88a DeKalb Ave. 	La Pointe Park 	1839 	13201 	37.C 	17 	0.28 
#98 	53-55 Stuyvesant Ave. 		1839 	13201 	38 	6 	
#99 	90-92 DeKalb Ave. 		1839 	13201 	39 	17 	
#100 	57 Stuyvesant Ave. 		1839 	13201 	40.A 	5 	
#101 	94 DeKalb Ave. 		1839 	13201 	41.A 	17 	
#102 	1020 West Side Ave. 	Pavonia Marion Park 
(includes Pavonia Pool) 
(includes Martucci LL Field) 
(includes Marion Plygrd.) 
(includes Gus DiSanto Ct.) 	1852 	10501 	59 	1 	3.4 
#103 	901 Pavonia Ave. 		1852 	10501 	59 	1 	
#104 	903 Pavonia Ave. 		1852 	10501 	59 	1 	
#105 	901 Pavonia Ave. 		1852 	10501 	59 	1 	
#106 	899 Pavonia Ave. 		1852 	10501 	59 	1 	
#107 	Corbin Ave. 		1852 	10501 	59 	1 	
#108 	Corbin Ave. 		1852 	10501 	59 	1 	
#109 	Corbin Ave. 		1852 	10501 	59 	1 	
#110 	Corbin Ave. 		1852 	10501 	59 	1 	
#111 	Corbin Ave. 		1852 	10501 	59 	1 	
#112 	West Side Ave. 		1852 	10501 	59 	1 	
#113 	West Side Ave. 		1852 	10501 	59 	1 	
#114 	West Side Ave. 		1852 	10501 	59 	1 	
#115 	West Side Ave. 		1852 	10501 	59 	1 	
#116 	West Side Ave. 		1852 	10501 	59 	1 	
#117 	1040 West Side Ave. 		1853 	9306 	41 	3 	
#118 	West Side & Corbin Ave. 		1853 	9306 	41 	3 	
#119 	848 Pavonia Ave. 	Brett Triangle 	1856.1 	9302 	1 	1 	0.02 
#120 	298 Academy St. 	Apple Tree House 	1871 	12106 	34 	11 	0.48 
#121 	8-9 Foye Pl. 	McGinley Square Park 	1896 	14902 	29 	3 	0.3 
#122 	722 Montgomery St. 		1896.5 	14903 	A 	1 	
#123 	531 Communipaw Ave. 	Harmon St. Pool 	1941 	18702 	17 	9 	0.52 
#124 	1025-1031 Garfield Ave. 	Terry DeHere Park 
(aka Garfield Ave, Park) 	1947 	19703 	G.27 	41 	0.4 
#125 	785 Grand Street 	Arlington Park 	1949 	18802 	P 	1 	3,52 
#126 	38 Madison Ave. 	38 Madison Ave. 
(formerly Madison Ave. Park) 	1950 	18801 	R 	52 	0.91 
#127 	36 Monticello Ave. 	Monticello Ave. Park 	1951 	18604 	39 	15 	0.16 
#128 	566 Bramhall Ave. 	Izetta Hill-McDuffy Park 
(formerly Bramball Park) 	1952 	18601 	40.A 	1 	0.07 
#129 	568 Bramhall Ave. 		1952 	18601 	41.A 	1 	
#130 	514 Jackson Ave. 		1952 	18601 	41.B 	1 	
#131 	285 Arlington Ave. 	Arthur Ashe Park 
(formerly Arlington/Minerva Park) 	1969 	21303 	97.A 	19 	0.12 
#132 	Minerva St. 		1969 	21303 	98.A 	19 	
#133 	80 Virginia Ave. 	Virginia Ave. Park 	1978 	21101 	48 	50 	0.23 
#134 	78 Virginia Ave. 		1978 	21101 	49 	49 	
#135 	76 Virginia Ave. 		1978 	21101 	50 	48 	
#136 	74 Virginia Ave. 		1978 	21101 	51 	47 	
#137 	124 Lafayette St. 	Rey. Ercel F. Webb Park (aka Lafayette Park) 	2066.1 	17405 	PK 	1 	4.43 
#138 	335 Johnston Ave. 	Dr. Lena Edwards Park 	2074 	19002 	34 	3 	0.77 
#139 	333 Johnston Ave. 		2074 	19002 	34 	3 	
#140 	331 Johnston Ave. 		2074 	19002 	34 	3 	
#141 	329 Johnston Ave. 		2074 	19002 	34 	3 	
#142 	327 Johnston Ave. 		2074 	19002 	34 	3 	
#143 	325 Johnston Ave. 		2074 	19002 	34 	3 	
#144 	285 Pine St. 		2074 	19002 	35 	8 	
#145 	283 Pine St. 		2074 	19002 	35 	8 	
#146 	368 Whiton St. 		2074 	19002 	36 	23 	
#147 	370 Whiton St. 		2074 	19002 	36 	23 	
#148 	372 Whiton St. 		2074 	19002 	36 	23 	
#149 	382 Whiton St. 		2074 	19002 	36 	23 	
#150 	384 Whiton St. 		2074 	19002 	36 	23 	
#151 	386 Whiton St. 		2074 	19002 	36 	23 	
#152 	388 Whiton St. 		2074 	19002 	36 	23 	
#153 	390 Whiton St. 		2074 	19002 	36 	23 	
#154 	Inside Lot Gateway Park Complex 		2134 	13701 	F 	4 	6.3 
#155 	Bright St. & Merseles St. 	(aka Bright St. Gateway Park) 	2134 	13701 	5-15,17-24, P1-25 	4 	
#156 	Bright St. 	(includes Dick Seay Field) 	2134 	13701 	25.PT, 26-32 	4 	
#157 	40 Merseles Ave. 		2134.5 	13702 	PL.2 	1 	
#158 	24 Merseles Ave. 		2137 	13702 	PL.2 	4 	
#159 	17-31 Merseles Ave. 		2138 	13701 	8 	4 	
#160 	490-504 Grand St. 		2139 	13703 	A3.PL 	2 	
#161 	Lincoln Park 	Lincoln Park West 	1702.1 	16002 	1 portion 	1 	8 
Subtotal of Acres Developed 	120.76 
Wholly Undeveloped Lands Held for Recreation and Conservation Purposes 
#162 	24-32 Hudson St. 	Veteran Park 	2 	14502 	A 	11 	0.34 
#163 	New York Ave. 	Tumulty Park 	723 	5202 	21.B 	26 	0.49 
#164 	New York Ave. 		723 	5202 	21.C 	27 	
#165 	Hillside Rd. 	Terrace Ave. 	923 	2001 	5.B 	8 	0.09 
#166 	Hillside Rd. 		923 	2001 	12.B 	1 	
#167 	Hackensack R. & Clendenny 	Hackensack River Greenway 	1746.5 	16001 	H2 	2 	33.88 
#168 	Hackensack River 		1751 	16001 	12 	1 	
#169 	52 Summit Ave. 	Summit Comelison Park 	1916 	17102 	1 	1 	0.5 
#170 	113-116 Central Ave. 	Reservoir 3 	835 	4802 	S portion 	1 	13.13 
#171 	770-776 Ocean Avenue 	Oak Street Park 	1970 	21302 	K.2 	43 	
#172 				21302 	L.1 	43 	
#173 				21302 	47.5 	43 	
#174 				21302 	M.1 	42 	Survey to be provided 
#175 	Berry Lane 	Berry Lane 	2040 	18901 	A 	18 	
#176 				18901 	B.1 	18 	
#177 				18901 	C.16 	18 	
#178 				18901 	H 	18 	
#179 				18901 	G.1 	18 	
#180 				18901 	E 	18 	
#181 				18901 	J.1 	18 	
#182 				18901 	K 	18 	6.59 
Subtotal of Acres Undeveloped 	50.89 
Total Acres of developed and open space from all pages 	175.78 
 
D.  Open Space Recreation and Historic Preservation Trust Fund Tax Levy. 
[Added 3-22-2017 by Ord. No. 17-026 ] 
See Ch. 304, Article VIII.  
Chapter 242 - PEACE AND GOOD ORDER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
History— Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City as indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable. 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, Ch. 84; curfew, Ch. 137; drug-free school zones, Ch. 151; firearms and weapons, Ch. 163; noise, Ch. 222; paging devices, Ch. 230; conduct in parks, Ch. 239; pornography and obscenity, Ch. 251. 
 
ARTICLE I - Trespass on Roofs 
[Adopted 4-22-1982 by Ord. No. MC-168] 
 
§ 242-1. - Trespass prohibited. 
No person shall enter or go onto the roof of any building under the jurisdiction and control of the Jersey City Housing Authority, as heretofore established pursuant to law ( N.J.S.A. 55:14A-4 et seq. [2]), for any purpose other than as the direct result of an emergency or when authorized by the Executive Director of the Jersey City Housing Authority or someone acting pursuant to his or her authorization. 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— N.J.S.A. 55:14A-4 through 55:14A-58 were repealed by L. 1992, c. 79, § 59. 
 
ARTICLE II - Graffiti[3] 
[Adopted 11-23-1983 by Ord. No. MC-503; amended in its entirety 9-30-1992 by Ord. No. 92-132] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Sale of spray paint, Ch. 290. 
 
§ 242-2. - Placement prohibited; violations and penalties. [Amended 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050] 
Any person who defaces or places graffiti on any public property or private property of another by any means whatever shall be subject to a minimum fine of $100 and a maximum fine or imprisonment as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25, and/or up to 90 days of community service.  
§ 242-3. - Fee for removal. 
There shall be a fee of up to $125 for the removal of graffiti from any private property. The Director of Public Works shall determine the amount of such fee in accordance with a fee schedule, which shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk.  
§ 242-4. - Reward for information leading to apprehension and conviction.[4] 
Upon the written recommendation of the Public Safety Director, the Mayor may authorize payment of a reward of $500 to any person who provides information or assistance leading to the apprehension and conviction of any person violating § 242-2 above. No reward may be paid to any public employee whose duty it is to investigate or enforce this article. This reward of $500 shall be subject to appropriation of funds. 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— See also Ch. 266, Rewards. 
 
ARTICLE III - Urination in Public[5] 
[Adopted 9-12-1985 by Ord. No. C-6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Pornography and obscenity, Ch. 251. 
 
§ 242-5. - Prohibition. 
Urinating on any street, sidewalk or any other public place in the City of Jersey City is prohibited.  
ARTICLE IV - Obstruction of Entry 
[Adopted 2-27-1991 by Ord. No. McC-288] 
 
§ 242-6. - Unlawful acts. 
A.  No person may, without any legal privilege to do so, purposely or recklessly obstruct any public passage to any place of business or house of worship or residence. "Obstruct" means render impassable without unreasonable inconvenience or hazard. No person shall be deemed guilty of recklessly obstructing in violation of this article because of a gathering of persons to hear him or her speak or otherwise communicate or solely because of being a member of such a gathering. 
B.  No person in a gathering may refuse to obey a reasonable official request or order to move to prevent obstruction of public passage to a place of business or house of worship or residence. 
C.  An order to move, addressed to a person whose speech or other lawful behavior attracts an obstructing audience, shall not be deemed reasonable if the obstruction can be readily remedied by police control of the size or location of the gathering.  
ARTICLE V - Motor Vehicles[6] 
[Adopted 9-28-1994 as part of Ord. No. 94-089] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— For penalty provisions see Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25. 
 
§ 242-7. - Violations—Breach of the peace; obstructing pedestrian way; stopping vehicles at an intersection. 
[Amended 3-12-2014 by Ord. No. 14-206 ] 
No person shall drive, maintain or use a motor vehicle in any manner so as to: 
A.  Create or cause to be created a breach of peace. 
B.  Create or cause to be created any disturbance or annoyance to the comfort and repose of any person. 
C.  Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or other motor vehicles. 
D.  Interfere with the safety of pedestrians or other vehicles. 
E.  Engage in any course of conduct alarming to any reasonable person. 
F.  Stop a motor vehicle within an intersection or marked crosswalk, if preceding traffic or any traffic light or signal prevents the immediate clearance of the intersection or marked crosswalk.  
ARTICLE VI - Roller Skates, In-Line Skates, Skateboards and Bicycles 
[Adopted 9-27-1995 by Ord. No. 95-081; amended 9-9-1998 by Ord. No. 98-105] 
 
§ 242-8. - Helmet use and safety. 
[Amended 5-8-2013 by Ord. No. 13-056 ] 
A.  No one under eighteen (18) years of age may ride upon in-line skates, bicycles, roller blades, roller skates, skateboards or similar devices without wearing a properly fitted and fastened helmet which meets the standards of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI Z 90.4 bicycle helmet standard), the United States Consumer Product Safety, or the Snell Memorial Foundation's 1984 standard for protective head gear for use in bicycling or a helmet designed for use with the particular device being used. 
B.  No person operating a bicycle shall allow another person to ride as a passenger on a bicycle unless: 
(1)  Such passenger is carried in a proper bike seat, trailer or other bicycle accessory that complies with the Snell Memorial Foundation, the Safety Equipment Institute, or the United States Consumer Produce Safety Commission, and contains adequate provision for retaining the passenger in place and for protecting the passenger from moving parts of the bicycle; and such bike seat, trailer or other bicycle accessory is used in accordance with manufacturer's age and weight requirements and limitations; and 
(2)  Such passenger is wearing a properly fitted and fastened helmet meeting the standards in § 242-8(A). 
C.  No passenger on a bicycle shall be carried in a pack fastened to the operator.  
§ 242-9. - Violations and penalties. 
[Amended 5-8-2013 by Ord. No. 13-056 ] 
A.  Anyone who violates a requirement of § 242-8 shall be warned of the violation by the enforcing official. His or her parent or legal guardian may be fined a maximum of fifty dollars ($50.00). There shall be a presumption that the parent or guardian failed to exercise reasonable supervision or control over the person's conduct. A fine may be waived if an offender or his or her parent or legal guardian presents suitable proof that an approved helmet or bike seat has been purchased since the violation occurred.  
§ 242-9.1. - Definitions; bicycle riders subject to traffic regulations; riding bicycles on business district public sidewalks prohibited; riding bicycles on public sidewalks in areas outside of business districts prohibited, except for minors age nine and under; use of bicycle lanes and public bicycle parking racks regulated; and safety of cyclist. 
[Adopted 9-9-1998 by Ord. No. 98-105; Amended 5-8-2013 by Ord. No. 13-056 ; 4-13-2016 by Ord. No. 16-057 ] 
A.  "Bicycle" means a vehicle propelled by human power upon which a person may ride, having two (2) tandem wheels, either of which is twelve (12) inches or more in diameter, and may be any vehicle generally recognized as a bicycle though equipped with two (2) front or rear wheels. 
A "commercial bicycle" is a bicycle owned or operated by (1) a business to deliver food or goods or (2) used as part of "bike share service or program." 
B.  "Business district" means an area that is a designated Special Improvement District or is zoned for retail use. 
C.  As used herein, "bicycle parking rack" means a stationary fixture to which a bicycle can be securely attached to prevent theft. It does not include a bicycle docking station. 
A "bicycle docking station" means a stationary fixture to which bicycles used as part of a bike share program are attached and made available for use and where these bicycles must be returned at the end of their use. 
D.  All persons operating bicycles shall have all of the rights and shall obey all applicable laws of the State of New Jersey and ordinances of this city, particularly those regulating traffic. Bicycle riders shall obey the same rules as the drivers of motor vehicles unless inapplicable. 
(1)  Any person operating a bicycle within a roadway shall obey the instructions of the official traffic control signs, and other control devices applicable to vehicles unless otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(2)  No person shall ride or operate a bicycle within a roadway in any direction except that permitted of vehicular traffic traveling on the same side of the roadway, or that permitted in a bike lane. 
(3)  Any person operating a bicycle within a roadway or bike lane shall stop for pedestrians in crosswalks. 
E.  Every person riding a bicycle within a roadway shall ride as near to the right roadside as practicable exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction. A bicyclist may move left under any of the following conditions: 
(1)  To make a left turn from a left turn lane or pocket; 
(2)  To avoid debris, drains, or other hazardous conditions on the right; 
(3)  To pass a slower moving vehicle; 
(4)  To occupy any available lane when traveling at the same speed as other traffic; 
(5)  To travel no more than two abreast when traffic is not impeded, but otherwise ride in single file. 
F.  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or ride a bicycle in any of the following places: 
(1)  On any public property where signs are posted by the Traffic Engineer prohibiting such use; 
(2)  On private property where a sign prohibiting bicycle riding has been posted by the owner, lessee or person in charge of such property; 
(3)  On sidewalks in business districts; 
(4)  On sidewalks outside of business district areas, except for minors age nine (9) and under. 
G.  Use of bicycle lanes. Whenever a bicycle lane has been established on a roadway, any person operating a bicycle upon the roadway at a speed less than the normal speed of traffic moving in the same direction shall ride within the bicycle lane, except that such person may move out of the lane under any of the following situations: 
(1)  Whenever overtaking or passing another bicycle, vehicle or pedestrian, within, the lane or about to enter the lane if such overtaking and passing cannot be done safely within the lane. 
(2)  When preparing for a turn at an intersection or into a private road or driveway. 
(3)  When reasonably necessary to leave the bicycle lane to avoid debris or other hazardous conditions. 
H.  No person operating a bicycle shall leave a bicycle lane until the movement can be made with reasonable safety and then only after giving an appropriate signal. 
I.  In addition to bicyclists, the following are permitted to use bicycle lanes: 
(1)  Individuals using roller blades, scooters, and skateboards; and 
(2)  Individuals using motorized wheelchairs with an orange safety flag at least five (5) feet above the street level; and 
(3)  Bicyclists with attached trailers for children with an orange safety flag attached to the rear of the portage vehicle at least five (5) feet above the street level. 
J.  Equipment. It shall be unlawful for the driver of the bicycle to wear more than one (1) earphone attached to an audio device while operating a bicycle. 
K.  Carry Articles. No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package device, or article which prevents the rider from keeping both hands upon the handles bars. 
L.  Clinging to moving motor vehicles is prohibited. 
M.  Lamps and equipment on bicycles. 
(1)  Bicycles in use when dark shall be equipped with a lamp on the front which shall omit a white light visible from a distance of at least five hundred (500) feet to the front and with a red reflector on the rear of a type which shall be visible from fifty (50) feet to three hundred (300) feet to the rear. A lamp omitting a red light visible from distance of five hundred (500) feet to the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector. 
(2)  Bicycles shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the operator to make the braked wheel skid on dry, level, clean pavement. 
(3)  Bicycles shall be equipped with a bell to serve as audible signal to vehicles, pedestrians, and other bicyclists. 
N.  No commercial bicycle shall be permitted to use any publicly-owned bicycle parking rack for a period of more than two (2) consecutive hours. Any owner of a commercial bicycle found to be in violation of this section shall be subject to a minimum fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) with a recommended fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).  
§ 242-9.2. - Repealed. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13-056 , adopted May 8, 2013, amended the Code by repealing former § 242-9.2 in its entirety. Former § 242-9.2 pertained to violations and penalties, and derived from Ord. No. 98-105, adopted September 9, 1998.  
§ 242-9.3. - Use restricted. 
[Amended 8-13-2003 by Ord. No. 03-102; 9-24-2003 by Ord. No. 03-131] 
A.  No person may ride or use a skateboard or scooter on the streets and sidewalks of all commercially zoned districts within the City. 
B.  No person less than seventeen (17) years of age may ride or use a motorized scooter, motorized skateboard, or motorized roller skates on any roadway, sidewalk or public property within the City of Jersey City. The motor need not be engaged in order for a person to be in violation thereof.  
§ 242-9.4. - Definitions. 
[Amended 8-13-2003 by Ord. No. 03-102] 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
A.  Roller Skates - means a pair of devices worn on the feet with sets of wheels attached, regardless of the number or placement of those wheels, and used to slide or propel the user over ground. 
B.  Skateboard - means a platform low to the ground and mounted on wheels, regardless of the number or placement of those wheels, and used to slide or propel the user over the ground. 
C.  Scooter - means a platform low to the ground and mounted on wheels, regardless of the number or placement of those wheels, with a steering column attached to the front axle, and used to slide or propel the user across the ground. The scooter may or may not have a seat.  
§ 242-9.5. - Violations and penalties. 
[Amended 8-13-2003 by Ord. No. 03-102; 5-8-2013 by Ord. No. 13-056 ] 
A.  Any person, except a minor, who violates this article shall be subject to a minimum fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) and a maximum fine as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25. 
B.  Any minor who violates any provision of § 242-9.1 and § 242-9.3 shall, upon a first offense, receive a written warning addressed to the minor's parents or guardian. The minor and the parent may also be advised that a second violation will make them liable for a fifty-dollar ($50.00) fine or community service as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25, and that a third or subsequent offense will make them liable to a minimum fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) and a maximum fine as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25. 
C.  In addition to subsection (A) of this section, any member of the Department of Public Safety who witnesses a violation of this subsection shall confiscate the motorized scooter, motorized skateboard, or motorized roller skates which shall remain in police custody until such time as a the matter is adjudicated in the Municipal Court and the violator pays any fine that is ordered. Should the defendant be found guilty of the alleged violation, the vehicle will be forfeited. 
D.  A police officer shall only issue a fine for a violation of any provision of § 242-9.1 and § 242-9.3 by a person less than fourteen (14) years of age to the parent or guardian of such person if the violation by such person occurs in the presence of such person's parent or guardian. Such fines shall only be issued to such parent or guardian.  
ARTICLE VII - Controlled Dangerous Substances 
[Adopted 2-25-1998 by Ord. No. 98-011] 
 
§ 242-10. - Prohibited acts; violations and penalties. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person, knowingly or purposely, to purchase or obtain, or attempt to purchase or obtain, a controlled dangerous substance or controlled substance analog, as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:35-2, unless the substance was obtained directly or pursuant to a valid prescription or order form from a practitioner, while acting in the course of his professional practice, or except as otherwise authorized by P.L. 1970, c. 226, N.J.S.A. 24:21-1 et seq. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly loiter about or at any place or area open to the public where a controlled dangerous substance or a controlled substance analog, as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:35-2, is being illegally sold, dispensed, furnished, given away or stored. 
C.  Subsection B shall not apply to persons inside licensed pharmacies or drug stores or to persons licensed by the State of New Jersey to sell or dispense controlled dangerous substances nor to any person lawfully possessing a controlled dangerous substance pursuant to a prescription written by a person authorized to write prescriptions under law. 
D.  The penalty for violating any provision of this article shall be a minimum fine of $100 and a maximum fine of $1,000 and/or imprisonment for a period of up to 90 days and/or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days.  
ARTICLE VIII. - Prohibiting Specified Actions Constituting a Breach of the Peace 
 
§ 242-11. - Disturbing the peace. 
[Added 5-22-2019 by Ord. No. 19-047 ] 
The following acts shall be unlawful: 
A.  No person shall engage in loud, boisterous, threatening, abusive, insulting, indecent language or behavior tending to breach the public peace and good order at a time or place where a reasonable person has a reasonable expectation to quiet enjoyment. 
B.  Appropriate factors for determining reasonableness with respect to quiet enjoyment include, but are not limited to, the following: 
1.  The proximity of the conduct to noise sensitive areas, which is any real property normally used for sleeping (either residentially or commercially) or normally used as a school, church, hospital or public library; 
2.  The time of day or night the conduct occurs; 
3.  Whether the conduct is recurrent, intermittent, or constant.  
Chapter 245 - PEDDLING, SOLICITING AND CANVASSING 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City: Art. I, 5-4-1971 as Ch. 8, Art. XII, of the 1971 Jersey City Code, as readopted 9-19-1978 by Ord. No. S-128; Art. II, 5-4-1971 as Ch. 8, Art. XVI, of the 1971 Jersey City Code, as readopted 9-19-1978 by Ord. No. S-128; Art. III, 5-4-1971 as Ch. 8, Art. V, of the 1971 Jersey City Code, as readopted 9-19-1978 by Ord. No. S-128; Art. IV, 9-20-1979 as Ord. No. S-266. Amendments noted where applicable.] 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Advertising materials — See Ch. 81. 	Noise — See Ch. 222. 
Auctioneers — See Ch. 93. 	Sale of spray paint — See Ch. 290. 
Fees and charges — See Ch. 160. 	Sale of tires — See Ch. 313. 
Food-handling establishments — See Ch. 175. 	Sale of tobacco products — See Ch. 316. 
Sale of ice — See Ch. 193. 	Vending machines — See Ch. 329. 
  
ARTICLE I - Licensing of Peddlers 
[Adopted 5-4-1971 as Ch. 8, Art. XII, of the 1971 Jersey City Code, as readopted 9-19-1978 by Ord. No. S-128] 
 
§ 245-1. - Definitions. [Amended 4-28-1988 by Ord. No. C-730; 2-14-1996 by Ord. No. 96-009] 
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
PEDDLER - Any person, traveling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle or any other type of conveyance from place to place, from house to house or from street to street, carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares or merchandise, offering and exposing the same for sale, or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers, or who, without traveling from place to place, shall sell or offer the same for sale from a wagon, automotive vehicle, railroad car or other vehicle or conveyance. Any person who solicits orders and, as a separate transaction, makes deliveries to purchasers as part of a scheme or design to evade the provisions of this Article shall be deemed a "peddler." "Peddler" shall include the words "hawker" and "huckster." Peddler shall also include any person who is issued a veteran peddlers' license pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:24-9 et seq., except that the actual issuance of a veteran's license and cancellation of a veteran's license for sale or use to anyone other than the veteran; or if the veteran is convicted of a crime or is guilty of violation of municipal ordinance shall be governed exclusively by N.J.S.A. 45:24-10 and 45:24-13.  
§ 245-2. - License required; fees. 
A.  Every peddler shall obtain a peddler's license from the license issuing authority prior to engaging in business as a peddler. The peddler's license fee shall be as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges, not prorated, accounting from April 1, or a daily charge as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges. 
[Amended 11-8-1989 by Ord. No. McC-68; 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050] 
B.  The requirement of a peddler's license shall be subject to the following exemptions: 
(1)  Persons residing in the city who have a state trader's license. 
(2)  The sale of farm, dairy or garden produce raised by the vendor in the state. 
(3)  Seafood caught by the vendor in the state. 
(4)  Articles of the vendor's own manufacture manufactured in the state.  
§ 245-3. - Identification tag; fee; exemption. 
A.  Each peddler shall procure a peddler's identification tag from the City Treasurer prior to engaging in business as a peddler, and such tag shall be conspicuously displayed on the peddler's vehicle, wagon, cart or person while engaged in such business. The application for a peddler's identification tag shall contain an appropriate certification by the applicant that he or she is a bona fide grower, producer or manufacturer of the products to be sold by him or her, and the application shall be signed by the peddler. 
B.  The fee for a peddler's identification tag shall be as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges. 
[Amended 11-8-1989 by Ord. No. McC-68; 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050] 
C.  The requirement of a peddler's identification tag shall be subject to the exemption of and shall not apply to any person who has complied with the licensing provisions of § 245-14.  
§ 245-4. - License and tag nontransferable. 
A peddler's license and a peddler's identification tag shall be nontransferable and shall not be used or worn at any time by any person other than the one to whom it was issued.  
§ 245-5. - Revocation of license. [Amended 4-23-1986 by Ord. No. C-159] 
A peddler's license shall be subject to revocation by the license issuing authority, after notice and hearing, for any one (1) of the following grounds: 
A.  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for a peddler's license. 
B.  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on his or her business as a peddler. 
C.  Violations of law as set forth in this Article. 
D.  Conducting the business of peddling in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the public health, safety or general welfare.  
§ 245-6. - Prohibited peddling locations; use of streets; exemption for handicapped persons. 
[Amended 5-18-2005 by Ord. No. 05-056; 2-8-2006 by Ord. No. 06-010] 
A.  No peddler may sell or offer to sell any goods, wares or merchandise within the areas designated as a special improvement district (SID), which areas are more particularly described by block and lot numbers and street addresses as set forth in Schedule A to Chapter 69 of this Code on file in the Office of the Jersey City Clerk. 
[Amended 3-8-2017 by Ord. No. 17-022 ] 
B.  No peddler who shall make use of the streets to vend goods, either from a wagon, vehicle or other conveyance, shall remain in one place longer than twenty (20) minutes or return thereto within a period of less than five hours; provided, however, that this time limitation shall not apply to physically handicapped persons who have been issued a specific vehicle identification card by the Division of Commerce. 
[Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
(1)  No peddler shall be deemed to have complied with the foregoing requirement unless such peddler shall have moved at least one hundred (100) feet from the point at which he or she last stopped. 
(2)  "Physical handicap" means a physical impairment which confines a person to a wheelchair; causes a person to walk with difficulty or insecurity; affects the sight or hearing to the extent that a person functioning in public areas is insecure or exposed to danger; causes faulty coordination; or reduces mobility, flexibility, coordination and perceptiveness. "Physical handicap" shall include coronary conditions. Any such physically handicapped person shall submit a certificate from a physician certifying that such handicap does exist. 
C.  No peddler's location upon the streets for the purpose of sale shall be at a distance of less than one hundred (100) feet from the entrance of the store or place of business of a permanent retailer who sells like merchandise, foodstuffs or produce as the peddler. 
D.  The Department of Public Safety shall enforce the twenty (20) minute regulation as set forth in this section. [ Amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ]  
§ 245-7. - Entry on private property. 
No peddler shall make entry upon private property for the purpose of offering for sale or selling any merchandise, foodstuffs or produce unless the property owner shall have given prior consent to such entry.  
§ 245-8. - Articles not to be sold. 
No peddler shall offer for sale or sell the following prohibited articles on any street or public way: medicines, patented remedies, nostrums, soaps, perfumes, extracts, toy balloons, toilet articles or other like merchandise.  
§ 245-8.1. - Exempt persons. 
[Added 3-8-2017 by Ord. No. 17-022 ] 
The following activities shall be exempt from this article: 
(1)  Delivery of goods, wares or merchandise in the regular course of business to the premises of persons ordering or entitled to receive same. 
(2)  Solicitations on behalf of members of any charitable organizations, religious purpose or on behalf of a political candidate or activity.  
ARTICLE II - Transient Businesses 
[Adopted 5-4-1971 as Ch. 8, Art. XVI, of the 1971 Jersey City Code, as readopted 9-19-1978 by Ord. No. S-128] 
 
§ 245-9. - Definitions. 
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
TRANSIENT BUSINESS - A sale by a person who was not permanently engaged in business in the city prior to the sale in which the person represents himself as a bankrupt, an assignee or about to quit business, or that the sale is one of damaged goods as a result of fire, water or other cause.  
§ 245-10. - License required; fee.[1] 
Every person, not already engaged in a permanent business in the city, who intends to begin a transient business shall first apply for and obtain a transient business license from the license issuing authority. The fee for a transient business license shall be as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. 
 
ARTICLE III - Canvassers and Solicitors [Adopted 5-4-1971 as Ch. 8, Art. V, of the 1971 Jersey City Code, as readopted 9-19-1978 by Ord. No. S-128] 
 
§ 245-11. - Definitions. 
[Amended 3-8-2017 by Ord. No. 17-022 ] 
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
CANVASSER or SOLICITOR - Hereinafter referred to only as a "canvasser," any individual, whether resident of the City of Jersey City or not, traveling either by foot, wagon, automobile, motortruck or any other type of conveyance from place to place, from house to house or from street to street, offering to purchase any real property or any interest in real property either on his own behalf or as an agent or broker on behalf of any third party, taking or attempting to take orders for sale of goods, wares and merchandise, personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery or for services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale, or whether he or she is collecting advance payments on such sales or not, provided that such definition shall include any person who, for himself, herself or for another person, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, tent, railroad, boxcar, boat, hotel room, lodging house, apartment, shop or any other place within the city for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for future delivery; and provided, further, that the foregoing definition shall not be deemed to include any person who, acting for a manufacturer or wholesaler, shall sell or take orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise to any other manufacturer or wholesaler or to a retailer for resale in the usual course of business; nor shall the provisions of this Article apply to sales made under authority and by order of law nor to sales made by the vendors of farm or dairy products.  
§ 245-12. - License required. 
No solicitor or canvasser, as defined herein, shall engage in such business within the city without first obtaining a canvasser license therefor in compliance with the provisions of this Article.  
§ 245-13. - Exempt persons. 
[Amended 3-8-2017 by Ord. No. 17-022 ] 
The following activities shall be exempt from this Article: 
(1)  Delivery of goods, wares or merchandise in the regular course of business to the premises of persons ordering or entitled to receive same. 
(2)  Solicitations on behalf of members of any charitable organizations, religious purpose or on behalf of a political candidate or activity.  
§ 245-14. - License application; fee. 
A.  An applicant for a canvasser license under this Article shall file with the City Treasurer a sworn application in writing, in duplicate, on a form to be furnished by the City Treasurer, which form shall give the following information: 
(1)  Name and description of the applicant. 
(2)  Permanent home address and full local address of the applicant. 
(3)  A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold. 
(4)  If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with credentials establishing the exact relationship. 
(5)  The length of time for which the right to do business is desired. 
(6)  The place where the goods or property proposed to be sold, or orders taken for the sale thereof, are manufactured or produced, where such goods or products are located at the time said application is filed and the proposed method of delivery. 
(7)  A photograph of the applicant, taken within sixty (60) days immediately prior to the date of the filing of the application, which picture shall be two by two (2 x 2) inches, showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner. 
(8)  The fingerprints of the applicant and the names of at least two (2) reliable property owners of the County of Hudson, State of New Jersey, who will certify as to the applicant's good character and business responsibility or, in lieu of the names of references, such other available evidence as to the good character and business responsibility of the applicant as will enable an investigator to properly evaluate such character and business responsibility. 
(9)  A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor. 
(10)   A list of the municipalities in which the applicant and his or her employer has conducted the business for the six (6) months prior to the date of the application. 
(11)   A statement setting forth whether any complaints have been made against the applicant or his or her employer by customers solicited in this city or elsewhere and the nature of said complaints. 
B.  At the time of filing the application, a fee as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges, shall be paid to the license issuing authority to cover the cost of investigation of facts stated therein. [2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. 
 
§ 245-15. - Investigation; disapproval of applicant. 
A.  Upon receipt of such application, the original shall be referred to the Chief of Police or, in the absence of the Chief, the officer in charge of police headquarters, who shall cause such investigation of the applicant's business and moral character to be made as is deemed necessary for the protection of the public good. 
B.  If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's character or business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory for any of the reasons set forth herein, the Chief of Police shall endorse on such application his or her disapproval and the reasons for the same, and return said application to the City Treasurer, who shall notify the applicant that the application is disapproved and that no permit and license will be issued. 
C.  If, as a result of such investigation, the character and business responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the Chief of Police shall endorse on the application his or her approval, execute a permit addressed to the applicant for the carrying on of the business applied for and return said permit, along with the application to the license issuing authority, who shall, upon payment of the prescribed investigation fee, deliver to the applicant the permit and issue a license. Such license shall contain the signature and seal of the issuing officer and shall show the name, address and photograph of said licensee and the kind of goods to be sold thereunder, the amount of fee paid, the date of issuance and the length of time the same shall be operative, as well as the license number and other identifying description of any vehicle used in such soliciting or canvassing. The license issuing authority shall keep a permanent record of all licenses issued. 
D.  It shall be sufficient for the Police Chief to disapprove an application for the license for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  If the applicant or his or her employer has been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor, criminal offense or the violation of any municipal ordinance. 
(2)  If there is any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application. 
(3)  If the applicant or his or her employer or the employer's representatives have committed any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement in conducting said business in this city or elsewhere. 
(4)  If the applicant or his or her employer or the employer's representatives have conducted said business in an unlawful manner in this city or elsewhere.  
§ 245-16. - Denial of license; appeals; hearing. [ ] 
Any person aggrieved by the action of the Chief of Police or, in the absence of the Chief, the officer in charge of police headquarters, or the license issuing authority, upon the denial of the license as provided in this Article shall have the right of appeal to the Director of Public Safety. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with said Director, within fourteen (14) days after notice of the action complained of has been mailed to such person's last known address, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The Director shall set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal, and notice of such hearing shall be given to the appellant in the same manner as provided in this Article for notice of hearing on revocation. The decision and order of the Director on such appeal shall be final and conclusive.  
§ 245-17. - Revocation of license; notice; hearing. 
A.  Licenses issued under the provisions of this Article may be revoked by the Director of Public Safety after notice and hearing, for any of the following causes: [ Amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] 
(1)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for license. 
(2)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on business as solicitor or as canvasser. 
(3)  Any violation of this Article. 
(4)  Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude. 
(5)  Conducting the business of soliciting or canvassing in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public. 
B.  Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the time and place of hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the licensee at his or her last known address at least five (5) days prior to the date set for hearing.  
§ 245-18. - Expiration of license. 
All annual licenses issued under the provisions of this Article shall expire on December 31 in the year issued. Other licenses shall expire on the date specified in the license.  
§ 245-19. - Permitted hours; photograph. 
No person shall canvass within the city except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. A copy of the licensee's photograph shall be carried on the license, which photograph shall be furnished by the applicant. The licensee shall exhibit his or her license to any police officer or other person upon request. The licensee shall be courteous to all persons in canvassing and shall not importune nor annoy any of the inhabitants of the city and shall conduct himself or herself in a lawful manner. On expiration of the license, the licensee shall surrender the same to the officer in charge of police headquarters.  
§ 245-20. - Production of license. 
All police officers shall require any person seen soliciting or canvassing and who is not known by such officer to be duly licensed to produce his or her canvasser's license at the request of the officer.  
§ 245-20.1. - Establishment of a no-knock registry. 
[Added 3-8-2017 by Ord. No. 17-022 ] 
A.  For the purpose of protecting residents from criminal activities and safeguarding their privacy, there is hereby established a no-knock registry of properties where canvassing and soliciting are prohibited. The no-knock registry shall be maintained by the City Clerk. 
B.  The City Clerk shall prepare a list of addresses of those premises whose owners or occupants have notified the Clerk that canvassing or soliciting are not permitted on their premises. Notification shall be by the completion of a form, available online and at the City Clerk's office during normal business hours. The premises shall remain on the Registry unless the owners or occupants notify the City Clerk in writing that they wish the property to be removed from the registry. The City Clerk shall update the list monthly. The inclusion of a premises on the registry shall be deemed a revocation of any privilege or license to enter or attempt to enter the property. 
C.  Owners or occupants who have requested to be listed on the no-knock registry pursuant to Subsection A herein, may procure from the Clerk's office a notice for display on the premises indicating the enlistment on the no-knock registry. The notice shall indicate which solicitors may contact residents and shall read substantially as follows: 
"These premises are listed on the City of Jersey City's 'No-Knock Registry' (Jersey City Code Sec. 245-20.1). You may not enter or attempt to enter these premises for the purpose of canvassing or soliciting, which includes offering to purchase real estate on behalf of any person or organization. Charitable, political, religious organizations are exempt from this law. Violation of Jersey City Code Sec. 245-20.1 may result in a fine of up to $2,000 and/or up to 90 days of community service." 
D.  The first notice shall be provided free of charge and may be picked up in person during regular business hours. If a replacement notice is required, the individual may pick up the replacement notice at the Clerk's office for a fee of $5.00, which shall be payable to the City Clerk. A fee of an additional $1.00 per notice will be applied for any individual who desires to have a notice mailed to him or her, payable to the City Clerk. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:18-3, "any owner or occupant who has listed his or her premises on this registry shall be deemed to have revoked any express or implied legal privilege or license to enter or attempt to enter the premises." 
E.  The City Clerk shall distribute the current City no-knock registry to a licensed canvasser or solicitor at the time of issuance of a license. 
F.  Although the most current list of registrants on the City no-knock registry shall be provided by the City Clerk, it is the responsibility of the canvasser or solicitor to have the most up-to-date list prior to engaging in any canvassing or soliciting. 
G.  Any person convicted of violating this section upon competent evidence by an owner, occupant or other person with personal knowledge of such violation shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  First offense: a minimum fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) with a maximum of up to one thousand two hundred fifty dollars ($1,250.00); 
(2)  Subsequent offense: a minimum fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) with a maximum of up to two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each offense, together with community service for a period of up to 90 days; and 
(3)  Any offense: in addition to the above, a permanent revocation of any license issued under the within chapter. 
H.  The City shall post a no-knock registry application on the City webpage and distribute to other media outlets as designated by the City. The City shall provide copies of the application to the public and undertake reasonable efforts in education and distribution, in order to further public awareness of the no-knock registry. 
I.  This section does not preclude an owner or occupant from filing any other appropriate complaint with the prosecutor, including a complaint for trespass.  
§ 245-21. - Violations. 
The Chief of Police shall report to the license issuing authority all convictions for violation of this Article, and the license issuing authority shall maintain a record for each license issued showing all violations of this Article by the licensee.  
ARTICLE IV - Fund-Raising 
[Adopted 9-20-1979 as Ord. No. S-266] 
 
§ 245-22. - Definitions. 
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
CITY - The city administration or any department, division, bureau or administrative unit thereof, including any agency of the city or any administrative unit of such agency. 
IN THE NAME OF THE CITY - Any reference, directly or indirectly, to the city administration or any of its departments, divisions, bureaus or administrative units thereof, including any agency of the city or any administrative unit of such agency which will give anyone the impression, directly or indirectly, by implication or inference that the city, as defined in the definition of "city" above, is involved in any way or is sponsoring or has given consent to such activity. 
PERSON - "Person" as defined in Chapter 1, General Provisions, of this Code.  
§ 245-23. - Use of city name in fund-raising activities. 
A.  No person, as defined in this Code, shall use the name of the city, as defined in § 245-22, in any fund-raising activities until such person shall obtain the consent of the City Council to conduct such fund-raising activity. Said consent shall be in the form of an appropriate resolution adopted by the City Council. 
B.  Any person seeking consent of the Council to conduct any fund-raising activity shall submit to the City Clerk an application therefor, which application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the person or organization which will conduct or be responsible for the fund-raising activity. 
(2)  Names and addresses of all persons who shall be involved in the fund-raising activities. 
(3)  A detailed statement of the purpose of the fund-raising program, setting forth for whose benefit the program is to be conducted. 
(4)  The names and addresses of the persons who shall be responsible for the collection and accounting of said funds. 
(5)  Names and addresses of the persons who shall be responsible for any expenditures made of said funds. 
(6)  The name and address of the bank in which the funds will be deposited, setting forth the number of the account and the names and addresses of the authorized signatures pertaining to said account. 
(7)  Whether or not there is any intention to utilize public buildings or property and the location of same. 
(8)  Whether or not the city or any agency will furnish any personal property, specifying what kind of personal property and the quantity thereof. 
(9)  Whether or not the city or any agency will be requested to provide any funds and, if so, the amount of such funds. 
(10)   Whether or not the city will be requested to furnish the services of any of its employees during their duty hours and, if so, the names of the employees and the purpose for which the services of these employees will be utilized. 
(11)   A statement notarized under oath setting forth the following: 
(a)  That the applicant will deposit all funds raised in a separate and distinct bank account and will not co-mingle said funds with any other funds. 
(b)  That the applicant will furnish to the Council an accounting of all funds received and expended. 
(c)  That the applicant hereby authorizes the Council, at its option, to make an audit of the account. 
(d)  That the applicant will have all persons handling the money for the fund-raising activity bonded so as to insure the funds against any loss. 
(12)   The applicant agrees to furnish all necessary liability insurance in appropriate amounts naming the city, its officers and employees as additional insureds, so as to hold the city and its officers and employees harmless for any claims for personal injuries or damages which may occur as a result of the fund-raising activities. 
(13)   The applicant agrees to abide by all appropriate federal, state and local laws pertaining to such activity.  
§ 245-24. - Violations and penalties. 
A.  Any person violating any provisions of this Article shall, upon conviction, be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25. [3] 
B.  In addition to the above penalties, if the applicant fails to comply with the conditions set forth herein, the Council may rescind its consent to conduct such fund-raising program in the name of the city. 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. 
 
Chapter 248 - POOL ROOMS 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City 5-4-1971 as Ch. 5, Art. VI, of the 1971 Jersey City Code, as readopted 9-19-1978 by Ord. No. S-128. Amendments noted where applicable.] 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Amusement devices — See Ch. 87. 	Zoning — See Ch. 345. 
Fees and charges — See Ch. 160. 	
 
 
§ 248-1. - Definitions. [Amended 3-11-2009 by Ord. No. 09-024] 
As used herein, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
DIRECTOR — The Director of Commerce in the Department of Housing, Economic Development and Commerce. [Added 1-9-2008 by Ord. No. 07-192] 
POOL — Synonymous with the word "billiard." It includes any of the various games played on a pool table having six (6) pockets with usually fifteen (15) object balls and it also includes a game in which one scores by causing a cue ball to hit in succession two (2) object balls. 
POOL ROOM — Synonymous with the words "pool hall." A "pool room" also means any place wherein a pool or billiard table or tables are available for hire to the public for the purpose of playing pool. 
POOL ROOM LICENSEE — Any person to whom a license has been issued for the operation of a pool room. 
POOL TABLE — Any table surrounded by a ledge or cushion with or without pockets in which billiard balls are propelled by a stick or cue.  
§ 248-2. - License required. [Amended 1-9-2008 by Ord. No. 07-192; 3-11-2009 by Ord. No. 09-024] 
No person shall operate any pool room for the use of the general public for private profit without obtaining a license from the Director of the Division of Commerce.  
§ 248-3. - License application. [Amended 1-9-2008 by Ord. No. 07-192; 3-11-2009 by Ord. No. 09-024] 
A.  An applicant for a license to operate a pool room shall be of good moral character and shall file an application with the Director giving the name of the owner if a sole proprietorship, the partners if a partnership or the officials, directors and stockholders if a corporation, with the residence address of each person so named and the business in which he is engaged. 
B.  The Director shall refer the application to the Director of Public Safety, who shall conduct an investigation to determine whether the applicant, in his judgment, qualifies for the desired license, and the Director of Public Safety shall notify the Director of the result of the investigation with his recommendation, and the Director shall or shall not, after due consideration thereof, issue the desired license. [ Amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ]  
§ 248-4. - License fee; expiration. [Amended 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050; 12-23-1997 by Ord. No. 97-088; 2-11-1998 by Ord. No. 98-004; 1-9-2008 by Ord. No. 07-192; 3-11-2009 by Ord. No. 09-024] 
The annual pool room license fee in the amount as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges, shall be filed with the application for the desired license; provided, however, that if the license is not granted, the fee shall be returned to the applicant. All licenses shall expire on December 31 of each year. The initial license fee following the change in expiration date will be subject to proration by the Division of Commerce.  
§ 248-5. - Exceptions. [Amended 3-11-2009 by Ord. No. 09-024] 
The license provisions and other requirements hereof shall not apply to the operation of pool tables kept on the premises of religious, charitable and educational organizations not operated for private profit, nor to those kept in private residences or on the premises of bona fide clubs or social organizations not operated for private profit.  
§ 248-6. - Licenses to be posted. [Amended 3-11-2009 by Ord. No. 09-024] 
The pool room license shall be posted in a conspicuous place inside the entrance of the pool room.  
§ 248-7. - Transfer of license.[Amended 3-11-2009 by Ord. No. 09-024] 
A.  A license may be transferred to a different lawful location upon application approved by the Director and payment of a transfer fee as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges. [Amended 6-14-1995 by Ord. No, 95-050; 1-9-2008 by Ord. No. 07-192] 
B.  A license shall not be transferred to a different licensee.  
§ 248-8. - Compliance with zoning regulations.[Amended 3-11-2009 by Ord. No. 09-024] 
No pool room license shall be issued for any pool room where the proposed operation or location thereof would be in violation of the zoning provisions of this Code. 
* Editor's Note: See Ch. 345, Zoning.  
§ 248-9. - Hours of operation. [Amended 1-9-2008 by Ord. No. 07-192; 3-11-2009 by Ord. No. 09-024] 
No licensed pool hall shall operate said business except during the following hours: Sunday through Thursday from 12:00 noon to 2:00 a.m. the following day; Friday and Saturday from 12:00 noon to 3:00 a.m. the following day; and on New Year's Eve, from the opening hours herein specified until 4:00 a.m. the following day.  
§ 248-10. - View into pool halls to be unobstructed. [Amended 3-11-2009 by Ord. No. 09-024] 
Every pool hall shall have unobstructed windows or open space on at least one (1) side so that the area is open to view by the general public passing by on a public street or using a corridor, lobby or other rooms to which the public resorts and is admitted without charge. The licensee shall not permit any obstruction of such public view by the use of drawn shades, blinds, partitions or other structures or obstructions.  
§ 248-11. - Presence of minors. [Amended 3-11-2009 by Ord. No. 09-024] 
No persons under the age of seventeen (17) shall frequent, loiter, go or remain in any pool hall licensed hereunder at any time unless accompanied thereto by an adult. This prohibition shall apply to persons under eighteen (18) with reference to pool halls wherein intoxicating liquors are dispensed.  
§ 248-12. - Wagering on games. [Amended 3-11-2009 by Ord. No. 09-024] 
No person shall wager or bet upon the outcome of any game, contest or exhibition played in a licensed pool hall.  
§ 248-13. - Suspension or revocation; Director of Public Safety or the Director of the Division of Commerce authorized. [Added 1-9-2008 by Ord. No. 07-192; 3-11-2009 by Ord. No. 09-024; ] 
A.  Pursuant to a ten-day notice in writing to the licensee and after a hearing, the Director may suspend or revoke any license if 
(1)  the owner, partner, or agent has been convicted of a crime under federal or state law; or 
(2)  has violated any of the provision of this Chapter; or 
(3)  has been found responsible for any acts constituting a breach of the peace or a public nuisance; or 
(4)  where the Director finds the operation of the licensed premises detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the people of the city. 
B.  The Director of Commerce or the Director of Public Safety may suspend any license on an emergent basis for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days after a hearing pursuant to two-days' notice to the licensee for any of the grounds listed in subsection A if the Director finds in addition that protection of the public health, safety or welfare requires an immediate suspension.  
Chapter 251 - PORNOGRAPHY AND OBSCENITY[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18-123 , adopted November 7, 2018, amended the Code by repealing former Ch. 251, §§ 251-1—251-8, and adding a new Ch. 251. Former Ch. 251 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from derived from Ord. No. MC-187, adopted May 27, 1982; Ord. No. McC-131, adopted April 25, 1990; Ord. No. McC-197, adopted September 26, 1990; Ord. No. 95-050, adopted June 14, 1995; and Ord. No. 97-052, adopted August 13, 1997. 
Cross reference— Fees and charges, Ch. 160; peace and good order, Ch. 242; urination in public, Ch. 242, Art. III. 
 
§ 251-1. - Definitions. 
[Added 11-7-2018 by Ord. No. 18-123 ] 
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
DISPLAY — To promote, issue, sell, give, provide, lend, deliver, transfer, transmit, publish, distribute, circulate, disseminate, present, exhibit or advertise, or to offer or agree to do the same. 
FILM — Any motion picture, film, preview or trailer to a motion picture or film, not including any motion picture or film which portrays actual events or pictorial news. 
LICENSED ESTABLISHMENT — Any business licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for purchase or consumption. 
MATERIAL — Anything tangible that is capable of being used, displayed or adapted for use. 
OBSCENE — In accordance with the standards set forth in Miller v. California, 413 U.S. 15 (1973), any material, film or any performance which violates the accepted community standard for decency. The public display of material, film or a performance shall be deemed obscene if an average resident of Jersey City, after having evaluated the display or performance as a whole, and after having applied contemporary community standards to the display or performance, would conclude that the display or performance (1) lacks any serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value and (2) appeals only to the prurient interest in sex. 
Examples of obscenity include, but are not limited to, the public display of any material, any film or live performance which depicts: 
(1)  Reproductions or descriptions of intimate sexual acts, actual or simulated, including sexual intercourse and bestiality; 
(2)  Representations or descriptions of masturbation, excretory functions, lewd exhibition of the genitals, the male or female genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal or covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
PERFORMANCE — A play, dance or other exhibition performed before an audience. 
STATE OF NUDITY — The complete exposure of the anus or genitals or pubic area or of the female breast below the point immediately above the top of the areola down to the bottom of the areola.  
§ 251-2. - Display of obscene materials for sale, restrictions; fee. 
[Added 11-7-2018 by Ord. No. 18-123 ] 
A.  No person who operates a store, newsstand, booth, concession, movie and video sale or rental or similar business with unimpeded access for persons under 18 years of age or who is in business of making sales or rentals of movies, pictures, drawings, photographs or other visual depictions shall display or permit to be displayed at his or her business premises any obscene material at a height of less than five feet and without a blinder or other covering placed or printed on the material displayed. The public display of the obscene material shall constitute presumptive evidence that the retailer knowingly made or permitted this display. 
B.  Every person who displays obscene materials as defined herein shall register with the Division of Commerce, identify the location of each site where such materials are displayed and thereafter notify the Division of Commerce of any change of location or change of address of the material displayed. There shall be a one-time registration fee as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges, to offset the cost of registration and enforcement.  
§ 251-3. - Unlawful acts. 
[Added 11-7-2018 by Ord. No. 18-123 ] 
A person commits an offense under this Chapter if that person: 
(1)  Displays any obscene material, or displays any obscene material for sale in a manner inconsistent with the provisions set forth in § 251-2; 
(2)  Publicly presents an obscene film or performance or participates in a part participates in a part of a performance that is obscene or that contributes to its obscenity; 
(3)  Appears or travels on any street; avenue, highway, road or waterway located in the City or to appears in any public place, store or business in a state of nudity.  
§ 251-4. - Exceptions. 
[Added 11-7-2018 by Ord. No. 18-123 ] 
A female is not considered to be in a state of nudity if she exposes her breast while in the process of breastfeeding.  
§ 251-5. - Licensed establishments maybe subject to more stringent restrictions. 
[Added 11-7-2018 by Ord. No. 18-123 ] 
Licensed establishments are subject to the standards set forth in N.J.S.A. 33 et seq. governing the sale of intoxicating liquors and N.J.A.C. 13:2 et seq. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as supplementing or superseding any of the regulations contained therein with respect to obscene or lewd behavior in or about a licensed establishment.  
§ 251-6. - Violations and penalties. 
[Added 11-7-2018 by Ord. No. 18-123 ] 
The penalty for a violation of this article shall be as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25.  
Chapter 254 - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
History— Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City May 4, 1971 as Ch. 13 of the 1971 Jersey City Code, as readopted September 19, 1978 by Ord. No. S-128. Amendments noted where applicable. 
Cross reference— Handbills and littering, Ch. 81; numbering of buildings, Ch. 108; certificates of occupancy, Ch. 119; uniform construction codes, Ch. 131; fees and charges, Ch. 160; housing accommodations, Ch. 188; multiple dwellings, Ch. 218; noise, Ch. 222; paint stripping, Ch. 233; graffiti, Ch. 242, Art. II; disclosure of presence of lead-based paint, Ch. 257; retail and commercial premises, Ch. 263; security gates, Ch. 278; solid waste collection and removal; recycling, Ch. 287; snow and ice removal; use of streets and sidewalks, Ch. 296; trees, Ch. 321. 
 
ARTICLE I - General Provisions 
 
§ 254-1. - Title. 
This chapter may be cited as the "Property Maintenance Code" and may be referred to herein as "this chapter."  
§ 254-2. - Findings. 
A.  It is hereby found and declared that there are located within the city buildings used for residential and nonresidential purposes which have become or are becoming substandard with respect to structure, equipment, maintenance, occupancy, sanitation or use; and it is further declared that such conditions, which include but are not limited to lack of maintenance of exterior or interior of premises, faulty design, construction or installations, lack of proper sanitary facilities, fire or accident hazards, unsanitary conditions, infestation or overcrowding, have made these buildings either unfit for human habitation, occupancy or use or so deteriorated, dilapidated, dangerous, unsanitary, neglected or over-occupied as to jeopardize or be detrimental to the health, morals, safety or welfare of the people of the city. It also is recognized that to make housing more livable we must have homemaking and other social services as well as enforcement of the Property Maintenance Code's physical standards. 
B.  It is further found and declared that, among other reasons, because of lack of maintenance and progressive deterioration, certain properties have become blighted and have had the further effect of causing blighting conditions within the city that have necessitated an excessive and disproportionate expenditure of public funds for health, fire protection, public safety, welfare and other public services. However, it is further found and declared that through appropriate regulations and restrictions, as herein contained, the growth of blight and blighting conditions can be curbed or prevented and neighborhood and property values thereby maintained, the appearance and amenities of properties and neighborhoods can be enhanced and the public health, safety and welfare protected and fostered. [2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Original Subsection (c), which followed this subsection and dealt with boardinghouses and lodging houses, was deleted 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050. 
 
§ 254-3. - Purpose; other standards. 
A.  The purpose of this Property Maintenance Code is to protect the public health, safety, morals and welfare and to eliminate and to prevent the spread of property and neighborhood deterioration and blight by establishing minimum standards governing the maintenance, appearance, condition and occupancy of residential and nonresidential premises; to establish minimum standards governing utilities and facilities of dwellings and other physical components and conditions in dwellings and nonresidential buildings essential to make the same fit for human habitation, occupancy or use; to fix certain responsibilities and duties upon owners and managers and distinct and separate responsibilities and duties upon occupants; to require the licensing and regulation of all boardinghouses and lodging houses; to authorize and establish procedures for the inspection of residential and nonresidential premises and for the general administration and enforcement of this chapter; to provide for the vacation and repair or demolition of premises unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use; to provide for the right of access across adjoining premises to permit repairs; and to fix penalties for violations of this chapter. This Property Maintenance Code is hereby declared to be remedial and essential for the public interest and it is intended that it be liberally construed to effectuate the purposes as stated herein. 
B.  The New Jersey State Housing Code, as amended from time to time, N.J.A.C. 5:28-1 et seq., is hereby adopted by reference as a supplement to the Jersey City Property Maintenance Code subject to the condition that the Jersey City Property Maintenance Code shall apply whenever it contains a standard more stringent than that contained in the New Jersey Housing Code. 
[Added 4-28-1993 by Ord. No. 93-038]  
§ 254-4. - Definitions. 
As used herein, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
ACCESSORY BUILDING - A structure, the use of which is incidental to that of the main building and which is attached to the main building or located on the same premises. 
ALTERATION - A change or rearrangement in the structural parts or exit facilities of a structure; or an enlargement thereof, whether done by extending on a side or by increasing the height; or the moving thereof from one location or position to another; or a change in use or occupancy thereof from one use group to another of different legal requirements. 
AREA INSPECTION - Systematic property-to-property, block-to-block inspection of 10 or more premises within an area designated by the city through its Division of Construction Code Official and its Division of Planning for concentrated area code enforcement in order to implement neighborhood maintenance, rehabilitation or urban renewal programs of the city. 
[Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
BASEMENT - That portion of a building which is partly below and partly above grade, but has more than ½ of its height, measured vertically from clear floor to ceiling, above the average level of the adjacent finished grade. 
BATHROOM - An enclosed space containing at least one lavatory, one toilet and one bathtub or one shower. 
BUILDING - Any structure designed or used for the housing, shelter, enclosure and/or support of individuals, animals or property of any kind and any appurtenances or outhouses belonging thereto or used therewith or for mixed use as defined herein. 
BUILDING CODE - The Building Code of the City of Jersey City. 
Cross reference— See Ch. 131, Construction Codes, Uniform. 
CELLAR - That portion of a building which is partly or wholly below grade and has one-half (½) or more of its height, measured vertically from clear floor to ceiling, below the average level of the adjacent finished grade. 
CENTRAL HEATING SYSTEM - The main heat appliance and accessory components serving all residential and nonresidential units in a building wherein the main appliance is located in a fire-resistant enclosed space or spaces rated adequate under the provisions of the Building Code in Chapter 131 and separate and apart from the area to be heated, is affixed permanently on a fireproof base and is connected to a listed venting system as required by the Building Code. 
CHIEF - The executive official in charge of the Division of Construction Code Official or his or her authorized representative. 
[Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
CODE - The Code of the City of Jersey City (1995) or the Jersey City Code (1995). 
[Amended 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050] 
COMMUNITY KITCHEN - A room or part of a room in which food and drink are cooked or prepared, whose use is shared by occupants of one or more rooming units, two or more dwelling units or any combined number of rooming units and dwelling units. A "community kitchen" may be used in conjunction with one or more furnished apartments, provided that the cooking unit shall not consist of more than four burners and one oven in each such installation. 
DETERIORATING - A condition which necessitates more repair than would be provided in the course of regular maintenance because of the existence of one or more intermediate defects which will lead to more serious damage or danger if not corrected. 
DILAPIDATED - An unsafe or inadequate condition because of one or more critical defects or a combination of intermediate defects in sufficient number to require extensive repair or rebuilding or because of inadequate original construction. 
DIRECTOR - The chief administrative officer of the Division of Construction Code Official. 
[Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
DISABLED PERSON - Any person who by reason of a physical or mental condition is not sufficiently ambulatory or otherwise is unable to reach or use the two means of egress most accessible to his or her living quarters without assistance and with reasonable facility or who is unable to attend to daily personal and bodily needs. 
DORMITORY - A building or portion thereof maintained and operated by a college, monastery, trucking company, railroad company or other person wherein there is one room which contains more than one bed, or there is a series of independent sleeping rooms which are rented or which are intended for rent, or for which a fee is charged, or the beds or rooms are used by and for employees. A railroad bunk room is included in this definition. 
DWELLING - Any occupied or vacant house, building or portion thereof designed or intended for use as a permanent or transient residence for humans. 
DWELLING UNIT - Any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling arranged for the use of one or more individuals as a single housekeeping unit, and includes cooking, living, sanitary and sleeping facilities. 
EMANCIPATED MINOR - Any person under the age of 18 who is gainfully employed and self-supporting or who is married to a spouse who is gainfully employed and who supports said minor or who is a student living away from home and in regular attendance at an institution of higher learning. 
[Amended 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050] 
ESTABLISHMENT SUBJECT TO LICENSING - Any boardinghouse or lodging house, including nursing homes, hotels, motels, tourist homes, furnished apartments, dormitories, fraternity and sorority houses, which is required to be licensed to operate as such pursuant to § 254-82 under the provisions of this chapter. 
EXPOSED TO PUBLIC VIEW - Any premises or building or any part of either which may be lawfully viewed by the public from a sidewalk, street or alleyway or from any adjoining or neighboring premises. 
EXTERMINATION - The control and elimination of insects, rodents or other pests by removing their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible food, dirt, waste or other materials that may serve as their food; by trapping or fumigating or by poisoning or spraying with effective insecticides, pesticides or rodenticides; or by other approved legal means of pest elimination. 
FAMILY - The head of the family, the spouse, if any, and the parents and children (including foster or adopted children, if any) of either the head of the family or spouse or of both of them. 
FIELD REPRESENTATIVE - The authorized representative of the Chief of the Division of Construction Code Official, Department of Housing, Economic Development and Commerce, who is assigned to inspect residential and nonresidential buildings and premises. 
[Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
FIRE HAZARD: 
[Amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] 
A.  Any device or condition likely to cause fire and which is so situated as to endanger either persons or property. 
B.  Any use of combustible or explosive material or any accumulation or storage thereof that is sufficient in amount or so located as to put either persons or property in jeopardy if ignited. 
C.  Any obstruction to or of fire escapes, ladders usable as means of egress, stairways, aisles, passageways, halls, windows or doors likely, in the event of a fire, to interfere with the egress of occupants or the operations of the Department of Public Safety. 
D.  The violation of any rule now or hereafter promulgated by the Department of Public Safety. 
FLOOR AREA, NET - The total floor area within the enclosing walls of a room minus the space occupied by built-in cabinets, closets or wardrobes, kitchen units or fixtures which are not readily movable and minus any floor space where the floor-to-ceiling height is less than seven feet. 
FURNISHED APARTMENT - More than one room furnished, with or without a cook stove, and rented to transients or permanent guests. 
GARBAGE - The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
GUEST ROOM - A room which is occupied, or is intended, arranged or designed to be occupied, for sleeping purposes by one or more guests. This definition includes rooms hired out, furnished or unfurnished, and also includes any room arranged for or used for sleeping purposes by an employee as a condition of employment or for an accommodation on a contractual basis. This definition does not include sleeping rooms used by the owner or his or her immediate family. 
HABITABLE ROOM - A room or enclosed floor space in a basement, first or upper story used or designed for use for living, eating or sleeping purposes; but does not include bathrooms, toilet rooms, laundries, closets, pantries, foyers, corridors, cellars, heater rooms, boiler rooms, utility rooms or any room whose net floor area is less than 50 square feet. 
HOTEL - As defined in the Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Law ( N.J.S.A. 55:13A). 
[Amended 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050] 
HOUSE - As used in all articles of this chapter, a private dwelling, apartment house or other places of human habitation, and, as used in Article XIX, it also means office building, store or any building whatsoever or any lot used for business purposes. 
HOUSING INSPECTOR — See definition of "field representative." 
IMMEDIATE FAMILY - A family unit which consists of the family head, spouse, child or children and father and mother of either or both spouses. These terms are synonymous with the terms "single family," "family" and "family unit." 
INCIDENTAL COOKING - The use of cooking facilities which contain no more than two approved plates or two vented gas burners not exceeding six inches in diameter. 
INFESTATION — The presence of insects, rodents, vermin or other pests within or around any building. 
INSECTS — Means, but is not limited to bedbugs, houseflies, lice, bees, cockroaches, moths, silverfish, beetles, ants, termites, hornets, mosquitoes and wasps, and such members of the phylum arthropoda as spiders, mites, ticks, centipedes and wood lice. 
[Added 9-24-2008 by Ord. No. 08-140] 
KITCHEN — Any room or part of a room used for the preparation or cooking of food.* 
* Editor's Note: The definition of "lodging house," which immediately followed this definition, was deleted 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050. 
MANAGER — Any person who has charge, care or control of any building or premises or a part thereof in which any part is rented or for rent with or without the knowledge and consent of the owner. 
MIXED USE — Any building containing one or more dwelling units or rooming units and also having a portion thereof used for nonresidential purposes. 
MOTEL — As defined in the Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Law ( N.J.S.A. 55:13A-3). 
[Amended 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050] 
MULTIPLE DWELLING — Any dwelling containing more than two dwelling units. 
NONRESIDENTIAL — Any property and premises or portions thereof, as, for example, business, industrial or storage buildings, which are used for purposes other than dwellings for the habitation of humans. 
NUISANCE: 
A.  Any public nuisance shown as public law or in equity jurisprudence or as provided by the statutes of the State of New Jersey or the ordinances of the City of Jersey City, including this chapter. 
B.  Any attractive nuisance which may prove detrimental to the health or safety of children located in a building, on the premises of a building or upon an unoccupied lot, including but not limited to: abandoned wells, shafts, basements, excavations, abandoned iceboxes, refrigerators, motor vehicles, any structurally unsound fences or structures, lumber, trash, debris or vegetation, such as poison ivy, oak or sumac, which may prove a hazard for inquisitive minors or others. 
C.  Physical conditions dangerous to human life or detrimental to the health of persons who are on or near the premises where the conditions exist. 
D.  Overcrowding of a room or dwelling unit with occupants in violation of this chapter. 
E.  Insufficient ventilation or illumination in violation of this chapter. 
F.  Inadequate or insanitary sewage or plumbing facilities in violation of this chapter. 
G.  Insanitary conditions or anything offensive to the senses or dangerous to health in violation of this chapter. 
H.  Whatever renders air, food or drink unwholesome or detrimental to the health of human beings. 
I.  Fire hazards. 
OCCUPANT — Any person over one year of age living, sleeping, cooking or eating in or having actual possession of a dwelling unit or rooming unit, or any person who works on the premises for any business located thereon. 
OCCUPIABLE ROOM — A room or enclosed space designed for human occupancy in which large numbers of individuals congregate for amusement, educational, religious or similar purposes or in which occupants are engaged at labor; and which is equipped with exit, light and ventilation facilities specified in the applicable requirements of this chapter. 
ONE-FAMILY DWELLING — Any dwelling containing only one dwelling unit or one dwelling unit and two rooming units with sufficient space and sleeping accommodations for only one person in each rooming unit and with or without incidental cooking facilities. 
OWNER — Any person alone or jointly or severally with others: 
A.  Who has legal or equitable title to any premises, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof; 
B.  Who has equitable title and is either in actual possession or collects rents therefrom; 
C.  Who, as executor, executrix, trustee, guardian or receiver of an estate or as mortgagee or as vendee in possession, either by virtue of a court order or by agreement or voluntary surrender of the premises by the person holding the legal title, or as collector of rents, shall have charge, care or control of any dwelling, boardinghouse or lodging house; or any such person thus representing the person holding the equitable or legal title, all of whom under this chapter shall be bound to comply with the provisions hereof and any rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto to the same extent as if they were the persons holding the legal or equitable title; or 
D.  Who is a lessee or assignee subletting or assigning any part or all of any dwelling, all of whom under this chapter shall have joint responsibility over the portion of the premises sublet or assigned. 
PARTIES IN INTEREST — All individuals, associations and corporations who have interests of record in a building or lands and any who are in actual possession thereof. 
PERSON REQUIRING SPECIAL CARE — Any person who does not suffer from such physical or mental incapacity as to be classified as a disabled person, but by reason of physical or mental limitations or advanced years does require a limited degree of care and attention to assure personal safety at all times. 
PLUMBING — Includes all of the following supplied facilities and equipment: bathtubs, catch basins, drains, garbage disposal units, gas pipes, installed clothes-washing machines, installed dishwashers, installed gas clothes dryers, lavatories, showers, toilets, vents, waste pipes, water pipes and any other supplied plumbing fixtures, together with all connections to gas, sewer or water lines and water pipes, the lines or pipes themselves and lines utilized in conjunction with air-conditioning equipment. 
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land, including any and all buildings and structures thereon. 
PROVIDED or SUPPLIED — Furnished, supplied, paid or under the control of the owner or manager or his or her designee. 
PUBLIC AUTHORITY - The Division of Construction Code Official or any officer who is in charge of any department, branch or agency of the city or of the County of Hudson or of the State of New Jersey responsible for the administration of building, fire, health or other regulations applicable to buildings in the city. 
[Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
PUBLIC HALLWAY - A public corridor or space separately enclosed that provides common access to one or more exitways in any story of a building or to two or more residential units therein and is not within the exclusive control of one person or family. 
PUBLIC OFFICER - The Director of the Division of Construction Code Official of the city or such other person as the Director may designate to act in his or her behalf. 
[Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
REGISTERED MAIL - Mail registered with or certified by the public postal authority for transmission to the addressee. 
REPAIR - To restore to a safe, sound and acceptable state of operation, serviceability or appearance, all of which under this chapter shall be made with such materials and in such a workmanlike manner that it can be expected that they will last approximately as long as would new products originally installed. 
REPLACE - To remove an existing item or portion of a building or structure, including but not limited to the electrical, heating and plumbing systems thereof and the components of which it is constructed; and to build or install a new item of the same, equivalent or better quality than the existing item when new; and should ordinarily be made where the item is incapable of repair or where repair would be more costly. 
ROOMING HOUSES - Every building kept, used, maintained, advertised as or held out to be a place where sleeping accommodations are supplied for pay to transients or permanent guests in which from two to 14 rooms, inclusive, are rented, furnished or unfurnished, with or without meals for the accommodations of such guests. 
ROOMING UNIT - Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit other than a dwelling unit and which is rented or available for rent for sleeping purposes, with or without cooking facilities. 
RUBBISH - Combustible or noncombustible waste materials, except garbage, and the term shall include, but not be limited to, the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke and other combustible material, bedding, boxes, cartons, crockery, dust, excelsior, glass, leather, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, paper rags, rubber, tree branches, wood trimming and yard clippings. (See also Chapter 287, Solid Waste.) 
STORY - That portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above except that the topmost story of a building shall extend from the upper surface of its topmost floor to the ceiling or roof above. 
SUPPLIED - Paid for, furnished or provided by or under the control of the owner or manager. 
TENEMENT HOUSE - As defined by state statute, [3] means any house or building or portion thereof which is rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied or is occupied as the home or residence of three or more families, living independently of each other and doing their cooking upon the premises. This definition shall not apply to a detached dwelling house of not more than three stories that has central heating, is equipped for occupancy by three families living independently where the space is provided for at least one of such families and is not equipped with full cooking facilities; provided, however, that this exception shall not apply to any such dwelling house constructed or converted on or after September 1, 1959. 
VENTILATION - The supply and removal of air to and from any space by natural or mechanical means. 
VENTILATION, MECHANICAL - Ventilation by power-driven devices whose air-changing capacity is specified thereon. 
VENTILATION, NATURAL - Ventilation by opening to outer air through windows, skylights, doors, louvers or stacks with or without power-driven devices. 
WATER CLOSET - A toilet and its accessories. 
WATER CLOSET COMPARTMENT - An enclosed space containing one or more toilets which also may contain one or more urinals and either one or more lavatories or one or more bathtubs, showers or combinations thereof. 
WEATHERING - Deterioration, decay or damage caused by exposure to the elements. 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— See N.J.S.A. 34:6-121. 
 
ARTICLE II - Applicability 
 
§ 254-5. - Scope. 
Every residential and nonresidential building and the premises on which it is situated in the city that is used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes or for business, commercial or industrial occupancy shall comply with the provisions of this chapter, whether or not such building shall have been constructed, altered or repaired before or after the adoption of this chapter, and irrespective of any permits or licenses which shall have been issued for the use or occupancy of the building or premises, for the construction or repair of the building or for the installation or repair of equipment or facilities prior to the effective date of this chapter. This chapter establishes minimum standards for the initial and continued occupancy and use of all such buildings and does not replace or modify standards otherwise established for the construction, repair, alteration or use of the building, equipment or facilities contained herein, except as provided in the next section of this article. Where there is mixed occupancy, the residential and nonresidential uses therein also shall be regulated by and subject to the provisions of this chapter.  
§ 254-6. - Conflicts with other laws; higher standard to prevail. 
In any case where the provisions of this Property Maintenance Code impose a higher standard than set forth in any other applicable provisions of the Jersey City Code or ordinances to be incorporated into the Jersey City Code or under the laws of the State of New Jersey, then the standards set forth herein shall prevail; but if the provisions of this Property Maintenance Code impose a lower standard than any other provisions of the Jersey City Code or ordinances to be incorporated into the Jersey City Code or of the laws of the State of New Jersey then the higher standard contained in any other provision or ordinance or law shall prevail.  
§ 254-7. - Issuance and renewal of other permits and licenses. 
After the date of enactment hereof, all licenses and permits shall be issued upon compliance with this Property Maintenance Code as well as with the provisions of the Jersey City Code or ordinance to be incorporated into the Jersey City Code under which licenses and permits are granted.  
§ 254-8. - Compliance required. 
No license or permit or other certification of compliance with this chapter shall constitute a defense against any violation of any ordinance of the city which is applicable to any structure or premises, nor shall any provision herein relieve any owner, manager or occupant from complying with any other provision, nor any official of the city from enforcing any other provision.  
§ 254-9. - Duty to comply; permits. 
A.  General responsibility. The provisions of this chapter establish minimum standards for the continued occupancy and use of residential and nonresidential buildings, dwelling units and rooming units and shall not abrogate the responsibility of any person to comply with the provisions of any other chapter of the Jersey City Code with respect to any items for administration or decision concerning building, electrical, fire, health, plumbing or zoning matters or any New Jersey licensing statute or other pertinent state laws applicable to the premises he or she owns, manages or occupies. 
B.  Responsibility for securing permits before work commences. All repairs, alterations, additions or replacements of buildings, facilities or premises or any parts thereof that are required to bring such buildings, facilities or premises into compliance with this chapter shall not be started until appropriate municipal permits or state authorization for this work have been secured.  
ARTICLE III - Administration 
 
§ 254-10. - Division of Construction Code Official. 
[Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
To provide for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, there is established in the Department of Housing, Economic Development and Commerce a Division of Construction Code Official, hereinafter referred to as the "Division." The Chief of the Division, hereinafter referred to as the "Chief," shall be the executive official in charge, and he or she shall carry out his or her duties under the direction of the chief administrative officer of the Department of Housing, Economic Development and Commerce. All inspections, regulations, enforcement and hearings on violations of the provisions of this chapter, unless expressly stated to the contrary as in the powers assigned to the Director of the Division of Construction Code Official, shall be under the direction and supervision of the Chief. He or she may appoint or designate other public officials or employees of the city to perform such duties as may be necessary for the enforcement of this chapter. This includes the functions of inspection and the holding of hearings. 
Cross reference— See also Ch. 3, Administration of Government, § 3-75.  
§ 254-11. - Duties of Director of the Division of Construction Code Official. 
[Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
A.  The Director of the Division of Construction Code Official shall administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter pertaining to buildings alleged or determined to be unfit for human habitation, occupancy or use and Article IV and § 254-43. 
B.  The chief administrative officer of the Division of Construction Code Official shall be the Director thereof. The Director shall perform the specific duties assigned to him or her in Articles XII and XIV of this chapter in addition to the general duties assigned to him or her in § 254-10 of this article.  
§ 254-12. - Uniform Construction Code Act enforcing agency. 
A.  Whenever in this Property Maintenance Code the powers and duties of the Director of the Division of Construction Code Official are the same or similar to the powers and duties granted to the Uniform Construction Code enforcing agency ( N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.), then said enforcing agency shall exercise and perform those powers and duties. 
[Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
Cross reference— See also Ch. 131, Construction Codes, Uniform. 
B.  Whenever the powers and duties of said Director are in conflict with the powers and duties of said enforcing agency, the powers and duties of said enforcing agency shall be paramount and supersede those of the Director. 
C.  The provisions of the State Uniform Construction Code Act ( N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.) and the rules and regulations of the State Commissioner of Community Affairs shall supersede any provisions in this Property Maintenance Code which are in conflict or which pertain to the same subject matter contained in the State Act and/or state rules and regulations.  
§ 254-13. - General standards. 
[Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
The provisions of this chapter shall constitute the standards to guide the Chief and the Director of the Division of Construction Code Official in determining which buildings, dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units or premises in the city are in dangerous or blighted condition or are unfit for human habitation, occupancy or use.  
§ 254-14. - Rules and regulations. 
[Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
The Chief hereby is authorized and empowered to promulgate such written rules and regulations as he or she may deem necessary for the proper administration and enforcement of this chapter; provided, however, that such rules and regulations shall not be in conflict with any of the provisions of this chapter or applicable statutes, nor in any way alter, amend or supersede any of the provisions thereof. The Chief shall file a certified copy of rules and regulations which he or she may promulgate in his or her office, in the office of the City Clerk and in the office of the chief administrative officer of the Division of Construction Code Official.  
§ 254-15. - Effect of rules and regulations. 
Such rules and regulations promulgated by the Chief pursuant to this article shall have the same force and effect as the provisions of this chapter and the penalty for violations of the provisions of this chapter, as hereinafter provided.  
§ 254-16. - Inspections. 
A.  When inspections are to be made. 
(1)  All buildings and premises subject to this chapter shall be inspected from time to time by the enforcing officer of the city. Such inspections shall be made of residential premises between 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. and of nonresidential premises during the regular open hours of the business occupying the premises, unless one of the following conditions exists: 
(a)  The premises are not available during the foregoing hours for inspection. 
(b)  There is reason to believe that violations are occurring on the premises which can be apprehended and proven only by inspections during other than the prescribed hours or which require immediate inspection after being reported, such as failure to supply heat. 
(c)  There is reason to believe a violation exists of a character which is an immediate threat to health or safety. 
(2)  At the time of such inspections and upon proper identification, all rooms in the building and all parts of the premises are to be made available and accessible for such inspections and the owner, manager or occupant shall be requested to provide all arrangements necessary to facilitate the same. If any owner, manager or occupant refuses entry to the enforcing officer, the Chief is hereby authorized to apply to a Judge of the Municipal Court for a search warrant as provided in Subsection B of this section. 
B.  Where entry by inspectors is refused. [4] 
(1)  Search warrant or access warrant. 
(a)  In addition to the provisions of Subsection A of this section, the Chief shall, upon affidavit, apply to the Judge of the Municipal Court of the city for an administrative search warrant setting forth factually the actual conditions and circumstances that provide a reasonable basis for believing that a nuisance or violation of this chapter exists on the premises, and if the Judge is satisfied as to the matter set forth in the affidavit, he or she shall authorize the issuance of an administrative search warrant permitting access to and inspection of the premises on which the nuisance or violation may exist. 
(b)  In addition to the provisions of Subsections A(2) and B(1)(a) of this section, the Chief may, upon affidavit, apply to the Judge of the Municipal Court of the city for an administrative search warrant to conduct an area inspection, as that term is defined in § 254-4 of Article I, and the warrant shall be served by the Chief or his or her representative who shall be deemed to be law enforcement officers for this purpose. 
(c)  A warrant for access may be issued by the Judge upon affidavit of the Chief establishing grounds therefor pursuant to § 254-79 of Article XIII. 
(d)  The search warrant provisions of this chapter in no way shall abrogate the right of the enforcing officer to enter and inspect without a search warrant the exterior of all accessory structures and of all residential and nonresidential buildings and the surrounding grounds and all common interior areas of residential buildings and all public interior areas of nonresidential buildings. 
(2)  Penalties. 
(a)  Where the Chief or his or her representative is refused entry or access or otherwise is impeded or prevented by the owner, occupant or manager from conducting an inspection of the premises when there is reason to believe a violation exists of an emergency character which is an immediate threat to health or safety, and therefor, immediate entry and action is required to protect the public health and welfare, such person shall be in violation of this chapter and subject to the penalties provided for in the general provisions of the Jersey City Code. [5] 
(b)  Failure to permit entry under an administrative search warrant shall be a violation of this chapter which shall subject any person who refuses entry to the premises to the general penalty provisions of the Jersey City Code. 
(c)  In addition to the provision in Subsection B(2)(b) of this section, the Director of Housing Code Enforcement may deem any refusal to permit entry under an administrative search warrant to be prima facie evidence that the premises in question are unfit for human habitation, occupancy or use and subject to the condemnation proceedings specified in Article IV of this chapter. 
C.  Petition for inspection. Whenever a petition is filed with the Chief by at least five residents of the city charging that any dwelling or dwelling unit is in violation of this chapter, the Chief forthwith shall cause the premises so charged to be inspected in the manner provided in this section of this article. 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— See also Ch. 242, Peace and Good Order, Art. IV, Obstruction of Entry. 

--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— See Ch. 1, General Provisions, § 1-25. 
 
§ 254-17. - Notices and hearings. 
A.  Procedure where violation discovered. Except as provided in Subsection G of this section, where a violation of this chapter or the regulations hereunder is found to exist, a written notice from the Chief shall be served on the person or persons responsible for the correction thereof. 
B.  Contents of notice. The notice shall specify the violation or violations committed, what must be done to correct the same, a reasonable period of time not to exceed 30 days to correct or abate the violation, the right of the person served to request a hearing and that the notice shall become an order of the Chief in 10 days after service unless a hearing is requested pursuant to Subsection D of this section. 
C.  Service of notice. Notice may be served personally or by prepaid telegram or by mail with postage prepaid, addressed to the last known address of the person to be served. In the case of an occupant, notice may be posted upon the door of his or her dwelling unit or rooming unit. Where it is ascertained that the owner does not reside on the premises, the last known address shall be the address of the owner as shown in the office of the Tax Collector. If the last known address cannot be ascertained, the notice may be posted on the outside front entrance of the building. The Chief shall file and provide notice to any owner, manager or occupant of any violation at any address other than the last known address provided hereunder, if such other address is filed with the Chief personally or by certified mail addressed to the Chief. Service upon an owner, manager or occupant may also be attained by service of any notice upon a member of the family of the owner, manager or occupant. Date of service of the notice shall be determined, where service is by mail, as of the day following the day of mailing for notices to addresses within the city, and as of the third day after the day of mailing for notices to addresses outside the city. Where the day of service would fall upon a Sunday or other day when mail is not ordinarily delivered, then the day of service shall be the next regular delivery day. 
D.  Notice to become an order unless hearing requested. 
(1)  Within 10 days of the date of service of a notice, the notice shall constitute a final order unless any person affected by the notice requests a hearing thereon and serves a written request within the ten-day period in person or by mail on the Chief. 
(2)  Such request for a hearing shall set forth briefly the grounds or reasons on which the request for a hearing is based and the factual matters contained in the notice of violation which are to be disputed at the hearing. The Chief, upon receipt of the request, shall within 30 days therefrom and upon five days' notice to the party aggrieved set the matter down for hearing. 
E.  Determination at hearing. At any hearing provided hereunder, the Chief shall be vested with all the powers provided by law to compel the attendance of witnesses and parties in interest by issuance and service of subpoena, to require by subpoena the production of books, records or other documents at any such hearing which may be pertinent to matters to be determined by him or her and to enforce any such subpoena or secure any order for the enforcement of any such subpoena as provided by law. Determination shall be made within 10 days from the completion of the hearing. The Chief shall issue an order either incorporating the determinations and directions contained in the notice, modifying the same or withdrawing the notice. 
F.  Extensions of time. The Chief may extend the time for correction or abatement of the violation for one or more additional periods of time each not to exceed 30 days, except where major capital improvements or renovations are involved, in which instance the time for completion may be extended for additional periods each not to exceed 90 days beyond the expiration date of the original notice. Subject to the limitation in this paragraph, if an extension of time is requested, the owner or manager of the subject property shall provide a report to the Chief indicating the time necessary to correct or abate the violation and shall report on the status of any relocated tenants, if applicable. 
[Amended 4-25-2018 by Ord. No. 18-020 ] 
G.  Summary abatement in emergency; notice and hearing not required. Where the violation or condition existing on the premises is of such a nature as to constitute an immediate threat to life and limb unless abated without delay, the Director of the Division of Construction Code Official with the approval of the Director of the Department of Housing, Economic Development and Commerce either may abate the violation or condition immediately or order the owner, manager or occupant to correct the violation or condition within a period of time not to exceed three days, and upon failure to do so, the Director of the Division of Construction Code Official may abate the condition immediately thereafter. 
[Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
H.  Cost of abatement to be a lien against premises. 
(1)  Where abatement of any nuisance as defined herein, correction of a defect in the premises or the maintenance of the premises in a proper condition so as to conform to this chapter or other provisions of the Jersey City Code or any ordinance or state law applicable thereto requires expending city moneys therefor, the officer of the city by whom or under whose direction the hazards were removed shall certify the costs thereof to the Municipal Council. 
(2)  The Municipal Council shall examine the certificate and, if found correct, by resolution shall cause the cost as shown thereon to be charged against said lands. 
(3)  The amount so charged shall forthwith become a lien upon such lands and shall be added to and become and form part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon such lands, the same to bear interest at the same rate as taxes, and shall be collected and enforced by the same city officers and in the same manner as city taxes. 
(4)  A copy of the certificate and resolution shall be sent by certified mail to the owner. 
I.  Referral of violations. Any violation of any relevant provision of the Code other than this chapter discovered by a field representative shall be reported to the Chief who shall refer the alleged violation to the official or agency responsible for the enforcement of such other ordinance. 
J.  Extension of time where dispossess action undertaken. Where there exists a violation of occupancy standards hereunder, an owner or manager, upon receipt of a notice of violation, if unable to eliminate the violation by peaceable means within the period of time specified in said notice, shall commence within such period legal action to dispossess, evict or eject the occupants who cause the violation. No further action hereunder shall then be taken against the owner or manager so long as the action aforesaid is pending in the court and is prosecuted expeditiously and in good faith. 
K.  Where notice and hearing are not required prior to court proceedings. 
(1)  Notwithstanding the requirements of Subsections A, B and C of this section, violations of the following provisions of this chapter may be prosecuted without notice by the filing of a complaint by the Chief in the Municipal Court: §§ 254-16B(2), 254-27A(1), (3) and (7)(c), 254-28E and F, 254-44A, 254-45B(37), 254-70 and 254-72. 
(2)  Where the Chief has on two different occasions found violations by the same owner, manager or occupant on the same premises and has issued notices on each and has held at least one hearing and issued an order thereon, upon discovering a third or subsequent violation by the same owner, manager or occupant on the same premises within the space of one year, whether of the same sections or of any other sections of this chapter, he or she may thereupon prosecute the offender by filing a complaint in the Municipal Court for said third or subsequent violation occurring within said period of one year without first providing notice and opportunity for a hearing by the Chief. 
L.  Effect of notice on owner. For the purpose of enforcement of this chapter, the service of a notice on an owner, whether or not the owner is also the manager, shall constitute notice of violations set forth therein until the violations are abated in conformity with this chapter and the other applicable provisions of the Jersey City Code.  
§ 254-18. - Appeals. 
Appeals from any decision of any officials regarding the manner of construction or materials to be used in the erection, alteration, rehabilitation or repair pertaining to this chapter shall be made to the Board of Appeals of the basic codes of the city in accordance with Chapter 1, General Provisions, of the Jersey City Code.  
§ 254-19. - Landlord to furnish list of violations to tenant. [Added 2-5-1980 by Ord. No. S-342] 
A.  Whenever a landlord receives a notice from the state agency of the city listing the violations which must be corrected, said landlord shall, within 10 days of the receipt of said notice, serve upon each tenant a copy of said notice. In such case, the landlord shall file with the Division of Construction Code Official proof of service of a copy of each said notice upon each tenant within 15 days of the receipt of said notice. Failure to serve a copy of said notice upon each tenant or failure to file a proof of service of said notice upon each tenant with the Division of Construction Code Official shall constitute a violation of this chapter and shall be punishable as such. [Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
B.  As soon as the landlord shall have abated any of the violations listed on any such notice, then the landlord shall obtain a statement of such abatement from the office which issued the notice of violations and shall furnish to each tenant a copy of said statement of abatement.  
ARTICLE IV - Vacant Properties[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-045, adopted May 14, 2014, amended the title of Art. IV. 
 
§ 254-20. - Vacant structures; vacant lots; inspection; notice; hearings. 
[Amended 5-14-2014 by Ord. No. 14-045 ] 
A.  The Director of the Division of Housing Code Enforcement (HCE) on his or her own, or upon the filing of a petition by a public authority or by at least five (5) residents of the City, shall make an inspection of any building believed to be unfit for human habitation, occupancy or use; and if a preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, the Director of Housing Code Enforcement or his or her designee thereupon shall serve upon the owner of the building and parties in interest in such a building, a notice stating the charges in that respect and setting a date for a hearing before the Director of Housing Code Enforcement not less than seven (7) nor more than thirty (30) days from the date of service of said notice. The owner and parties in interest shall be given the right to file an answer to the notice and to appear in person or otherwise and give testimony at the time and place fixed in the notice. The rules of evidence prevailing in the courts shall not be controlling in hearings before the Director of Housing Code Enforcement. [Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
B.  The Director of Housing Code Enforcement shall determine within 90 days after notice to the owner whether a building should be condemned and the owner directed to either repair or demolish the building. [Added 4-22-1992 by Ord. No. 92-044] 
C.  The Director of the Division of Housing Code Enforcement (HCE) on his or her own, or upon the filing of a petition by a public authority or by at least five (5) residents of the City, shall make an inspection of any vacant lot and if a preliminary investigation indicates that lot is unkempt and should be added to the City's Vacant Lot Registry then the Director of Housing Code Enforcement or his or her designee shall serve upon the owner of the lot and parties in interest in the lot a notice stating the charges in that respect and setting a date for a hearing before the Director of Housing Code Enforcement not less than seven (7) nor more than thirty (30) days from the date of service of said notice. The owner and parties in interest shall be given the right to file an answer to the notice and to appear in person or otherwise and give testimony at the time and place fixed in the notice. The rules of evidence prevailing in the courts shall not be controlling in hearings before the Director of Housing Code Enforcement. 
D.  The Director of Housing Code Enforcement shall provide the Mayor and Council with quarterly reports on the status of all buildings and lots reported to his or her division as abandoned or unfit for human occupancy. Such report shall indicate the Housing Code Enforcement Director's decision as to each such building. 
[Added 4-22-1992 by Ord. No. 92-044] 
Editor's note— Former Secs. 13-18 through 13-24, which followed this section and authorized the Director of Property Conservation to demolish unsafe structures, were deleted 4-28-1993 by Ord. No. 93-038. This responsibility has now been assigned to the Construction Official under Ch. 105, Buildings, Demolition of.  
§ 254-21. - Vacant or boarded structures. 
[Added 9-8-1988 by Ord. No. C-807; amended 5-14-2014 by Ord. No. 14-045 ] 
A.  Any residential or commercial building or structure in the City of Jersey City remaining vacant or boarded for a period exceeding six (6) months shall be deemed a fire hazard and unsafe. 
B.  If any residential or commercial building or structure remains vacant or boarded for more than six (6) months, the Director of Housing Code Enforcement or his or her designee shall serve upon the owner, agent or person in control of the building or structure a written notice describing the building or structure and requiring the owner, agent or person in control of the building or the structure to abate this condition by taking one (1) of the following corrective measures within six (6) months of the date of written notification. 
(1)  Actual and legal occupancy of the building or structure, which occupancy shall be made only after obtaining a certificate of occupancy. 
(2)  Submission of a fully executed and binding contract of sale for the building, which contract shall contain a clause advising the prospective purchaser that occupancy must be achieved within six (6) months of the service of the written notice specified above. 
(3)  Demolition of the building or structure, upon obtaining the necessary demolition permit(s). 
(4)  Any other action required or necessary to render the building or structure safe and in a habitable condition. 
C.  Where a building or structure has been abandoned for a period exceeding six (6) months and ownership cannot be determined, the City shall institute appropriate legal action to acquire title to the building or structure pursuant to the police powers vested in the City of Jersey City and upon acquisition, the building or structure shall be maintained by the City in a condition compatible with the surrounding neighborhood until such time as said property is disposed of at public auction or as otherwise permitted by law.  
§ 254-21.1. - Purpose. 
[Added 9-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-108; amended 5-14-2014 by Ord. No. 14-045 ] 
The purpose of this Article IV is to require accountability from the owners of vacant buildings and lots within the City of Jersey City by establishing a system of registration and the maintenance plan approval, and impose the fees to fund these efforts, which will protect public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens and improve unsightly neighborhoods, require secure structures, prevent structural deterioration, and protect neighborhood property values and safety.  
§ 254-21.2. - Definitions. 
[Added 9-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-108; amended 5-14-2014 by Ord. No. 14-045 ] 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
ABANDONED PROPERTY defined in accordance with N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 means improved real property that has not been legally occupied for six (6) months and which meets any one of the criteria set forth in N.J.S.A. 55:19-78. 
DIVISION OF HOUSING CODE ENFORCEMENT (HCE) is the City division charged with enforcing the provisions of this Ordinance. 
ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL means any duly authorized City employee or designated representative. 
EVIDENCE OF VACANCY means any condition that on its own, or combined with other conditions present would lead a reasonable person to believe that the property is or has been vacant for six (6) or more months. Such conditions include, but are not limited to, overgrown or dead vegetation, accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers or mail, past due utility notices or disconnected utilities, accumulation of trash, junk or debris, the absence of window coverings such as curtains, blinds or shutters, the absence of furnishings or personal items consistent with residential habitation, statements by neighbors, delivery agents, or government employees that the property is vacant or abandoned. 
OWNER means any person, co-partnership, agent, operator, firm, association, corporation, or fiduciary having a legal or equitable interest in the property; or appears oh the official records of the state, country, or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise exercises control of the property, including the trustee or guardian of the estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court. 
PROPERTY means any unimproved or improved real property, or portion thereof, located in the City of Jersey City, including the buildings or structures located on the property regardless of condition. 
VACANT BUILDING means any building used or to be used as a residence which is (i) not legally occupied or (ii) at which substantially all lawful construction operations or residential occupancy has ceased, and which is in such condition that it cannot legally be re-occupied without repair or rehabilitation; provided, however, that any property with all "building systems" in working order that is also being actively marketed by its owner for sale or rental, shall not be deemed vacant. 
VACANT LOT means a platted or unplatted parcel of land, which does not contain a habitable or commercial structure.  
§ 254-21.3. - General requirements for vacant buildings and lots. 
[Added 9-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-108; amended 5-14-2014 by Ord. No. 14-045 ] 
A.  Sixty (60) days after the effective date of this Ordinance or thirty (30) days after a building or lot becomes vacant, the owner shall file a registration statement for each such vacant building or lot with the City Division of Housing Code Enforcement (HCE) on forms provided by HCE for such purposes. The registration shall remain valid for one (1) year. The owner shall be required to renew the registration annually as long as the building or lot remains vacant or abandoned and shall pay a registration or renewal fee in the amount prescribed in § 254-21.9. 
B.  The owner shall notify the HCE within thirty (30) days of any change in the registration information by filing an amended registration statement on a form provided by the HCE for such purpose. 
C.  The registration statement shall be deemed prima facie proof of the statements therein contained in any administrative enforcement proceeding or court proceeding instituted by the City of Jersey City against the owner or owners of the property.  
§ 254-21.4. - Registration requirements for vacant buildings and lots. 
[Added 9-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-108; amended 5-14-2014 by Ord. No. 14-045 ] 
The owner of a vacant building(s) or lot(s) shall provide the following information to HCE on the registration form or form(s) prescribed by HCE: 
(1)  Name, address, email address and contact telephone number of the owner; the owner's address must include a street address; a post office box is not acceptable; 
(2)  Name, address, email address and contact telephone number of any local agent(s) or representative for the building or lot; 
(3)  Name, address, email address and contact telephone number of the person assigned to the property for the security and maintenance of the building or lot; 
(4)  Common address and tax assessor's block and lot designation of the building or lot; 
(5)  If a vacant building, the date on which the building became vacant; 
(6)  If a vacant building, proof of utility (gas, electric, water) connections or disconnections; and 
(7)  Any other information reasonably required by the City to ensure the safety of all persons and to prevent neglect. 
(8)  Any government entity that owns a vacant building or lot will be required to register with Jersey City, but the registration fee shall be waived. 
(9)  By designating an authorized agent under the provisions of this section, the owner consents to receive any and all notices of code violations concerning the registered vacant building or lot and all process in any court proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding brought to enforce code provisions concerning the registered building or lot by service of the notice of process on the authorized agent. Any owner who has designated an authorized agent under the provisions of this section shall be deemed to consent to the continuation of the agent's designation for the purposes of this section until the owner notifies the City of a change of an authorized agent or until the owner files a new annual registration statement. 
(10)  The owner is required to update the form within thirty (30) days of a change of any information contained within the form. 
(11)  The registration statement shall be deemed prima facie proof of the statements therein contained in any administrative enforcement proceeding or court proceeding instituted by the City of Jersey City against the owner or owners of the vacant building or lot. 
(12)  An Enforcement Official may identify vacant lots through his/her routine inspection process as well as through notification by residents, or other community groups that a lot may be eligible for inclusion on the registry. Notice will be served upon, or sent by mail, to the owner and will be deemed received by the owner, upon personal delivery; or five (5) days after service by first class mail. 
(13)  The Director of Housing Code Enforcement shall provide the Mayor and Council with quarterly reports on the status of all vacant lots.  
§ 254-21.5. - Vacant building inspection. 
[Added 9-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-108; amended 5-14-2014 by Ord. No. 14-045 ] 
After filing a registration statement or a renewal of a registration statement and upon reasonable notice, the owner of any vacant building shall provide access to the city to conduct an exterior and interior inspection of the building to determine compliance with the municipal code, during the period covered by the initial registration or any subsequent renewal.  
§ 254-21.6. - Requirements for owners of vacant buildings. 
[Added 9-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-108; amended 5-14-2014 by Ord. No. 14-045 ; 8-20-2014 by Ord. No. 14-086 ] 
The owner of any building that has become vacant, and any person maintaining, operating or collecting rent for any such, building shall, within thirty (30) days: 
(1)  Enclose and secure the building against unauthorized entry in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Code of the City of Jersey City and as per the specifications established by the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) for securing vacant buildings. 
a.  The securing of the building shall include the boarding up of all windows/doors/garages (except the front door through which access to the interior of the building is made) with unsanded exterior-grade CDX plywood painted white on the outside. All board-ups must meet the approval of the Director of HCE or his or her designee. 
b.  Plywood thickness should be one-half (½) of an inch for window openings, five-eighths ( 5/8 ) of an inch for door openings and three-quarters (¾) of an inch for sliding door and French door openings. 
c.  Plywood is to be cut to size to fit snugly against the blind stop of the window. Where no blind stops exist plywood shall be cut to fit snugly in the opening. 
d.  All plywood shall be cut and installed so that the grain of the plywood runs in the same direction as the long run of the opening. All plywood shall be installed in one (1) piece whenever possible. 
e.  2 × 4-inch lumber planks shall be attached with 10d common nails or screws as appropriate. 
f.  2 × 4-inch lumber planks should be graded and should be a minimum of sixteen (16) inches longer than the width of the plywood cover and 2 × 4-inch lumber planks are to be drilled with one-half-inch diameter holes that line up with the holes in the plywood covers. 
g.  Hardware shall be cadmium plated or galvanized steel, three-eighths-inch or one-half-inch diameter and of sufficient length to extend from the outside through the 2 × 4 brace laid flat from wall to wall across the opening plus metal washer and nut with a minimum three-thread exposure after tightening. Each bolt shall have one (1) flat washer on the outside of the boarding. Bolts shall be tightened to the maximum extent without damaging the wood. Bolts shall be inserted with tire head on the exterior side of the boarding and nuts on the inside of the brace. 
(2)  Post a sign affixed to the building indicating the name, address and telephone number of the owner, the owner's authorized agent for the purpose of service of process (if designated pursuant to this Chapter) and the person responsible for day-to-day supervision and management of the property, if such person is different from the owner or authorized agent. The sign shall be of a size and placed in such a location so as to be legible from the nearest public street or sidewalk, whichever is nearer, but shall be no smaller than 18" × 24" and shall state "WARNING: THIS BUILDING IS SECURED PURSUANT TO CHAPTER 254 OF THE JERSEY CITY MUNICIPAL CODE. ANYONE ENTERING THIS BUILDING WITHOUT AUTHORIZATION WILL BE SUBJECT TO ARREST"; and 
(3)  Secure the building from unauthorized entry and maintain the sign until the building is again legally occupied or demolished or until repair or rehabilitation of the property is complete.  
§ 254-21.7. - Vacant building deemed abandoned building; list of abandoned buildings to be maintained by the Director of Housing and Economic Development; remedies for abandoned building. 
[Added 9-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-108; amended 5-14-2014 by Ord. No. 14-045 ] 
If the Director of Housing Code Enforcement determines that a vacant building as defined herein has been abandoned as defined in N.J.S.A. 55:19-81, the Director shall place the building on a list of abandoned buildings to be maintained by the Director in accordance with N.J.S.A. 55:19-55. The abandoned building list shall become effective either upon the expiration date of the period for appeal with respect to any building placed on the list or upon the denial of an appeal brought by the owner. Thereafter, the municipality may pursue any statutory remedy with respect to buildings on the abandoned building list, including the sale of tax sale certificate subject to the condition that the purchase or assignee shall be obliged to complete any rehabilitation or repairs required to render the building eligible for removal from the abandoned building list.  
§ 254-21.8. - Requirements for owners of vacant lots. 
[Added 5-14-2014 by Ord. No. 14-045 ] 
The owner of any vacant lot and any person maintaining such a lot shall within sixty (60) days: 
(1)  Register the vacant lot of which they are in possession. 
(2)  Enclose and secure the property against unauthorized entry with a six-foot tall fence in accordance with Section 345-67, Fences and walls, and with any other applicable provisions of the Code of the City of Jersey City. Broken or open fences must be repaired or replaced in a timely fashion. 
(3)  Ensure that all bushes and trees are trimmed and that they do not interfere with neighboring properties. 
(4)  Ensure that grass does not exceed twelve (12) inches in height and that all grass clippings are removed from the lot when the grass is cut. 
(5)  Lots must be clear of all garbage, litter and debris. Vacant lots must be clear of all vehicles: cars, boats, campers, etc. 
(6)  All sidewalks bordering vacant lots must be maintained and be cleared of snow, ice, tripping hazards, obstructions, garbage, litter and debris. 
(7)  The owner or owner's agent shall perform regular weekly inspections of the vacant lot to ensure compliance with the requirements of this section. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-045 , adopted May 14, 2014, amended the Code by repealing former § 254-21.8, and adding a new section. Former § 254-21.8 pertained to fees, and derived from Ord. No. 11-108, adopted September 14, 2011.  
§ 254-21.9. - Fees. 
[Added 5-14-2014 by Ord. No. 14-045 ; 6-13-2018 by Ord. No. 18-060 ] 
The initial registration fee for each vacant building or vacant lot shall be $500.00. The fee for the first renewal shall be $1,000.00. The fee for the second renewal shall be $2,000.00. The fee for any subsequent renewals shall be $3,000.00. The renewal fee for the annual registration shall be due on the yearly anniversary of the initial registration. The registration fee will not be prorated or refunded. 
The initial registration fee, and subsequent renewals, for each vacant building or lot shall be as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and charges. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-045 , adopted May 14, 2014, amended the Code by repealing former § 254-21.9, and adding a new section. Former § 254-21.9 pertained to violations and penalties, and derived from Ord. No. 11-108, adopted September 14, 2011.  
§ 254-21.10. - Violations and penalties. 
[Added 5-14-2014 by Ord. No. 14-045 ; 1-25-2017 by Ord. No. 17-005 ] 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided for in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Section 1-25; provided, however, that the minimum penalty for a violation of this chapter shall be a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00).  
ARTICLE V - Electrical, Light and Ventilation Standards 
 
§ 254-22. - Compliance required. 
No person shall occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein or any nonresidential building or any part thereof for any business, commercial, governmental, industrial, institutional or other human use which does not comply with the following requirements.  
§ 254-23. - Electrical facilities. 
A.  Residential. 
(1)  Electrical service generally. Every dwelling, dwelling unit and rooming unit shall be properly connected to and be provided with electric power through safely insulated conduits conforming to Chapter 131, Uniform Construction Codes. [7] 
(2)  Circuits. Overloading of circuits is prohibited. Where such violation exists, the owner shall be required either to install a line or lines of sufficient capacity to absorb the peak seasonal load to which such line or lines are subjected or to install a fusestat or fusestats that will limit the use of such existing line or lines to the properly rated capacity. 
(3)  Fuses and protective devices. Maximum fuse sizes consistent with safety shall be posted conspicuously on the inside cover of all fuse boxes and no fuse shall be installed there in excess of the stated maximum. Fusestats shall be installed in any fuse box located within a dwelling unit or rooming unit in the exclusive possession of occupants other than the owner. 
(4)  Outlets and fixtures. Every electrical outlet and fixture shall be properly installed and maintained in good safe condition so as not to cause a fire or electrical shock hazard and shall be properly connected to the source of power. No ceiling or wall fixtures shall be used to supply power to equipment other than that for which these are designed. 
(5)  Wiring. Insulation shall be provided for all wiring and cables and shall be kept in good repair. No loose or temporary wiring shall be used except extension cords six (6) feet in length or less that are in good and safe condition, run directly from portable fixtures or appliances to convenience outlets, and do not lie under rugs or other floor coverings nor extend through doorways, transoms, holes or other openings through structural elements. 
(6)  Electrical outlets in habitable rooms. There shall be at least two (2) permanently installed remote wall-type double-electric convenience outlets in every habitable room. In lieu of this, each room must contain at least one (1) permanently installed wall-type double-electric convenience outlet and one (1) overhead light fixture. 
(7)  Light fixtures for bathrooms and water closet compartments. Every bathroom and water closet compartment shall be provided with at least one (1) permanently installed ceiling or wall-type electric light fixture and a switch and wall plate so located that there is no danger of short-circuiting from water from other bathroom or water closet facilities or from splashing of water. 
B.  Nonresidential. 
(1)  Electrical service generally. Electrical power through safely insulated conduits conforming to Chapter 131, Uniform Construction Codes, shall be supplied to nonresidential buildings regularly utilized for business, commercial, governmental, industrial or institutional work and activities and to garages designed for use by four (4) or more vehicles. [8] 
(2)  Lighting of bathrooms and water closet compartments. Every bathroom and water closet compartment shall be provided with permanently installed, artificial ceiling or wall-type electric lighting fixtures with a switch and wall plate so located and maintained that there is no danger of short-circuiting from water from other bathroom facilities or from splashing of water. 
(3)  Lighting of common spaces other than habitable rooms, bathrooms and water closet compartments. 
(a)  All nonresidential buildings, including the garages required to have electric service under Subsection B(1) of this section, also shall be provided with permanently installed, artificial lighting fixtures. All such fixtures shall be operable from a switch located near the point of ingress to the interior of the space lighted. All portions of the premises which are utilized regularly for work and activities shall be illuminated by at least five (5) footcandles, that is five (5) lumens or one (1) watt per square foot of floor area measured in the darkest portions thereof. All portions of the premises other than common means of passage that are used occasionally and incidentally by occupants of the premises shall be illuminated by at least three (3) footcandles; that is, three (3) lumens or one-half (½) watt per square foot of floor area measured in the darkest portions thereof. 
(b)  Lighting of hallways, stairways, landings and other spaces used by occupants in common as a normal means of passage shall be sufficient to provide at least five (5) footcandles; that is, five (5) lumens or one (1) watt per square foot of floor area measured in the darkest portion. Light switches for stairs and hallways shall be readily accessible to occupants using the same except where janitorial service is provided and the artificial lighting for hallways and common areaways is supplied from a master control switch. 
(4)  Overloading of circuits is prohibited. Where such a violation exists, the owner shall be required either to install a line or lines of sufficient capacity to absorb the peak seasonal load to which such line or lines are subjected or to install a fusestat or fusestats that will limit the use of such existing line or lines to their proper, rated capacity. 
(5)  Fuses and protective devices. Maximum fuse sizes consistent with safety shall be posted conspicuously on the inside cover of all fuse boxes and no fuse shall be installed therein in excess of the stated maximum. Fusestats shall be installed in any fuse box located in any part of the premises which is in the exclusive possession of occupants other than the owner. 
(6)  Outlets and fixtures. Every electrical outlet and fixture shall be properly installed and maintained in good and safe condition so as not to cause a fire or electrical shock hazard and shall be properly connected to the source of power. No ceiling or wall fixture shall be used to supply power to equipment other than that for which these are designed. 
(7)  Wiring. Insulation shall be provided for all wiring and cables and shall be kept in good repair. No loose or temporary wiring shall be used except extension cords six (6) feet in length or less that are in good and safe condition, run directly from portable fixtures or appliances to convenience outlets, and do not lie under rugs or other floor coverings, nor extend through doorways, transoms, holes or other openings through structural elements. 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. 

--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. 
 
§ 254-24. - Lighting and ventilation. 
A.  Residential. 
(1)  Habitable rooms. 
(a)  Every habitable room shall have at least one (1) window or skylight facing directly to the outdoors except as provided hereinafter. The minimum total window area, measured between stops, for every habitable room shall be ten percent (10%) of the floor area or twelve (12) square feet, if the latter area is greater. Whenever the only window in a room is the skylight-type window in the top of such room, the total window area of such skylight shall equal at least fifteen percent (15%) of the total floor area of such room. 
(b)  Whenever walls or other portions of structures face a window of any such room and such light obstructing structures are located less than three (3) feet from the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room such a window shall not be deemed to face directly outdoors and shall be included in calculating the required minimum window area. 
(c)  Every habitable room shall have at least one (1) window or skylight which can be opened easily or such other device as will adequately ventilate the room. The total of openable window area in every habitable room shall be equal to at least fifty percent (50%) of the minimum window area size, as hereinabove provided, except where there is supplied some other approved device affording adequate ventilation. 
(d)  In any row house constructed prior to 1951 and not used for boardinghouse or lodging house purposes, any interior room not having its own source of natural light and ventilation may be used for living purposes if it contains equivalent artificial means of light [six (6) footcandles per square foot over the area of the room measured thirty (30) inches above floor level at the center of the room] and a mechanical means of ventilation, whose capacity is marked clearly thereon, that provides two (2) air changes per hour or one-half (½) of a cubic foot per minute per square foot for each habitable room other than a kitchen and three (3) air changes per hour, or one and one-half (1 ½) cubic feet per minute per square foot for a kitchen. 
(2)  Bathrooms and water closet compartments. Every bathroom and water closet compartment shall comply with lighting and ventilation requirements for habitable rooms contained in Subsection A(1) of this section, except that the total window area or skylight area shall be four (4) square feet, not twelve (12) square feet, if this figure is greater than the specified percentage of the total floor area, and with the further exception that no window or skylight shall be required in adequately ventilated bathrooms and water closet compartments equipped with a ventilation system providing at least six (6) air changes per hour or one and one-half (1 ½) cubic feet per minute per square foot, whose capacity is marked clearly thereon, and which is operated either continuously or automatically when the room is in use. 
(3)  Common spaces other than habitable rooms, bathrooms and water closet compartments. 
(a)  Every portion of each cellar, furnace room, utility room, hall, landing, staircase and all similar nonhabitable space in a dwelling shall have artificial light available at all times that shall be sufficient to provide an illumination of at least five (5) footcandles; that is, five (5) lumens or one (1) watt per square foot of floor area measured in the darkest portion thereof. 
(b)  Every portion of any interior or exterior passageway or staircase common to three (3) or more families in a dwelling shall be illuminated at all times with light of at least five (5) footcandles; that is five (5) lumens or one (1) watt per square foot of floor area measured in the darkest portion of the normally traveled stairs and passageways. In dwellings comprising two (2) dwelling units, such illumination shall not be required at all times if separate switches for the control of such light are provided at points convenient and readily accessible to each dwelling unit. 
(4)  Public passageways. 
(a)  Every public hall, stairway and passageway in every multiple dwelling, boardinghouse and lodging house shall be ventilated adequately by the natural means specified below or by a ventilating system providing at least one (1) air change per hour [one-fourth (1/4) cubic foot per minute per square foot] and whose capacity is marked clearly thereon. 
(b)  Any of the specified building types meeting the pertinent standard or standards listed below shall be considered ventilated adequately by natural means: 
[1]  A building three (3) stories or thirty (30) feet in height or less with front entrance door not less than thirty (30) inches in width and six (6) feet eight (8) inches in height. 
[2]  A building over three (3) stories or thirty (30) feet in height with hall, stairway and/or passageway window or windows whose total area is equal at least to ten percent (10%) of the total floor area of said hall, stairway and/or passageway. 
[3]  A building six (6) stories in height or less served by a skylight with a minimum openable area of forty (40) square inches. 
(5)  Utility spaces. Utility spaces which contain heat producing, air-conditioning and other operating mechanical equipment shall be ventilated to the outer air and air from such spaces shall not be recirculated to other parts of the building. 
(6)  Special spaces. Natural ventilation of spaces such as attics, basements, cellars and enclosed basementless spaces shall be provided by opening of sufficient space to overcome dampness and minimize the effect of conditions conducive to decay and deterioration of the structure and to prevent excessive heat in attics. 
B.  Nonresidential. 
(1)  Occupiable rooms. 
(a)  Every occupiable room shall contain light transmitting media opening to the sky or on a public street, yard or court that are adequate to provide an average illumination of six (6) footcandles over the area of the room measured at a height of thirty (30) inches above floor level in the center of the room, or an alternate artificial method or device that will provide the equivalent minimum amount of light. 
(b)  Every occupiable room shall contain ventilating skylights, monitors, louvers, windows, transoms, doors or other natural means of ventilation capable of providing a volume of four (4) air changes per hour [one and one-half (1 ½) cubic feet per minute per square foot] if the room contains less than one thousand (1,000) cubic feet per individual, (2) air changes per hour [one-half (1 ½) cubic feet per minute per square foot] if the room contains one thousand (1,000) cubic feet or more per individual or an alternate mechanical ventilating device, whose capacity is marked clearly thereon, that will provide the equivalent minimum amount of air. 
(2)  Public passageways. Hallways shall have at least one (1) window opening directly on a street or on a required court or yard in each story, located so that light penetrates the full length of the hallway, with additional windows for each change of direction of the hallway; or the equivalent artificial lighting shall be provided. 
(3)  Utility spaces. Utility spaces which contain heat producing, air-conditioning and other operating mechanical equipment shall be ventilated to the outer air and air from such spaces shall not be recirculated to other parts of the building. 
(4)  Special spaces. Natural ventilation of spaces such as basements, cellars, loft areas and enclosed basementless spaces shall be provided by openings of sufficient size to overcome dampness and minimize the effect of conditions conducive to decay and deterioration of the structure and to prevent excessive heat in lofts.  
ARTICLE VI - Minimum Standards for Basic Equipment and Facilities 
 
§ 254-25. - Compliance required. 
No person shall occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein or any nonresidential building or any part thereof for any business, commercial, governmental, industrial, institutional or other human use which does not comply with the following requirements.  
§ 254-26. - Residential bathroom, kitchen and cooking facilities. 
A.  Dwelling units. 
(1)  Every dwelling unit shall have a bathroom within it which affords privacy to a person inside said room; contains a bathtub or shower, wash basin and flush water closet and complies with such other requirements as are set forth elsewhere in this Code unless the dwelling unit existed prior to February 24, 1960. Any dwelling unit in existence before that date may have the bathtub or shower in one (1) room and the flush water closet and wash basin in another; so long as both rooms are located within the dwelling unit, afford privacy to any person within either room and comply with all other requirements set forth elsewhere in this chapter. Where there are more than eight (8) occupants in a dwelling unit, said unit shall have two (2) bathrooms. 
(2)  Every dwelling unit shall be equipped with private kitchen fixtures located in one (1) room which shall include a supplied kitchen sink and a gas or electric kitchen stove that shall be supplied by the owner or the tenant dependent upon the rental agreement, and the room or part of a room in which said fixtures are located shall comply with such other requirements as are set forth elsewhere in this chapter. 
(3)  In the event that the tenant provides the gas stove or the electric stove, he or she shall be responsible for having it installed properly and maintained in a safe, sanitary and operable condition. 
(4)  Every kitchen stove in every dwelling unit shall include at least two (2) top burners and an oven, shall be in good order and repair and shall be properly connected to the appropriate utility system. 
(5)  Every bathtub, shower, flush water closet, kitchen sink and wash basin in every dwelling unit shall be in good working condition and repair and properly connected to a water and sewer system. 
(6)  Every bathtub, shower, kitchen sink and washbasin in every dwelling unit shall be properly connected with both hot and cold water lines. 
B.  Minimum sanitary facilities for all cooking. No cooking, including incidental cooking, shall be permitted in any dwelling unit or rooming unit, except as provided in Subsection A(3) of this section, unless it contains the following minimum sanitary equipment and facilities: 
(1)  A kitchen sink of nonabsorbent impervious material and a drainboard of appropriate materials. 
(2)  A tenant-supplied waterproof, washable container, including a tight-fitting cover of metal or other approved material, for the temporary storage and disposal of garbage. 
(3)  A refrigerator for the storage of food containing at least five (5) cubic feet of storage space shall be supplied by the owner or tenant depending upon the rental agreement, and shall be maintained in good working condition and repair and in a clean state. If the tenant supplies the refrigerator, he or she shall be responsible for maintaining it in good working condition and repair. The tenant shall be responsible for maintaining the refrigerator in a clean state whether it is supplied by him or her or by the owner. 
C.  Community cooking facilities. Cooking facilities serving more than one (1) dwelling unit or one (1) rooming unit, in which incidental cooking is permitted, or any combination thereof shall not be permitted, except nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the operation of establishments subject to licensing.  
§ 254-27. - Heating facilities; duty to supply heat. 
A.  Residential. 
[Amended 9-22-1983 by Ord. No. MC-459; 9-25-1986 by Ord. No. C-303; 10-23-1986 by Ord. No. C-322; 8-18-1988 by Ord. No. C-788] 
(1)  Supplied heating facilities. 
(a)  Every dwelling unit shall contain supplied heating facilities which are installed properly, are maintained in safe and good working condition and are capable of maintaining a minimum inside temperature of seventy degrees Fahrenheit (70° F.) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and water closet compartments when the outside temperature is at or above zero degrees Fahrenheit (0° F.). The temperature shall be read at a height of thirty (30) inches above floor level at the center of the room. 
(b)  Every dwelling unit in every building not now centrally heated shall contain heating facilities which are properly installed, are maintained in safe and good working condition and are capable of maintaining a minimum inside temperature of seventy degrees Fahrenheit (70° F.) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and water closet compartments when the outside temperature is at or above zero degrees Fahrenheit (0° F.). These facilities may be supplied by the owner or the tenant based on the rental agreement. 
(c)  Heating facilities shall be inspected at least once each year between October 1 and December 1. Such inspection shall be by a licensed plumber, licensed heating contractor or an employee of a gas utility company certified as qualified to make such inspections. Each inspection shall include such tests and visual inspections as are necessary to determine whether there is any gas leak at the premises, whether there is any defective equipment and whether there are unsafe conditions or unsafe equipment present. 
(d)  The person, firm or corporation making the inspection and the owner or a person in charge of the premises shall each keep a copy of the inspection record until the next annual inspection. The owner or person in charge of the premises shall exhibit a copy of the inspection report to any city inspector on demand. 
(e)  If any unsafe conditions or unsafe equipment are found, the inspector shall apply a red tag in a clearly visible location at or near the heater, furnace or thermostat, stating substantially as follows: 
WARNING: This equipment is unsafe to use. Do not attempt to light or turn on this equipment until complete repairs have been made and this warning tag has been removed by an authorized inspector. For information telephone (telephone number to be supplied.) 
(2)  Where central heating required. Decentralized heating systems now in use may be continued in use in accordance with Subsection A(1)(a) and (b) above, provided that the above mentioned decentralized heating systems conform with all other applicable codes and standards. [9] 
(3)  Facilities required in lieu of central heating. All dwelling units and rooming units not having central heating shall be permitted to be heated (in the interim) by supplied space heaters. 
(4)  Every space heater shall comply with all of the following requirements: 
(a)  Every space heater burning gaseous, liquid or solid fuels shall be permanently installed. 
(b)  Every space heater burning gaseous, liquid or solid fuels shall be properly vented to a chimney, duct or flue leading to outdoor space. 
(c)  Every space heater shall have a permanently affixed, fire resistant panel beneath it. 
(d)  Every space heater located within two (2) feet of a wall shall be equipped with insulation sufficient to prevent overheating of the wall. 
(e)  Every space heater smoke pipe shall be equipped with guards, properly constructed of nonflammable material, at any point where the pipe goes through a ceiling, partition or wall. 
(f)  Every space heater shall comply with all the requirements of Chapter 131, Uniform Construction Codes, and electrical space heaters must meet the standards set by the Middle Department Association of Fire Underwriters. [10] 
(g)  The use of any unvented space heater burning gaseous, liquid or solid fuels is prohibited. 
(h)  Any merchant selling unvented space heaters burning gaseous, liquid or solid fuels must display a sign, within three (3) feet of the space heater display and in full view of customers, bearing the words "Warning: the City of Jersey City Fire Prevention Bureau warns that the use of unvented space heaters burning gaseous, liquid or solid fuels is hazardous, and the use of these heaters is banned according to § 254-27A(4) of the Jersey City Code." The letters used on this sign must be no smaller than two (2) inches in height and one (1) inch in width. 
(5)  The use of portable heating equipment employing flame and solid, liquid or gaseous fuels is prohibited. 
(6)  The use of portable electric space heaters in bathrooms or water closet compartments is prohibited. 
(7)  When the owner or manager is required to supply heat. 
(a)  From October 1 to May 1, every dwelling unit, room unit, bathroom and water closet compartment shall be supplied with sufficient heat to maintain therein a minimum temperature of seventy degrees Fahrenheit (70° F.) between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. and sixty-five degrees Fahrenheit (65° F.) between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(b)  From May 1 to October 1, every dwelling unit, rooming unit, bathroom and water closet compartment shall be supplied with sufficient heat to maintain therein a minimum temperature of seventy degrees Fahrenheit (70° F.) between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. whenever the outside temperature falls below fifty-five degrees Fahrenheit (55° F.) during those hours. 
(c)  Whenever a dwelling is heated by means of a furnace, boiler or other apparatus under the control of the owner or manager of the dwelling, such owner or manager, in the absence of a written contract to the contrary, shall be deemed to have contracted, undertaken or bound himself to furnish heat in accordance with the provisions of Subsection A(1) through (7) of this section to every dwelling unit and rooming unit which contains radiators, furnace heat duct outlets or other heating apparatus outlets. 
B.  Nonresidential. 
(1)  Supplied heating facilities. Every business, commercial, governmental, industrial and institutional building shall contain supplied heating facilities which are properly installed, are maintained in safe and good working condition and are capable of maintaining a minimum inside temperature of seventy degrees Fahrenheit (70° F.) in all occupiable rooms, bathrooms and water closet compartments when the outside temperature is at or above zero degrees Fahrenheit (0° F.). The temperature shall be read at a height of thirty (30) inches above the floor level at the center of the room. Occupiable rooms located in buildings where it is not feasible to heat them to a temperature of seventy degrees Fahrenheit (70° F.), because of the nature of the business, are exempted from this requirement. 
(2)  Portable heating equipment prohibition. The use of portable heating equipment employing flame and solid, liquid or gaseous fuel is prohibited. 
(3)  When the owner or manager is required to supply heat. 
(a)  From October 1 to May 1, every occupiable room, bathroom and water closet compartment shall be supplied with sufficient heat to maintain therein a minimum temperature of seventy degrees Fahrenheit (70° F.) during whatever hours of each day the building is open for use. 
(b)  From May 1 to October 1, every occupiable room, bathroom and water closet compartment shall be supplied with sufficient heat to maintain therein a minimum temperature of seventy degrees Fahrenheit (70° F.) whenever the outside temperature falls below fifty-five degrees Fahrenheit (55° F.) between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. 
(c)  Whenever a nonresidential building is heated by means of a furnace, boiler or other apparatus under the control of the owner or operator of the building, such owner or operator, in the absence of a written contract to the contrary, shall be deemed to have contracted, undertaken or bound himself to furnish heat in accordance with the provisions of Subsection B(1) through (3) of this section to every occupiable room, bathroom and water closet compartment which contains radiators, furnace heat duct outlets or other heating apparatus outlets. 
C.  In enforcing this section the Municipal Judges shall utilize the form of summons issued by the administrative office of the court. The summons may be served upon any persons, corporations, business firms and/or partnerships violating this section by inspectors or properly authorized employees of the Division of Construction Code Official. The Judges are further authorized by rule to provide that violators may sign or execute on the back of the summons a written plea of "guilty" and the submission of a fine for offenses of this section. The fine for any offense of this section shall be as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25. 
[Amended 10-28-1980 by Ord. No. S-510; 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050; 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. 

--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. 
 
§ 254-28. - Residential plumbing facilities and water supply. 
A.  Bathroom facilities. Every bathroom required hereunder shall be provided with a flush water closet connected to the cold water line, and a shower or tub and a wash basin connected to running water, as set forth in Subsections C and E of this section. 
B.  Connection to sanitary sewer. All plumbing fixtures shall be connected to the sanitary sewer through lines which are free of corrosion, deterioration or leaks and provide unobstructed passage from the plumbing facilities within the dwelling to the sanitary sewer. 
C.  Hot and cold water. Every kitchen sink, bathroom sink and basin, tub or shower required under this chapter shall be connected to both hot and cold water lines. 
D.  Maintenance of plumbing facilities. Every facility required under Subsection A of this section shall be maintained in a sanitary condition, free of defect and in operating condition at all times. Where said facility or plumbing fixtures shall be clogged, overflow or otherwise necessitate repairs, such repairs shall be performed forthwith. 
E.  Supply of city water. Every facility using running water for domestic purposes within any building shall be connected to the public water supply system of the city. The water system shall be maintained in a good and operable condition at all times so that an adequate amount of water (not less than one gallon per minute) can be drawn from every installed hot and cold water faucet. 
F.  Water heating facility. 
[Amended 9-9-1980 by Ord. No. S-461; 10-28-1980 by Ord. No. S-502; 1-29-2014 by Ord. No. 14-001 ] 
(1)  Installation; maintenance and capacity; hot water must be furnished. 
(a)  There shall be supplied water heating facilities which are properly installed, are maintained in safe and good working condition, are properly connected with the hot water lines required under Subsection C of this section and are capable of supplying water at a minimum temperature of not less than 120 degrees Fahrenheit (120° F) and at a maximum temperature of not more than 140 degrees Fahrenheit (140° F) at all times to each hot water outlet. 
(b)  Every person, firm or corporation who shall have contracted, undertaken or shall be bound to furnish hot water to occupants of rooming houses or residences occupied by two or more families shall furnish to such occupants or tenants, at all times, 24 hours a day, seven days a week, an adequate supply of running hot water to a minimum temperature of not less than 120 degrees Fahrenheit (120° F) and at a maximum temperature of not more than 140 degrees Fahrenheit (140° F) at all times in accordance with anticipated need. 
(c)  Wherever a rooming house or residence is supplied with hot water from a plant or system operated under the control of the owner, lessor or agent of such rooming house or residence, in the absence of a written contract or agreement to the contrary, such owner, lessor or agent shall be deemed to have contracted, undertaken or bound himself to furnish hot water in accordance with the provisions of this article; and the presence of such a hot water plant or system, in any such rooming house or residence shall be prima facie evidence of such contract or agreement. 
(2)  Side arm gas water heaters. On or before January 1, 1968, no new or used side arm gas water heaters shall be installed. No side arm gas heaters shall be permitted after January 1, 1975. 
G.  In enforcing this section the Municipal Judges shall utilize the form of summons issued by the administrative office of the court. The summons may be served upon any persons, corporations, business firms and/or partnerships violating this section by inspectors of the Division of Housing Code Enforcement. The Judges are further authorized by rule to provide that violators may sign or execute on the back of the summons a written plea of "guilty" and the submission of a fine for offenses of this section. The fine for any offense of this section shall be as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25. 
[Amended 10-28-1980 by Ord. No. S-510; 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050; 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052; 1-29-2014 by Ord. No. 14-001 ]  
§ 254-29. - Screens. 
A.  Residential. 
(1)  Properly fitting screens in good repair shall be supplied for each exterior door and window of each dwelling unit or rooming unit. Such screens shall have a mesh of not less than size number sixteen (16). Window screens shall not be required in rooms on the seventh or higher floors in a building or in those rooms or buildings where room or central air conditioning is installed and operating. In establishments subject to licensing and in all buildings where janitor service is required, pursuant to this section, screens shall be installed and maintained by the owner or manager on all doors and windows from May 1 to October 1 of each year. 
(2)  Every basement or cellar window used or intended to be used for ventilation, and every other opening to a basement or cellar which might provide for entry of rodents, shall be supplied with a screen or such other device as will effectively prevent their entrance. 
B.  Nonresidential. Properly fitting screens in good repair shall be supplied for each exterior door, opening and window of every eating and drinking establishment and of all other nonresidential retail and wholesale establishments where uncooked or cooked food is sold. Such screens shall have a mesh of not less than size number sixteen (16).  
§ 254-30. - Interior rubbish containers. 
Every rooming unit shall be provided with a container of metal or other approved material for the temporary storage and disposal of rubbish.  
§ 254-31. - Exterior garbage containers. 
A.  Approved receptacles. Only the receptacles shall be used for the exterior temporary storage of garbage, refuse and liquid waste substances as required by Chapter 287, Solid Waste. [11] 
B.  Every dwelling unit and every rooming unit containing cooking facilities shall be provided with the aforesaid approved receptacles for the exterior temporary storage or garbage. 
C.  In enforcing this section, the Municipal Judges shall utilize the form of summons issued by the administrative office of the courts. Said summonses may be served upon any persons, corporations, business firms and/or partnerships violating the section by members of the Department of Public Safety, by any inspectors of the Health Division and any inspectors or properly authorized employees of the Department of Public Works. The Judges are further authorized by rule to provide that violators may sign or execute on the back of the summons a written plea of "guilty" and the submission of a fine for the first offense; provided, however, that said amount shall be less than the maximum amount fixed by Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25. [12] 
[Amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] 
Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. 

--- (12) --- 
Editor's note— Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. 
 
ARTICLE VII - Minimum Space, Use and Egress Requirements 
 
§ 254-32. - Occupancy standards; net floor area. 
No person shall occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein or any nonresidential building or any part thereof for any business, commercial, governmental, industrial, institutional or other human use which does not comply with the following requirements: 
A.  Dwelling units. Every dwelling unit shall contain a minimum net floor area of one hundred fifty (150) square feet for the initial occupant thereof, two hundred fifty (250) square feet for two (2) occupants and one hundred (100) additional square feet for each occupant thereafter, except that, for the purpose of this section, children under one (1) year of age shall not be counted as occupants. The minimum overall height of the area to be included in this calculation shall be seven and one-half (7 ½) feet from the floor to the ceiling, except in structures or dwelling units legally erected or converted for residential use prior to 1951 to which the height requirement shall be six and one-half (6 ½) feet. 
B.  Required space in sleeping rooms. Except as required under Subsection C, each room utilized for sleeping purposes shall have a minimum dimension of seven (7) feet and a minimum net floor area of seventy (70) square feet for the initial occupant, fifty (50) square feet for each additional occupant, except that children under one (1) year of age shall not be counted as occupants for the purpose of this section. In existing structures built prior to 1951, if any dwelling has no room at least ten (10) feet by twelve (12) feet in size, two (2) persons will be allowed to sleep in the largest room therein so long as it is nine (9) feet in size at least. 
C.  Where additional area required in sleeping rooms. Rooms utilized for sleeping purposes shall have a minimum net floor area of ninety (90) square feet for the initial occupant and seventy (70) square feet for each additional occupant in: 
(1)  Room utilized for sleeping purposes in which there are cooking facilities. 
(2)  Rooms rented or available for rent in boardinghouses and lodging houses.  
§ 254-33. - Ceiling height requirements. 
A.  Habitable rooms. At least sixty (60) square feet of floor area of every habitable room shall have a ceiling height of at least seven and one-half (7 ½) feet and the floor area of that part of any room where the ceiling height is less than five (5) feet shall not be considered as part of the floor area in computing the total floor area of the room for the purpose of determining the maximum permissible occupancy thereof. Habitable rooms in dwellings legally erected or converted prior to 1951 shall have a ceiling height of at least six and one-half (6 ½) feet. 
B.  Common spaces other than habitable rooms. Every bathroom, water closet compartment, utility room, hall and passageway shall have a clear ceiling height of at least six (6) feet eight (8) inches. Bathrooms, water closet compartments, utility rooms, halls and passageways in dwellings legally erected or converted prior to 1951 are exempt from the six (6) feet eight (8) inches ceiling height requirements, but shall meet the ceiling height requirement prevailing at the time each of such dwellings was erected or converted.  
§ 254-34. - Cellars and basements. 
A.  No cellar space shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling unit or for the required bathroom facilities of a dwelling unit, boardinghouse or lodging house. 
B.  No basement space shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling unit unless: 
(1)  The floor and walls are impervious to leakage of underground and surface runoff water and are insulated against dampness. 
(2)  The total of openable window area in each room is equal at least to the minimum as required by§ 254-24A(1)(a) and (b) and is located entirely above the grade of the ground adjoining such window area. 
(3)  The total of openable window area in each room is equal at least to the minimum as required by § 254-24A(1)(c) of Article V of this chapter. 
(4)  There are no ducts, pipes or other obstructions less than six (6) feet six (6) inches above floor level. 
(5)  All furnace or other heating facilities are so located, insulated and separated from living areas by fireproof partitions or walls necessary pursuant to regulations of the Fire Chief to prevent the same from constituting an undue hazard to the safety and health of the occupants. 
(6)  There is a second means of egress conforming to § 254-38C of this Article.  
§ 254-35. - Use of sleeping rooms as passageways. 
Except in buildings legally erected for or converted to residential use prior to 1951, no dwelling or dwelling unit containing two (2) or more sleeping rooms shall have such rooms so located that access to a bathroom or water closet compartment intended for use by occupants of more than one (1) sleeping room can be had only by going through another sleeping room; nor shall room arrangements be such that access to a sleeping room can be had only by going through another sleeping room or a bathroom or water closet compartment.  
§ 254-36. - Nature of occupancy of certain dwelling and rooming units limited. 
A.  Occupancy of single-family dwelling. A single-family dwelling shall be occupied by persons composing a family and no more than two (2) other persons. 
B.  Occupancy of dwelling unit. A dwelling unit in any building other than a single-family dwelling shall be occupied by persons composing an immediate family and no more than one (1) other person except as provided in Subsection C of this section. 
C.  Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection B of this section, the Director of Housing Code Enforcement is authorized to permit, on an annual basis, a dwelling unit, in a building containing six (6) or more dwelling units, to be occupied by not more than five (5) college or university students of the same sex pursuant to written leasing arrangements between the college or university where said students are enrolled as full-time students and the owner or manager of the building containing said dwelling unit, provided that: 
(1)  A copy of the written leasing arrangements is filed with the Director of Housing Code Enforcement. 
(2)  An appropriate official of said college or university submits a written agreement that he or she will cause adequate safeguards to be provided to ensure that said dwelling is properly maintained. 
(3)  In all other respects the occupancy of said dwelling unit is in full compliance with this chapter. 
D.  Occupancy of rooming units. Rooming units shall be rented for occupancy or be occupied by adults and emancipated minors only. 
E.  Occupancy of one-room dwelling units or rooming units. Occupancy of dwelling units or rooming units having only one (1) habitable room, except for those in approved hotel, motel or dormitory facilities, shall be limited to two (2) persons. 
Cross reference— See also Ch. 188, Housing Accommodation.  
§ 254-37. - Occupancy standards to be cumulative. 
Nothing contained herein shall be construed as permitting occupancy in violation of any other occupancy standard, all occupancy standards being cumulative and not alternative.  
§ 254-38. - Means of egress. 
A.  Primary. Every dwelling unit shall have safe and unobstructed means of egress from every floor at ground level and above leading to safe and open space at ground level and accessible to a street. 
B.  Secondary. In addition, there shall be a suitable and separate secondary exit from each dwelling unit by means of a doorway, stairway, protected passageway or openable window. 
C.  Secondary from basement. The second means of egress from any basement dwelling unit may be by a second door located independently from the first means of egress and leading directly to the outside of the premises, or, in the alternative, by an openable window located no more than three (3) feet above floor level. 
D.  From building three (3) or more stories above grade. In buildings three (3) or more stories above grade that are used as boardinghouses or lodging houses, or contain three (3) or more dwelling units or contain one (1) or more nonresidential uses and two (2) dwelling units, the secondary exit from the third story and from every additional story, if any, shall be by a metal fire escape or an enclosed stairway. 
E.  From rooming units. Except in single-family dwellings, rooming units shall have a door opening directly into a common hallway or areaway. Any rooming unit located in the basement or at ground level shall be provided with a second means of egress that meets the same requirements as provided in Subsection C of this section. Where there is a rooming unit located above the first story, the common hallways or areaway into which it opens shall have two (2) means of egress remote from each other and one (1) of these shall open to a street of fireproof passage leading to a street and one (1) shall open to a yard or other safe space of sufficient area to accommodate all persons in the building. 
F.  Access to exit. Access to any exit required by Subsections A through D of this section shall not necessitate passage through any other dwelling unit or part thereof nor shall any exit be subject to locking by any device which impedes or prevents ready egress. 
G.  Door in path of egress. Any door in the path of egress shall be at least thirty (30) inches in width with a minimum height of six (6) feet six (6) inches, shall be free from obstruction and accessible from common hallways or areaways and shall open in the direction of travel if it leads to a fire escape or if it is located in a tenement house erected after 1904 or in any building erected as, or converted into, a dwelling after 1951. 
H.  Openable window in path of egress. Where a window forms a part of egress from a dwelling unit or rooming unit or from a common areaway or hallway to a fire escape, the window opening shall be at least thirty-six (36) inches in width and thirty-four (34) inches in height, whether the window is double hung or single hung. The bottom of the opening or the sill height shall not be more than three (3) feet six (6) inches above the floor. Said window shall be easy to open and shall lead directly to the fire escape or to the immediately adjacent outside ground area with maximum drop of three (3) feet six (6) inches thereto. Screens, storm windows and other barriers to the outside shall be readily opened or removed so as not to form any obstruction to occupants seeking egress in cases of emergency. 
I.  Location and number of exits. Where two (2) or more exits are required, each exit shall be as remote as practicable from the other exit or exits. All the exits shall be of such number and so located that the distance of travel from the door of each rooming unit or dwelling unit on each floor shall not exceed fifty (50) feet except in buildings of fireproof construction or in buildings equipped with automatic sprinkler systems throughout where the maximum distance of travel from the door of any unit to the nearest exit shall not exceed one hundred (100) feet, provided that two (2) of the exits shall be at least fifty (50) feet apart.  
ARTICLE VIII - Duties of Owners, Managers and Occupants 
 
§ 254-39. - Owners and managers. 
Owners and managers shall have all the duties and responsibilities prescribed in this chapter and in regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, and no owner or manager shall be relieved from any such duty or responsibility nor be entitled to defend against any charge of violation thereof by reason of the fact that the occupant also is responsible therefor and in violation thereof.  
§ 254-40. - Occupants. 
Occupants shall have all the duties and responsibilities prescribed in this chapter and in regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, and the occupant shall not be relieved from any such duty and responsibility nor be entitled to defend against any charge of violation thereof.  
§ 254-41. - Contract not to alter responsibility. 
Unless expressly provided to the contrary in this chapter, the respective obligations and responsibilities of the owner and manager on one (1) hand and the occupant on the other shall not be altered or affected by any agreement or contract by and between any of the aforesaid or between them and other parties.  
ARTICLE IX - Maintenance Responsibilities of Owners and Managers 
 
§ 254-42. - Compliance required. 
No person shall occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit for the purpose of living therein or any nonresidential building or part thereof for any business, commercial, governmental, industrial, institutional or other human use which does not comply with the requirements set forth in § 254-43.  
§ 254-43. - Maintenance of exterior of premises. 
A.  The exterior of the premises and all structures thereon shall be kept free of all nuisances, unsanitary conditions and fire or safety hazards in the public areas and any of the foregoing shall be removed and abated promptly by the owner or manager. 
B.  Without limiting the generality of Subsection A, the maintenance includes: 
(1)  Keeping alleys, driveways, fire escapes, porches, sidewalks, exterior stairways and yards reasonably clean and free from filth, garbage, obnoxious weeds, refuse or other debris and free from hazardous objects or conditions, such as excavations or holes, dead and dying trees, so as to afford safe passage and use. 
(2)  Providing and maintaining runoff drains adequate to prevent recurrent accumulations of stormwater or the entrance of water into a basement or cellar. 
(3)  Keeping the premises free of conditions conducive to infestation by vermin or insects, such as rodent harborages or stagnant water, and other known sources of infestation. 
(4)  Keeping any accessory building and any fence in good repair and free from fire, health and safety hazards. 
(5)  Providing a fence or wall of sufficient height to prevent persons from falling down the sharp drop in grade wherever there exists on any land a sharp drop in the grade of such land from the level of the street or sidewalk to said land or wherever there is a sharp drop in grade from said land to the level of the street or sidewalk and maintaining said fence or wall in safe and sound condition. 
(a)  If the Chief finds that any such fence or wall is in such condition as to create an unsafe condition or where he or she finds that no fence or wall exists where one is needed to prevent falls, he or she shall immediately notify the owner of the property and order said owner to forthwith repair, replace or install the fence or wall called for in Subsection B(5) of this section so as to eliminate such hazard. 
(b)  If the owner fails to comply with said order, the Chief shall notify the Director of Housing Code Enforcement who then shall cause such fence or wall to be repaired, replaced or installed so as to provide the required protection, and the cost thereof shall be charged to the owner of said property and collected in the manner provided in this chapter. 
(c)  In such emergency cases, the provisions of § 254-17G of Article III of this chapter regarding notice and hearing shall apply.  
§ 254-44. - Appearance of exterior of premises. 
A.  Residential. The exterior of the premises, the exterior of all dwelling and the exterior of all accessory structures shall be maintained so that the appearance of the premises and all building thereon shall reflect a level of maintenance in keeping with the residential standards of the neighborhood or such higher standards as may be adopted as part of a plan of urban renewal by the City of Jersey City. The maintenance also shall be at sufficiently high level that the appearance of the premises and structures shall not constitute a blighting factor for adjoining property owners nor an element leading to the progressive deterioration and downgrading of the neighborhood with the accompanying diminution of property values. 
B.  Prescribed methods of maintaining appearance. Without restricting the generality of Subsection A, the methods of maintaining the appearance of the exterior of premises and structures shall include the prescribed actions on the following matters: 
(1)  Front yard parking. No person shall park, stop or stand any motor vehicle, or permit or suffer the same to be done, in any front yard area of premises occupied by a dwelling, lodging house or hotel, except on driveways and parking areas constructed and installed in compliance with applicable provisions of the Jersey City Code. Effective on and after January 1, 1968, no such driveways or parking areas shall be constructed less than three (3) feet from the interior front sidewalk line adjacent to said premises. 
(2)  General maintenance. The exterior of every structure or accessory structure, including fences, shall be maintained in good repair and all surfaces thereof shall be kept painted or whitewashed where necessary for purposes of preservation and appearance. The same shall be maintained free of broken glass, loose or broken shingles or siding, crumbling stone or brick, peeling paint or other condition reflective of deterioration or inadequate maintenance to the end that the property itself may be preserved, fire and safety hazards eliminated and adjoining properties and the neighborhood protected from blighting influences. 
(3)  Landscaping. Premises shall be kept landscaped and lawns, hedges and bushes shall be kept trimmed and from becoming overgrown and unsightly so that the same may not depreciate adjoining property or impair the residential character of the neighborhood. 
(4)  Reconstruction of walls and siding. All reconstruction of walls and siding shall be of standard quality and appearance commensurate at least with the residential character of the properties in the same block and on both sides of the street on which the premises front, so that the materials used will not be of a kind that by their appearance under prevailing appraisal practices and standards will depreciate the values of neighboring and adjoining premises. 
(5)  Signs. All signs permitted by reason of other regulations or as a lawful nonconforming use shall be maintained by their owner in good repair and lettering, illustrations or pictures contained on either side thereof shall be kept legible and intact while in use. Such signs shall be removed by their owner when no longer in use. 
(6)  Storage of commercial and industrial material. No equipment or materials relating to business, commercial or industrial uses shall be stored or used at a location visible from the sidewalk, street or other public areas unless permitted under Chapter 345, Zoning, of this Code applicable to the premises. 
Cross reference— See also Ch. 263, Retail and Commercial Premises, and Ch. 296, Streets and Sidewalks. 
C.  Nonresidential. The exterior of the premises and the condition of every structure and accessory structure, including fences, shall be maintained so that their appearance shall reflect a level of maintenance in keeping with the standards of the neighborhood or such higher standards as may be adopted as part of a plan of urban renewal by the city and such that the appearance of the premises and structures shall not constitute a blighting factor for adjoining property owners nor an element leading to the progressive deterioration and downgrading of the neighborhood with the accompanying diminution of property values. 
D.  Without limiting the generality of Subsection C, the methods of maintaining the appearance of the exterior of premises and structures shall include the prescribed actions on the following matters: 
(1)  Awnings and marquees. Any awning or marquee and its accompanying structural members which extend over any sidewalk, street or other portion of the premises shall be maintained in good repair so as not to constitute a nuisance or safety hazard. In the event that such awnings or marquees are not properly maintained in accordance with the foregoing, they and their supporting members shall be removed forthwith. Where such awnings or marquees are made of cloth, plastic or similar materials any and all parts of said materials exposed to public view shall be maintained in good condition free of discoloration, excessive weathering, holes or tears. Nothing herein shall be construed to authorize any encroachment on sidewalks, streets or other parts of the public domain. 
(2)  Landscaping. Premises shall be kept landscaped and bushes, hedges and lawns shall be kept trimmed and from becoming overgrown and unsightly so that the same may not depreciate adjoining property. 
(3)  Signs and billboards. All permanent signs and billboards exposed to public view and permitted by other regulations or as a lawful nonconforming use shall be maintained in good repair. Signs which have become faded or excessively weathered or those upon which the paint has become cracked or peeled shall, with their supporting members, be removed forthwith or put into a state of good repair. All nonoperative or broken electrical signs shall be repaired or shall, with their supporting members, be removed forthwith. 
(4)  Signs or advertising; removal. 
(a)  Except for "for rent" or "for sale" signs, any temporary sign or other paper advertising material attached to a window or windows or otherwise exposed to public view shall be removed at the expiration of the event or sale for which it is erected or within sixty (60) days after erection if this occurs sooner. 
(b)  Except during the course of alterations or repairs, no more than fifty percent (50%) of the square footage of any single window or window display area shall be devoted to signs or other temporary advertising material attached to said window or windows or otherwise exposed to public view unless the establishment involved is located in a nonresidential zone and is lighted and ventilated adequately by artificial means. In the latter case, up to one hundred percent (100%) of any single window or window display area may be devoted to signs or other temporary advertising material. 
(5)  Storefronts. 
Cross reference— See also Ch. 278, Security Gates. 
(a)  All storefronts shall be kept in good repair, painted where required and free of any condition constituting a nuisance or safety hazard. 
(b)  In the event that repairs to a storefront become necessary, such repairs shall be made with materials the same as or similar to those used in the construction of the storefront and in such a manner as to permanently repair the damaged area or areas. 
(c)  Any cornice visible above a storefront shall be kept painted, where required, and in good repair. 
(6)  Windows. All windows exposed to public view shall be kept clean and free of marks or foreign substances except when necessary in the course of changing displays. No storage of materials, stock or inventory shall be permitted in window display areas or other areas ordinarily exposed to public view unless said areas first are screened from the public view by drapes, blinds or some permanent method of rendering said windows opaque, but in no case shall such storage and screening be permitted in the event that such screening would violate the natural light and ventilation regulations applicable to the premises. All permitted screening of interiors shall be maintained in clean and attractive condition and in a state of good repair.  
§ 254-45. - General safety and sanitation. 
[4-25-2018 by Ord. No. 18-020 ] 
A.  Residential. Every dwelling and accessory structure and every part thereof, whether occupied or not shall be maintained in a structurally sound condition and in a state of good repair. All parts of a dwelling whether occupied or not also shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, free of nuisances, insects, rodents, vermin or other pests, and free from fire, health and safety hazards. 
[Amended 9-24-2008 by Ord. No. 08-140] 
B.  Without restricting the generality of Subsection A, the following requirements shall be met: 
[Amended 9-24-2008 by Ord. No. 08-140; 10-27-2010 by Ord. No. 10-127; 11-24-2015 by Ord. No. 15-153 ] 
(1)  Load-bearing capacity. Every part of a dwelling shall be maintained so as to be capable of sustaining safely its own weight and any additional weight that may be put on it through normal use. 
(2)  Painting and other protective coating. All exposed surfaces susceptible to decay, at all times shall be kept painted or covered by another protective coating sufficient to prevent deterioration. 
Cross reference— See also Ch. 233, Paint Stripping. 
(3)  Weathertightness and watertightness. Every dwelling, whether occupied or not, shall be maintained so as to be weathertight and watertight. 
(4)  Foundation. 
(a)  A foundation wall of a dwelling shall be maintained so as to prevent the entrance of moisture, insects and rodents. 
(b)  Without restricting the generality of Subsection B(4)(a), the maintenance includes shoring of the wall where necessary, installing subsoil drains at the footing, grouting masonry cracks, waterproofing the wall and joists and using other suitable means. 
(5)  Exterior wall and its components. 
(a)  An exterior wall of a dwelling and its components shall be maintained so as to prevent its deterioration due to weather and insects and to preserve its appearance. 
(b)  Without restricting the generality of Subsection B(5)(a), the maintenance includes the painting, or whitewashing, repairing or restoring of the wall, coping or flashing; waterproofing of the joists; waterproofing of the wall itself; installing of termite shields in buildings erected after the adoption of this chapter, if required by Chapter 131, Uniform Construction Codes; repairing of termite shields, if any; extermination of termites in infested buildings; and treating of the soil with poison and using other suitable means. 
(6)  Exterior wall of accessory building. An exterior wall of an accessory building shall be maintained so as to prevent its deterioration and to preserve its appearance. 
(7)  Roof. 
(a)  A roof of a dwelling shall be maintained in a watertight condition so as to prevent leakage into the dwelling. 
(b)  Without restricting the generality of Subsection B(7)(a), the maintenance includes repairing of the roof and flashing, applying waterproof coatings, installing or repairing gutters and leaders and using other suitable means. 
(c)  Dangerous accumulations of snow or ice or both shall be removed from the roof of a dwelling or accessory building. 
Cross reference— See also Ch. 296, Streets and Sidewalks, Art. I. 
(8)  Windows, exterior doors and hatchways. 
(a)  Every window, exterior door and hatchway shall be maintained so as to be weathertight, watertight and rodentproof and shall be kept in good repair. 
(b)  Without restricting the generality of Subsection B(8)(a), the maintenance includes painting and renewing rotted or damaged doors, door frames, window frames, sills, sashes and casing, refitting doors and windows, weatherstripping, replacing broken or worn window cords and defective door and window hardware, reglazing and using other suitable means. 
(9)  Exterior balconies, fire escapes, landings, porches, exterior bridges and stairs. 
(a)  Exterior balconies, fire escapes, landings, porches, exterior bridges and stairs shall be provided with banisters or railings properly designed and maintained to minimize the hazard of falling and also shall be maintained free of holes and cracks, clear of obstructions and in structurally sound condition. 
(b)  Without limiting the generality of Subsection B(9)(a), the banisters or railings shall be required on the open side of a stairway, fire escape, balcony, exterior bridges, porch, landing and stairwell. In addition, the banister or railing shall be coated with a durable fire-retardant and heat-resistant coating that shall meet Class A flamespread rating of the American Society for Testing and Materials and shall be overcoated with a semigloss, fire-inert, enamel coating capable of meeting the durability standard set by Federal (DOD) Specification No. TT-P-0026B. 
(c)  All fire escapes, exterior bridges and egress balconies shall be examined and/or tested, and certified for structural adequacy and safety every five (5) years, by a professional engineer, architect or other qualified professional acceptable to the Fire Prevention Bureau; said engineer or professional shall then submit an affidavit to the Fire Prevention Bureau attesting to the structural adequacy of the fire escape/exterior bridge/egress balcony. Once the affidavit is received and approved, a green tag provided by the Bureau of Fire Prevention bearing the signature of the Fire Prevention Officer and the year of inspection shall be affixed to the ladder of the fire escape or railing of the exterior bridge or egress balcony by the property owner. 
(d)  Any fire escape, exterior bridge or egress balcony found to be in a state of deterioration or determined to be unsafe by the Fire Prevention Bureau shall be repaired immediately. Depending upon the structural condition, a load test of any fire escape shall be conducted before the escape is returned to service in accordance with the N.J.A.C. 5:23, the Uniform Construction Code. 
(e)  The affidavit of structural adequacy required by Section 254-45(B)(9)(c) shall be submitted by the owner to the City's Fire Prevention Bureau no later than December 31, 2016 and then submitted every five (5) years thereafter. 
(10)  Chimneys, smoke pipes and flues. 
(a)  Every chimney, smoke pipe and flue on a dwelling shall be maintained so as to prevent gases from leaking into the dwelling. 
(b)  Without restricting the generality of Subsection B(10)(a), the maintenance includes clearing the flue of obstructions, sealing open joints, keeping the chimneys, smoke pipes, flues and any other vent attachments thereto in structurally sound and safe condition, repairing masonry and using other suitable means. 
(11)  Fireplaces. 
(a)  Every fireplace used or intended to be used in a dwelling for burning fuel in open fires shall be maintained so that adjacent combustible materials and structural members shall not be heated to unsafe temperatures. 
(b)  Without restricting the generality of Subsection B(11)(a), the maintenance includes securing connection to a chimney that complies with the provisions of Subsection B(10) of this section and, if necessary, lining or repairing and relining the fireplace with fire-resistant material and installing, repairing or replacing the hearth. 
(12)  Light and air shafts. 
(a)  All light and air shafts shall be enclosed with guardrails to help protect those who use the roofs onto which these open from falling into such shafts. 
(b)  Guardrails for light and air shafts shall be of iron or steel of good quality, covered by at least one (1) coat of approved paint before leaving the shop and with at least one (1) additional coat of paint placed thereon immediately after installation of said guardrails. 
(c)  All such guardrails shall be constructed according to the following specifications: 
[1]  The four (4) corners forming the main supports shall be made of angle iron not less than two and one-half by two and one-half (2 ½ x 2 ½) inches by three-sixteenths (3/16) of an inch thick. Another such angle iron of the same dimensions shall be used to form the anchor around the base to bear on the roof through which the lag screws will be placed to penetrate into the trimmer and header beams forming the well opening. The corner posts are to be not less than three (3) feet in height. The top rail shall extend around all sides and shall be securely fastened to the upright angle irons forming the corner posts. All top rails shall be made of angle iron one and one-half by one and one-half (1 ½ x 1 ½) inches by three-sixteenths (3/16) of an inch thick. All corners are to be mitered. The intermediate rail shall be of wrought iron or steel slat material not less than one and one-half (1 ½) inches by three-sixteenths (3/16) of an inch thick. All members are to be secured to each other by means of rivets or properly welded joints. 
[2]  The angle iron forming the base bearing upon the roof shall be secured to the roof by means of lag screws not less than five-eighths (5/8) of an inch in diameter and five (5) inches long, properly screwed into bored holes in the trimmer and header beams, said holes to be not more than seven-sixteenths (7/16) of an inch in diameter, and the center of such holes shall be in the center of the outside trimmer or header beam, for all openings such as these have double beams framing the opening. 
(d)  All such guardrails also shall be made to conform with such other requirements as may be necessary to secure the utmost protection to all concerned. 
(13)  Stairs, handrails and banisters. 
(a)  Interior stairs and stairways in every structure used for human habitation shall be maintained in structurally sound condition, capable of sustaining any weight that may be put on these through normal use and free of defects and obstructions. 
(b)  Without restricting the generality of Subsection B(13)(a), the maintenance includes repairing or replacing treads or risers that show excessive wear or are broken, warped or loose and supporting structural members that are rotted or deteriorated. 
(c)  Handrails or banisters shall be provided for all interior stairs, stairways and balconies, shall be securely attached, shall be of sufficient height and shall be so maintained as to guard against accidents. 
(d)  Without restricting the generality of Subsection B(13)(c), the maintenance includes repairing or replacing broken, loose or missing handrails or balusters. 
(14)  Basements and cellars. The ceilings, floors and walls of every basement and cellar are to be kept dry and free from dampness at all times regardless of exterior weather conditions, and all basements and cellars are to be kept ventilated at all times. 
(15)  Floors. 
(a)  Every floor in a dwelling shall be kept in a clean condition and shall be maintained so as to be free of broken, loose, protruding, rotted or warped boards or broken or cracked tile that might cause an accident or what might serve as an entry point for rodents. 
(b)  Without restricting the generality of Subsection B(15)(a), the maintenance includes the repairing or replacing of floorboards or tiles; and, where the floorboards have been covered by the owner or the tenant, dependent upon the rental agreement, with linoleum or some other covering that has become torn or so worn that it retains dirt, the repairing or replacing of the linoleum or other covering by the owner or the tenant as provided in the rental agreement. 
(16)  Bathroom, kitchen and water closet compartment floors. 
(a)  Residential. Bathroom, kitchen and water closet compartment floors shall be surfaced with water-resistant material by the owner or the tenant, according to the rental agreement, and at all times shall be kept in a clean, dry and sanitary condition by the tenant; and shower room floors also shall be kept clean and sanitary by the tenant. 
(b)  Nonresidential. Bathroom, kitchen and water closet compartment floors shall be surfaced with water-resistant material and shall be kept in a clean, dry and sanitary condition at all times. 
(17)  Basement and cellar floors. In structures erected after 1951, floors of basements and cellars shall be paved with stone or concrete not less than four (4) inches thick, but in structures erected prior to 1951, brick or concrete floors not less than two (2) inches thick shall be acceptable. All basement and cellar floors shall be maintained at all times in a clean and smooth condition and free from breaks, cracks and other hazards. 
(18)  Supporting structural members. Supporting structural members are to be kept structurally sound, free of deterioration and capable of bearing imposed loads safely. 
(19)  Walls and ceilings. 
(a)  Every wall and ceiling in a dwelling shall be maintained in clean condition and free of breaks or holes and loose plaster or other material which might cause injury if it collapsed. 
(b)  The surface of every ceiling and wall shall be kept smooth, clean and free of flaking loose or peeling paint, plaster or paper. The finish of these surfaces shall be capable of being maintained in a sanitary condition free of visible foreign matter and of vermin. When it becomes necessary to accomplish the foregoing or any part thereof, such interior surfaces shall be spackled, painted, papered or otherwise provided with a protective coating appropriate for the surface material. This shall be done at least once every three (3) years unless it is clearly unnecessary. 
[Amended 9-27-1989 by Ord. No. McC-23] 
(20)  Interior painting. 
(a)  To protect occupants and the general public against the danger of lead poisoning, no lead paint may be used to cover interior ceilings, floors, trim, walls or other interior surfaces of any dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit. 
(b)  To reduce the danger of the spread of fire, effective January 1, 1970, every staircase and/or stairwell leading from the basement or cellar to the first floor and every common passageway, staircase and stairwell within every establishment subject to licensing and every tenement house three (3) or more stories in height shall be coated with a fire-retardant coating that meets the American Society for Testing and Materials standard for Class A flamespread rating. 
(21)  Freedom from infestation. All parts of the premises shall be maintained so as to prevent infestation. 
(22)  Freedom from accumulations and obstructions. Freedom from accumulations and obstructions and other putrefactive or combustible material shall be permitted in common or private areaways, balconies, hallways, porches or stairways or in common or private basements or cellars, except that garbage stored in proper containers may be set outside for removal, pursuant to Subsection B(26) of this section, the night before the time set for its collection by the garbage removal agency of the city. 
(23)  Garbage containers for exterior of building. Where there are one (1) or more occupants in any dwelling unit other than the one occupied by the owner, the owner shall supply for each dwelling unit a watertight container, with tight-fitting cover and made of metal or other approved material, at the exterior of the premises for the removal of garbage and rubbish. 
(24)  Responsibility for removal of garbage. The owner or manager shall have the duty and responsibility of removing garbage whenever a janitor is required for the premises in accordance with Subsection B(26) of this section. 
(25)  Accumulating rubbish and nonfireproof storage prohibited. Storage bins, rooms and areas shall not be used for accumulated garbage or rubbish; provided, however, that enclosed spaces or rooms in the interior of dwellings which are used exclusively as garbage collection points, are equipped with garbage containers complying with § 254-26B(2) and from which room or space the containers are removed by the janitor at least once daily shall not be prohibited. Inflammable or combustible liquids or other materials may not be stored on the premises unless these are of a type approved for storage by the regulations of the Department of Public Safety, and then only in such quantities and in such fireproof containers as may be prescribed by the regulations. 
[Amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] 
(26)  Janitorial service. In every dwelling containing three (3) or more dwelling units or rooming units or combination thereof, in which the owner does not reside, said owner shall provide or designate a superintendent, janitor, caretaker or housekeeper who shall maintain the premises in compliance with this chapter at all times and keep the interior and exterior of the premises free from filth, garbage and rubbish. All garbage and waste materials in each dwelling unit shall be deposited daily by the occupants in the exterior garbage containers supplied by the owner or shall be placed in the incinerator or on the dumbwaiter if incinerator or dumbwaiter service is provided. Where garbage containers are supplied, the janitor shall place the same outside for collection according to the schedule of the garbage removal agency of the city. 
(27)  Address of superintendent. In the event that said superintendent, janitor, caretaker or housekeeper shall not reside on the premises under his or her care, the owner or manager shall make said person's name, address and telephone number known to all tenants, and shall register the same with the Director of Housing Code Enforcement, and also shall make available and known to all tenants and the Director of Housing Code Enforcement the name, address and telephone number of an alternate individual who shall be responsible during the absence of said superintendent, janitor, caretaker or housekeeper. 
(28)  Residence on premises. 
(a)  In any premises containing six or more dwelling units, rooming units or combination thereof, the superintendent, janitor, caretaker or housekeeper shall reside on the premises. 
(b)  Where more than one building on adjoining premises or on premises in near proximity to each other are in common ownership or under common management or maintenance supervision, the requirements contained in Subsection B(28)(a) shall apply separately to each building unless the buildings contain forty-two (42) units or less and the owner can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Director of Housing Code Enforcement that proper operation of the premises and provision of all essential services and facilities as required under city codes and ordinances can be provided by a resident superintendent, janitor, caretaker or housekeeper of one building who shall assume responsibility for the other building or buildings adjoining or in near proximity to his or her place of residence. 
(29)  Authority and competence of superintendent. 
(a)  Every building superintendent, janitor, caretaker or housekeeper shall have sufficient knowledge, competence and responsibility to perform his or her duties in accordance with the minimum standards set by this chapter for janitorial service. 
(b)  The owner or manager of each and every residential building shall provide its superintendent, janitor, caretaker or housekeeper with a list of contractors whom he or she shall contact if an emergency occurs at any time when the owner or manager cannot be reached by telephone, to arrange for immediate correction of the condition or conditions causing the emergency, so as to assure continual operation of all essential services and facilities required under this chapter. 
(30)  Owner responsibility for janitorial services. The failure of any superintendent, janitor, caretaker or housekeeper to comply with the provisions of this chapter, even in disobedience of instructions, shall not relieve the owner or manager from the duties and responsibilities imposed by this chapter. 
(31)  Extermination of pests. Every owner of a dwelling containing two or more dwelling units, whether occupied or unoccupied, shall be responsible for the extermination of insects, rodents, vermin or other pests on the premises. Whenever, infestation exists in two or more of the dwelling units in any dwelling, or in the shared or public parts of any dwelling containing, two or more dwelling units, extermination thereof shall be the responsibility of the owner. As appropriate, but especially where the presence of bedbugs has been established, the owner shall treat (1) the two units, on either side of the affected unit, (2) the units directly above and below the affected unit and (3) the two units on either side of the units above and below the affected unit, for a total of nine units. A building owner is responsible to provide extermination service by a certified exterminator for bedbugs as many times as necessary to totally eliminate the reported bedbug problem. As used in this ordinance, the term "certified exterminator" means an exterminator who has had specialized training in bedbug eradication. Once the problem is eradicated, the building owner is not responsible to provide treatments if a new bedbug problem arises with the same tenant during the remainder of the current calendar year. The owner's responsibility to exterminate will be triggered upon receipt of a letter from the tenant stating the presence and description of the infestation and requesting extermination. A copy of the letter must be filed with the Division of Health and the Division of Housing Code Enforcement. The Health Officer may direct the owner to utilize the type of treatment he or she deems appropriate depending upon the type of infestation. 
(32)  Maintenance of public areas. Every owner of a dwelling containing two or more dwelling units, whether occupied or unoccupied, shall be responsible for maintaining in a clean and sanitary condition all communal, shared; public areas of the dwelling and premises, including the yard and accessory buildings thereof which are used or shared by the occupants of two or more dwelling units. 
(33)  Notification to tenant of maximum occupancy. No owner shall occupy or rent to any other person or persons for occupancy or allow any other person to occupy any dwelling or dwelling unit unless he or she has informed such persons in writing of the maximum number of individuals that may live in said dwelling or dwelling unit. 
(34)  Responsibility to supply equipment and facilities. It shall be the owner's responsibility to supply, unless stipulated otherwise in this Code or otherwise provided for under lease agreement, all of the equipment and facilities required by this chapter to each and every dwelling unit, whether occupied or unoccupied. 
(35)  Installation and maintenance of supplied facilities. Every supplied facility, piece of equipment or utility which is required under this chapter shall be so constructed or installed that it will function properly and shall be maintained by the owner free of defect and in working condition at all times. 
(36)  Repairs and maintenance of supplied facilities. The owner is responsible for all repairs and maintenance to supplied facilities and equipment required by this chapter, except where provided otherwise in the chapter, regardless of any agreement or lease entered into between owner and occupant. 
(37)  Ban or interruption of supplied services and facilities. No owner or manager shall cause any service, facility, equipment or utility which is required to be supplied under the provisions of this chapter to be removed from, or shut off from, or discontinued for any dwelling or dwelling unit, whether occupied or unoccupied, except for such temporary interruption as may be necessary while repairs, replacements or alterations are in the process of being made. 
(38)  Owners or managers shall maintain minimum heat in every dwelling unit and in all common areas in accordance with Ordinance 254-27A(7)(a). 
(39)  If an owner or manager is deemed to be the violation of this chapter and the violation persists beyond its compliance date, the owner or manager shall provide a report to the Construction Code Official stipulating the duration of time necessary to complete the required repairs and which shall include the status of any relocated tenants, as applicable. 
C.  Nonresidential. The exterior and interior of every structure or accessory structure (including fences, signs or storefronts) shall be maintained in clean and sanitary condition and in good repair and all surfaces thereof shall be kept painted or whitewashed where necessary for purposes of preservation and appearance. 
D.  Without restricting the generality of Subsection C, the following requirements shall be met: 
[Amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] 
(1)  Responsibility for removal of garbage. The owner or manager shall have the duty and responsibility of removing garbage. 
(2)  Accumulating rubbish and nonfireproof storage prohibited. Storage bins, rooms and areas shall not be used for accumulated garbage or rubbish. Inflammable or combustible liquids or other materials may not be stored on the premises unless these are of a type approved for storage by the Department of Public Safety and then only in such fireproof storage containers as may be prescribed by the regulations. 
(3)  Maintenance of exterior surfaces. All exterior surfaces shall be maintained free of broken glass, loose shingles, crumbling stone or brick, excessive peeling paint or other condition reflective of deterioration or inadequate maintenance to the end that the property itself may be preserved, safety, health and fire hazards eliminated and adjoining properties and the neighborhood protected from blighting influences. 
(4)  Maintenance of interior surfaces. All interior surfaces shall be kept clean and free of cracks, holes, excessive peeling paint or other conditions reflective of deterioration or inadequate maintenances. 
E.  Vacant buildings shall be properly secured as required by § 254-21 hereof. [13] 
Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note— Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. 
 
§ 254-46. - Security measures for residential buildings. 
A.  Every building containing four (4) or more dwelling units shall be provided with: 
(1)  Self-locking doors at every entranceway providing access to each dwelling unit from all hallways or other common area. 
(2)  Self-locking and self-closing doors at every entranceway providing access to each building from the exterior thereof, except as hereinafter provided. 
B.  Except in wood frame detached buildings, every building containing four (4) or more dwelling units shall be provided with either: 
(1)  A self-closing and self-locking main entranceway door to the exterior thereof which shall be opened only by a key from the outside and by an electrical control system operable from each dwelling unit; 
(2)  A peephole in the front door of each dwelling unit; or 
(3)  A doorperson at the main entranceway door to the exterior thereof. 
C.  All locks, self-locking and self-closing doors and electrical control systems, such as buzzers, bells or intercom systems, shall be maintained in good and operable condition at all times. 
D.  Where a building remains vacant for thirty (30) days or more it shall be the duty of the owner to board up or otherwise properly secure all windows, doors and other openings to prevent unauthorized entry.  
ARTICLE X - Property Used for Illegal Activities 
[Added 6-24-1992 by Ord. No. 92-075] 
 
§ 254-47. - Definitions. 
[Amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] 
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth herein: 
CHIEF OF POLICE - The Chief of the Division of Police or his or her designees in the enforcement of this Article. 
COSTS - Those cost actually incurred by the city for the physical securing of the structure, as well as tenant relocation costs, if required to be paid to any person. 
OWNER - Any person, agent, form, corporation, association or partnership, including a mortgagee in possession in whom is vested: 
A.  All or part of the legal title to the property; 
B.  All or part of the beneficial ownership and a right to present use and enjoyment of the premises; or 
C.  An occupant of the property. 
PERSON - Any natural person, association, partnership or corporation capable of owning or using property in the State of New Jersey. 
SPECIFIED CRIME PROPERTY - Any structure or place where activity involving the unlawful possession, use, sale, delivery or manufacture of a controlled substance, as defined in N.J.S.A. 24:21-35 or 2C:31-2, as amended from time to time, has occurred or is occurring. 
STRUCTURE - Any kind of structure, edifice or building, or unit(s) thereof, regardless of its commercial, residential or institutional use, including apartment units, rental units or garages of common areas, exterior or interior.  
§ 254-48. - Use as specified crime property prohibited. 
A.  Use of property. It is unlawful for structures to be employed or used as specified crime property within the City of Jersey City. If, pursuant to the procedures contained in this Article, property is found to be used or employed as such, it is subject to closure for a period of up to one (1) year. 
B.  Personal responsibility. It is unlawful for any person to employ, use, maintain or allow the employment, use or maintenance of specified crime property under their ownership and/or control by renting it or otherwise allowing or suffering others to so use it. A person who is found in violation of this subsection shall be subject to civil penalties of up to five hundred dollars ($500.) per day for each day the property has been used as specified crime property, as set forth herein.  
§ 254-49. - Violations and penalties; waiver. 
Unless vacation of a premises is waived or set aside by the Superior Court, it shall be unlawful for any person to use or occupy any structure determined to be specified crime property after the period prescribed in a notice, after service of notice has been made pursuant to §§ 254-50 and 254-51. 
A.  The provisions of this Article may be waived by the city in the event that the Director of Public Works determines that exigent circumstances are such that the use or occupancy of the structure prior to a plenary judicial review is mandated and not contrary to the public safety. 
[Amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] 
B.  Any occupant who fails to cease the use or occupancy of a structure, as required by this Article, shall be subject to the fines and penalties, civil or otherwise, provided for violation of this Article pursuant to a court order, after notice and an opportunity to be heard by the court having jurisdiction of an action brought pursuant to this Article.  
§ 254-50. - Determination and notice of violation. 
When the Chief of Police has determined that a structure has been or is being used or maintained in violation of § 254-48, he or she shall request the Corporation Counsel to commence proceedings to cause the closure of the structure unit or area, as well as the imposition of civil penalties against any or all of its owner.  
§ 254-51. - Contents of notice. 
The Chief of Police shall notify the owner of record, in writing, that the structure has been determined to be specified crime property. 
A.  The notice shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The street address and a legal description sufficient for identification of the premises on which the structure is located. 
(2)  A statement that the Chief of Police has found the structure to be in violation of this Article, with a concise description of the conditions leading to his or her findings. 
B.  A copy of the notice shall be served on the owner, resident, manager and/or agent at least ten (10) days prior to the commencement of any judicial action by the city. Service shall be made either personally or by mailing a copy of the notice by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to each person at their address, as registered with the city clerk, or in the case of properties not subject to such registration, to the address of the owner of record as it appears on the last equalized assessment of the tax roll, as well as on the last instrument of conveyance as recorded in the County Clerk's office, and as may be otherwise known to the Chief of Police. If no address appears or is known to the Chief of Police, then a copy shall be mailed first class, postage prepaid, addressed to such person at the address of the structure believed to be specified crime property. 
C.  A copy of the notice shall also be served on the occupants of the structure. Service of this notice shall occur not less than five (5) days prior to the commencement of any judicial proceedings and shall be made either personally or by mailing a copy of the notice by first class mail, postage prepaid, to them at the structure. 
D.  Furthermore, a copy of the notice shall be posted at the property if ten (10) days has elapsed from the service or mailing of the notice to the owner(s) without return proof of receipt.  
§ 254-52. - Failure to receive notice. 
The failure of any person or owner to receive actual notice of the determination by the Chief of Police shall not invalidate or otherwise affect the proceedings under this Article unless, and to the extent it shall be determined, that deprivation of notice substantially interfered with the owner's ability to abate any nuisance within the time period prescribed.  
§ 254-53. - Commencement of action. 
[Amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] 
A.  Civil proceeding. Concurrent with the notification procedures set forth above, the Chief of Police shall send a copy of the notice to the Director of Public Safety together with any other documentation which he or she believes supports the closure of the structure and the imposition of civil penalties. The Director of Public Safety shall then request the Corporation Counsel to commence civil proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction seeking the closure of the structure as well as the imposition of civil penalties against any and all of the owners thereof, and any such other relief as may be deemed appropriate. 
B.  Exception: agreement to abate conditions. Nothing contained in Subsection A shall be construed to limit the ability of the Director of Public Safety, prior to the institution of judicial proceedings, to enter into agreements with an owner willing to voluntarily abate the condition(s) giving rise to the violation.  
§ 254-54. - Stay of proceedings. 
Except in a proceeding under § 254-57, if, after commencement but prior to the trial of an action brought by the city pursuant to this Article, an owner specifically commits, in an enforceable manner, to pursue a course of action which is calculated to abate the conditions giving rise to the violation(s), the city shall agree to stay proceedings for a period of not less than ten (10) nor more than sixty (60) days. The owner or the Corporation Counsel may thereafter petition the court for such additional periods of time as may be necessary to complete the action(s) contemplated by the stipulation. However, in the event that the Corporation Counsel reasonably believes the owner is not diligently pursuing the action(s) contemplated by the stipulation, he or she shall then apply to the court for a release from the stay seeking relief, as is deemed appropriate.  
§ 254-55. - Burden of proof. 
In all actions seeking the closure of a structure as a specified crime property, the Corporation Counsel shall first determine that sufficient evidence exists to meet the burden of proof that the structure is a specified crime property. In all actions seeking civil penalties from an owner, the Corporation Counsel shall first determine that sufficient evidence exists to meet the burden of proof to show that the owner had actual or constructive knowledge of activities or conditions at the structure constituting a violation of this Article, on the basis of the notice provided hereunder or otherwise, and of the fact that the owner did not, thereupon, act to abate the activity or the conditions or circumstances giving rise to the activity, including but not limited to the commencement of eviction proceedings in the case of an offense by a tenant.  
§ 254-56. - Defense. 
It is a defense to an action seeking the closure of a structure or penalties that the owner of the subject property acted reasonably and diligently but could not, by the exercise of reasonable care or diligence, determine that the structure had been or was being used or maintained as a specified crime property and that, upon receipt of notice of such activity pursuant to this Article, all reasonable measures were taken to abate such activity, including but not limited to the institution of summary eviction proceedings or other forms of action calculated to prevent such activity from recurring on the property.  
§ 254-57. - Closure during pendency of action. 
In the event that it is determined that the structure is an immediate threat to the public health, safety and welfare, the Corporation Counsel shall apply to the court for such interim relief that is deemed to be appropriate. In such an event, the notification procedures set forth at § 254-50 and the limitation of § 254-54 need not be complied with.  
§ 254-58. - Enforcement of closure order; costs; penalty. 
A.  In the event that a structure constitutes a specified crime property, as defined in this Article, the Corporation Counsel shall pursue, on notice to all tenants affected and all lien holders of record, in addition to all other remedies, an order of the Superior Court that it, or any unit or area of it, be closed for any period of up to one (1) year and that the owner(s) pay to the city a civil penalty of up to five hundred dollars ($500.) for each day the owner had knowledge of activities or conditions at the structure constituting a violation of this Article and failed to undertake or maintain efforts of abatement. In the event that the enforcement of this Article requires an owner to institute tenancy eviction of partition proceedings, it shall be the duty of all appropriate officials of the City of Jersey City to provide testimony or evidence in such cause. 
B.  In establishing the amount of any civil penalty to pursue, the Corporation Counsel shall consider the following factors, if appropriate, and shall cite those found applicable. 
(1)  The actions taken by the owner(s) to mitigate or correct the problem at the structure. 
(2)  The financial condition of the owner(s). 
(3)  Whether the problem at the structure was repeated or continuous. 
(4)  The magnitude or gravity of the problem. 
(5)  The economic or financial benefit accruing or likely to accrue to the owner(s) as a result of the conditions at the structure. 
(6)  The cooperativeness of the owner(s) with the city. 
(7)  The cost to the city of investigating and correcting or attempting to correct the condition. 
(8)  Any other factor deemed by the Corporation Counsel to be relevant and worthy of consideration by the court. 
C.  The Corporation Counsel may seek orders authorizing the city or ordering the owner to physically secure the structure against use or occupancy in the event that the owner(s) fail to comply with other remedies agreed to or ordered by the court within the time specified. In the event that the city is authorized to secure the property, all costs reasonably incurred by the city to effect a closure shall be made an assessment lien upon the property. 
D.  The city bureau(s) effecting the closure shall be responsible for maintaining records and providing statements of costs for submission by the Corporation Counsel to the court.  
§ 254-59. - Relief from closure order. 
A.  The Corporation Counsel may enter into consent orders, with the approval of the court, with an owner of a structure determined to be specified crime property to provide relief from the court's judgment if the owner: 
(1)  Appears and pays all costs associated with the proceedings under this Article. 
(2)  Files a bond in such a place and form as the court may by order direct, in an amount not less than the tax assessed value of the structure and keeps such bond in force for a period of not less than one (1) year, or for such period as the court directs. 
(3)  Enters into a stipulation with the city that the owner shall immediately abate the conditions giving rise to the determination that the property is a specified crime property and prevent the same from being established or maintained thereafter. The stipulation will then made part of the court's record. 
B.  In the event that the owner violates the terms of the stipulation, the city may thereafter apply to the court for an order awarding up to the entire amount of the aforementioned bond to the city as a penalty, as well as such other relief, including closure for any additional period of up to one (1) year, that is deemed by the court to be appropriate.  
ARTICLE XI - Maintenance Responsibilities of Occupants 
 
§ 254-60. - General responsibilities. 
A.  Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall keep in a clean and sanitary condition that part of the dwelling, dwelling unit and premises, including the yard and accessory buildings thereof, which he or she occupies and controls. 
B.  No occupant shall create fire or safety hazards by storing goods or property or by dumping garbage or refuse on the means of egress or in the public areas of the building he or she occupies.  
§ 254-61. - Rubbish disposal. 
Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of all his or her rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in the rubbish containers required by § 254-30 of Article VI.  
§ 254-62. - Garbage removal. 
A.  Every occupant of a dwelling unit in a dwelling containing no more than two (2) dwelling units shall be responsible, unless provided for otherwise under a lease agreement, for the periodic removal of all garbage and rubbish from the premises in accordance with the regulations of the city for the collection of garbage and rubbish.* 
* Editor's Note: See Ch. 287, Solid Waste. 
B.  In every dwelling containing three (3) or more dwelling units, all garbage and waste materials in each of said dwelling units shall be deposited daily by the occupants in the exterior garbage containers supplied by the owner or shall be placed by them in the incinerator or on the dumbwaiter if incinerator or dumbwaiter service is provided.  
§ 254-63. - Extermination. 
A.  Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents or other pests therein or on the premises; and every occupant of a dwelling unit in a dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit shall be responsible for such extermination whenever his or her dwelling unit is the only one infested. 
B.  Notwithstanding the foregoing provision of this Article, whenever infestation is caused by failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a ratproof or reasonably insectproof condition, extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner. 
C.  All costs of extermination shall be the sole and exclusive obligation of the owner. Such costs may not be charged to any tenant or occupant. However, the owner will not be responsible to undertake the treatment and re-treatment more than one time per year. If repeated treatments are necessary or the extermination is due to the tenant's failure to properly maintain the dwelling, notwithstanding the initial treatment and re-treatment, the costs can be charged to the tenant. 
[Added 9-24-2008 by Ord. No. 08-140]  
§ 254-64. - Screens. 
Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit containing two (2) dwelling units or less shall be responsible for hanging all screens and double or storm doors and windows whenever the same are required under the provisions of this chapter or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, except where the owner has agreed to supply such service.  
§ 254-65. - Kitchen facilities and plumbing fixtures. 
Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all food storage receptacles, cooking facilities and plumbing fixtures therein in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care in the proper use and operation thereof.  
§ 254-66. - Heating facilities. 
Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care, proper care and proper operation of supplied heating facilities.  
§ 254-67. - Care in use of premises and facilities. 
Every occupant of a dwelling unit which is let or rented from another shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care and the proper use of the dwelling unit, and its component parts, and supplied facilities, equipment, fixtures and furnishings.  
§ 254-68. - Overoccupancy unlawful. 
No occupant shall occupy or permit the occupancy of any dwelling or dwelling unit in violation of the occupancy standards established in this chapter.  
§ 254-69. - Owner's right of entry. 
Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall give the owner thereof, or his or her agent or employee, access to any part of such dwelling or dwelling unit or its premises at all reasonable times for the purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter or with any lawful rule or regulation adopted or any lawful order issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.  
§ 254-70. - Maintenance of plumbing. 
Every occupant or operator shall maintain all plumbing fixtures used by him or her in a clean and sanitary condition, and he or she shall not deposit any material in any fixture or sewer system which would result in stoppage of or damage to the fixture or sewer system.  
§ 254-71. - Providing notice of defect to owner. 
Where the owner or manager would not otherwise know of a defect in any facility, utility or equipment required to be furnished hereunder and the same is defective or inoperable, each occupant or manager affected thereby shall, upon learning of said defect, provide notice to the owner, manager or other person in charge of the premises. However, nothing herein shall be construed to provide a defense to any owner or manager violating this chapter.  
§ 254-72. - No occupancy without required facilities. 
No person shall occupy or continue to occupy a dwelling unit or rooming unit that does not have provision for bathroom facilities as required under § 254-26A(1) of Article VI and § 254-100A of Article XVI.  
§ 254-73. - Violations by minors. 
Any adult member of the family or any adult foster parent shall be responsible and liable for any violation of this Article caused by minors under their care or custody and occupying the same dwelling unit if the violations were created or permitted to continue with the knowledge or acquiescence or consent of said adult member or adult foster parent.  
ARTICLE XII - Illegal Transportation of Landfill; Dumping 
 
§ 254-74. - Unlawful acts. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to transport landfill without a permit or to dump or otherwise deposit garbage, rubbish or other refuse on any vacant or occupied land within the city; or to permit the growth of ragweed or other noxious weeds or to permit the accumulation of stagnant water or the breeding of mosquitoes or the harboring of rodents.  
§ 254-75. - Dumping. 
[Amended 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050] 
Without restricting the generality of § 254-74 of this article, no person shall dump or otherwise deposit bottles, broken glass, carpets, crockery, cut grass, leaves, tree branches, lumber, bedding or furniture, iceboxes or refrigerators, leather, metal, old clothes, old shoes, rubber or tires on any vacant or occupied land within the city.  
ARTICLE XIII - Certificate of Necessity 
 
§ 254-76. - Applicability. 
Where any owner, manager or occupant is required to make repairs or otherwise improve his or her property and is unable to comply with this chapter without having right of access to the building or premises through or across adjoining premises not owned by him or her or under his or her control, and where right of access has been refused the owner, manager or occupant, or where the owner or person responsible for granting permission cannot be found or located, then, upon filing of affidavit setting forth the facts with the Director, the Director shall serve a five-day written notice of a hearing in accordance with the provisions for service contained in § 254-17 of Article III upon the owner, manager or occupant of any adjoining premises affected by the application.  
§ 254-77. - Hearing. 
On the day fixed for hearing the Director shall provide an opportunity for the owner, manager or occupant of the adjoining property or properties to state why access should not be granted to or across the adjoining properties.  
§ 254-78. - Issuance of certificate; conditions; bond. 
If the Director determines that access is necessary to accomplish or complete repairs or improvements necessary for compliance with this chapter, then the Director shall issue a certificate of necessity setting forth therein the person or persons to whom the certificate shall apply, such conditions as shall be necessary to protect the adjoining property, reasonable time limits during which such certificate shall operate, precautions to be taken to avoid damage and, where the Director deems proper, that a bond be procured against damage to persons or property arising out of such rights of access. The bond shall not exceed in amount $10,000, and the amount set shall take into consideration the extent, nature and duration of the repairs, the proximity of the improvement on the premises affected and potential risk of damage thereto. The bond shall be filed with the Director.  
§ 254-79. - Procedure where access refused. 
Any refusal to comply with this article or any interference with access to premises pursuant to a certificate issued hereunder shall be a violation of this chapter, and in addition to penalties provided hereunder, the Director may, upon affidavit, apply to the Judge for a warrant under the procedure set forth in § 254-14B of Article III authorizing access to the premises under appropriate conditions and circumstances as provided under § 254-78 of this article. [14] 
Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Editor's note— Original Sec. 13-70, entitled "Obligation to register," and Sec. 13-71, entitled "Contents of Limitation of Occupancy Notification," which immediately followed this section, were deleted 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050. 
 
ARTICLE XIV - Registration and Notification 
 
§ 254-80. - Changes in ownership. 
A.  Any change in address of the persons cited in N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.12C shall be reported to the Division of Construction Code Official within 30 days after such change. 
[Amended 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050; 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
B.  Upon any change in the ownership or control of any dwelling containing three or more dwelling units which is let or rented to others for the purpose of living therein, the new owner or manager shall register such transfer by making application for a new Limitation of Occupancy Notification within 30 days of the time of acquisition. 
Editor's note— Original Sec. 13-73, entitled "Reporting increases in dwelling units or occupancy," which immediately followed this section, was deleted 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050. 
Cross reference— See also Ch. 257, Property Transfers.  
§ 254-81. - Application form for notification. 
A.  Where to apply. The application for a Limitation of Occupancy Notification shall be made by the owner or manager to the Chief on forms provided by the Division of Construction Code Official. 
[Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
B.  The application shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the manager and the name and address of the owner if the manager is not the owner. 
(2)  The location of the dwelling or dwelling units, including the street and number of each entrance. 
(3)  The number of dwelling units available for rent in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and with the rules and regulations issued thereunder and in accordance with any other applicable provisions of the Jersey City Code or regulations thereof. 
(4)  If the owner or manager is a corporation, the name and address of such corporation and the name and address of its president, secretary and registered agent shall be given. 
(5)  If the owner or manager does not actually reside within the city or is not customarily present at an office in the city for the purpose of transacting business, then such owner or manager shall register the name and address of a person, or persons, who resides within or is customarily present at an office in the city who will be responsible for the maintenance and operation of the dwelling or dwelling units in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and who will be authorized to receive notices and process on behalf of the owner or manager in connection with the enforcement of this chapter. In the event that the owner or manager is a corporation, or in the event that a corporate managing agent is designated by an owner or manager, the corporation shall designate an officer or agent as the person so responsible. Said officer or agent designated as a managing agent shall meet the requirements of this subsection as to location and residence. 
(6)  Any person who signs the application herein provided for shall certify that all statements therein contained are, to the best of his or her knowledge and belief, true and correct. 
(7)  Such other information as the Chief may require.  
ARTICLE XV - Licensing[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
State Law reference— See also N.J.S.A. 55:13B-1 et seq. 
 
§ 254-82. - License required. 
[Amended 4-14-1983 by Ord. No. MC-340] 
A.  No person, firm or corporation shall manage, conduct or operate the business of keeping a furnished apartment, hotel or motel, referred to hereunder as "establishments," subject to licensing, without first securing a license therefor within the time and manner provided, nor shall any owner permit on premises owned by him or her the operation of such an establishment without a license. 
B.  No building or parts of a building shall be used as a furnished apartment, hotel or motel prior to the person, firm or corporation desiring such use making an application and receiving a license to be issued by the Director in accordance with the provisions of §§ 254-83 through 254-87 of this article. 
C.  A license shall be issued only for buildings meeting the requirements of this chapter and to the person desiring actually to use the building as a hotel, furnished apartment, motel (or dormitory), and said license shall terminate at any time after its issuance in the event that the use of the building for such purpose shall cease, or the building shall be officially declared not to be in compliance with this chapter or other applicable ordinances or rules and regulations thereto.  
§ 254-83. - License application. 
[Amended 4-14-1983 by Ord. No. MC-340] 
A.  The application for a license, as required herein, shall be submitted in triplicate to the Director on forms supplied by the Division of Construction Code Official. The application shall include: 
[Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
(1)  The name and address of the manager and the name and address of the owner if the manager is not the owner. 
(2)  The location of the establishment subject to licensing, including the street and number of each entrance. 
(3)  The number of units occupied or available for occupancy and the number of persons who may be accommodated in accordance with the occupancy provisions of this chapter and with the provisions of other applicable municipal ordinances and regulations thereof. 
(4)  Such other information as the Director may require. 
B.  All applications shall be accompanied by the required fees. 
C.  Where the applicant seeks a license for an establishment based on a claim that the same constitutes a lawful nonconforming use, the applicant shall state in the application the names and addresses of the owner and manager of the premises on the date when the use, by reason of the zone change or variance, first became nonconforming, and the number of rooms as of that date. 
D.  The application shall be signed by the owner as well as the manager and shall contain a certification of the truth of the information contained therein by both the owner and manager. 
E.  Any false information shall constitute a violation of this chapter and, in addition, grounds for revocation of any license approved pursuant thereto. 
F.  Any false information rendered knowingly and intentionally may, upon complaint of the Director, subject the party rendering it to criminal prosecution.  
§ 254-84. - Term of license; renewal. 
[Amended 4-14-1983 by Ord. No. MC-340] 
Except as otherwise provided herein, the term of the license shall be for one year, from March 1 to the last day of February of the next succeeding year, and is renewable annually.  
§ 254-85. - License fees. 
[Amended 4-14-1983 by Ord. No. MC-340] 
A.  The license fee shall be due and payable on or before March 1 of each year. The license fee for any part of a year shall be the same as the license fee for the entire year. 
B.  The license fees shall be as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges. 
[Amended 5-24-1995 by Ord. No. 95-045] 
C.  A license shall issue to a hotel upon payment of the fee provided in N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1 et seq. 
D.  When a request for a special inspection is made, a fee, the same as the registration fee, shall be charged to the person making the request.  
§ 254-86. - Procedure upon filing of application. 
[Amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] 
A.  Before any license is issued for any building for any purposes aforesaid, the Director of Public Safety shall receive a statement of the inspection required herein, certifying that the building complies in all respects with the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Upon filing the application, the Director shall immediately transmit the original to the City Clerk and one copy to the Director of Public Safety. 
(1)  The original shall be kept on file at all times in the office of the license issuing authority. 
(2)  The Director of Public Safety shall have inspections made of all establishments subject to licensing between January 1 and March 1 of each year and then shall take all following actions required to make sure all of these establishments are free from fire hazards and comply with applicable ordinances, rules and regulations for fire prevention and control. Within two weeks after the applications are filed, the Director of Public Safety shall indicate officially on each of his or her copies whether or not these buildings and premises for which licenses are sought have been found in compliance with this chapter and all applicable ordinances and rules and regulations and shall return the copies to the Director. 
C.  Inspection of the premises for compliance with this chapter and all related chapters administered by the Division of Construction Code Official shall be conducted in accordance with the regulations of the Director. 
[Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
D.  Upon completion of inspections, if the Director shall determine that the premises are in compliance, then the license shall be issued forthwith; provided, however, that if action of the Board of Adjustment is required under the Zoning Ordinance, no license shall be issued except in accordance with Chapter 345, Zoning, of this Code.  
§ 254-87. - Refusal of license or renewal; revocation or suspension. 
[Amended 3-24-1988 by Ord. No. C-708] 
A.  Notwithstanding the provisions of § 254-86 of this article, the Director may refuse to certify said application for a license where the manager or any person or persons who shall be in active management of the premises shall be found to be unfit to perform the duties thereof by reason of a record of convictions of a crime or offense involving moral turpitude, gambling or prostitution, alcoholism, illegal possession or use of drugs or narcotics, be a known carrier of a communicable disease or otherwise found to be physically or mentally unfit or unsuited by similar or equivalent circumstances for active management of the premises. 
B.  The Director may suspend or revoke a license or refuse said application for a license or renewal thereof where the conduct of the tenants is such as to constitute a general nuisance to the area where the premises are located or where the owner or operator: 
(1)  By conduct either unlawful in itself or unreasonable under all the circumstances creates or maintains a condition which endangers the safety or health of the neighborhood or disturbs the peace and tranquillity of the neighborhood. 
(2)  Conducts or maintains a premises where persons gather for purposes of engaging in unlawful conduct. 
(3)  Conducts or maintains any premises as a house of prostitution. 
C.  No owner, manager or operator of a hotel or motel shall let any room or rooms more than once between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the next day except to bona fide travelers with baggage.  
§ 254-88. - Applicant's right to hearing. 
A.  If the Director shall determine that the applicant has failed to meet the requirements of this chapter, the requirements of the Department of Public Safety or of any other ordinance of the city or laws of the State of New Jersey or that the applicant is unqualified pursuant to § 254-87 of this article or upon any suspension, revocation or failure to renew a license, the Director shall send a written notice to the applicant setting forth his or her reasons therefor. 
[Amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] 
B.  The applicant may thereupon correct any violation and apply for reinspection upon the payment of a reinspection fee as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges, or submit a written report for a hearing to the Director in which request the applicant shall state the facts on which he or she will base his or her contention that the Director's determination was in error. 
[Amended 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050] 
C.  The Director shall, within 30 days from the receipt thereof, provide upon a minimum of five days' notice to the applicant a hearing and render a decision thereon within 10 days thereafter. The Director may in such decision affirm or reverse a previous determination or modify his or her determination and agree to approve said application or terminate the suspension or revocation upon compliance with specified conditions.  
§ 254-89. - Operation without a license prohibited. 
On or after January 1, 1969, no person shall as a manager conduct or operate, or cause to be conducted or operated, or as an owner who is not also a manager knowingly allow others to conduct or operate without a license on premises owned by him any establishment subject to licensing.  
§ 254-90. - Violations and penalties. 
A.  Upon determining that the premises are in violation of this chapter, other applicable chapters or any other applicable ordinances of the city or the laws of the State of New Jersey, at any time after a license is issued, the Director shall require correction of said violation within ten (10) days' by notice in writing to the owner and manager. 
B.  Upon failure to correct the violation within the time prescribed, the owner and operator shall be liable for the penalties for violations of applicable provisions of the Jersey City Code or ordinances which are prescribed in the general provisions of the Jersey City Code. In addition thereto, the Director may suspend temporarily or conditionally refuse to renew the license issued for the premises for failure to correct the violation as aforesaid; provided, however, that if the owner or manager requests a hearing, no such suspension shall be effective until after a hearing and determination pursuant to § 254-88, which determination shall state reasonable terms and conditions upon which the suspension shall terminate or renewal shall be granted. 
C.  Where there has been a violation or conviction within one (1) year from the date of service of notice of violation and the violation shall be repeated or remain unabated resulting in a second notice of violation or conviction thereon in the Municipal Court, the Director may thereafter permanently revoke the license or refuse renewal thereof without conditions or terms.  
§ 254-91. - Changes in application. 
Any license issued hereunder shall cover only the number of occupants and that part of the premises described in the application therefor. Any increase in rooming units or in the number of roomers to be accommodated or of the part of the premises utilized as a lodging house or other structural changes affecting the data contained in the application or change in the person or persons actually in charge of operating or maintaining the premises shall require the submission and filing of an amended application containing the additional information as required by the Director.  
§ 254-92. - Licenses nontransferable. 
The license issued hereunder shall be nontransferable and no person other than the licensee shall operate or be permitted by the owner to operate the licensed premises. Where there is to be a change of ownership or operation, application shall be made for a new license.  
§ 254-93. - License fees nonrefundable. 
The applicant shall not be entitled to any refunds of any fees paid hereunder by reason of the rejection of any application, the suspension or revocation of any license or transfer of ownership or operation of premises prior to the termination of the license period.  
§ 254-94. - Posting of license. 
The licensee shall display the license in a vestibule, front hallway or other prominent and public place at or near the front entrance of the building during the entire period for which the license was issued.  
§ 254-95. - Effect of licensing on other provisions. 
The issuance of a license shall constitute a certification that the premises as of the date of issuance comply with this chapter, but shall not be construed to constitute a certification that the premises comply with any other such applicable provisions of the Jersey City Code or ordinances or any state law nor shall it relieve any other official or public agency from enforcing any such applicable chapter, provisions or laws.  
ARTICLE XVI - Apartments, Hotels, Motels and Dormitories 
 
§ 254-96. - Register book required. 
A.  All such establishments subject to licensing shall keep a register in which there shall be set forth the name and last permanent address and signature of each occupant, the number of the room to be occupied by each occupant and the name and address of any person or persons to be notified in case of emergency. 
B.  Registration under a false name is prohibited. 
C.  Said register shall be available at all times to the authorized representative of the Director and the Director of Public Safety. 
[Amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ]  
§ 254-97. - Right of Director or Health Officer to ascertain physical or mental limitations of occupants. 
A.  When physician's certificate shall be required. Where the Director or Health Officer has reason to believe that an occupant of an establishment subject to licensing other than a state-licensed nursing home or housing for the elderly either requires special care or is disabled, the Director may require that the person produce within forty-eight (48) hours a physician's certificate attesting to the mental or physical condition of said person as it relates to the category in which the occupant is classified. 
B.  Grounds for having occupant relocate. If the Director or Health Officer shall determine that said occupant of an establishment subject to licensing requires special care or is disabled and is prohibited, therefore, from residing in any lodging house or in any boardinghouse other than state-licensed nursing homes or housing for the elderly, then said person shall vacate the premises and relocate in a suitable and appropriate establishment no later than five (5) days after the issuance of an order directed to the owner or manager and to the occupant thereof, and if the condition of the person or circumstances under which he or she resides requires immediate attention, the order shall so specify and a period of less than five (5) days may be prescribed therefor. 
Editor's note— Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.  
§ 254-98. - Occupancy by unemancipated minors prohibited. 
The occupancy of any rooming unit in an establishment subject to licensing by an unemancipated minor is hereby prohibited and the manager and occupant of the premises in which such occupancy occurs shall be liable hereunder.  
§ 254-99. - Overcrowding. 
Occupancy in excess of the maximum occupancy permitted under § 254-36 of Article VII or the occupancy data set forth in the application under § 254-83 of this Article is prohibited.  
§ 254-100. - Sanitary conditions; general maintenance. 
A.  Bathroom and water closet facilities required. 
(1)  Bathroom or bathrooms, which affords privacy to a person inside said room; contains a bathtub or shower, wash basin and flush water closet; and complies with such other requirements as are set forth elsewhere in this Code shall be supplied for each six (6) persons or fraction thereof residing within a lodging house or boardinghouse; except that in an establishment subject to licensing where rooms are let only to males, flush urinals may be substituted for not more than one-half (½) the required number of water closets. 
(2)  All such facilities shall be so located within the dwelling as to be directly accessible from a common hall or passageway which is either on the same floor as, or is one (1) floor above or below, all rooming units it is designed to serve and which hallway is directly accessible to the occupants of all such rooming units without passing through any part of any other rooming unit or dwelling unit. 
(3)  All bathrooms and water closet compartments shall be provided with inside locks. 
B.  Bedding, bed linen, towels and soap required. Every manager shall provide for all occupants' bedding, mattresses, mattress covers, bed linens, blankets, pillows, towels and soap. All such items shall be kept in clean and sanitary condition at all times. Fresh, clean bed linens and towels shall be supplied for each new occupant at the commencement of the term of occupancy and fresh, clean bed linens and towels shall be supplied at least once a week. Unless laundry service is provided for all occupants, a laundry tub or washing machine shall be accessible to and available for use by all occupants. 
C.  Furniture and furnishings. All furniture and furnishings shall be maintained in safe and sound condition, in good repair, and upholstery and coverings shall be kept clean and free of rips and tears. Windows shall be provided, where necessary, with blinds, draw drapes, curtains or shades to provide occupants with privacy. 
D.  Person in charge of the premises. There shall be present and in charge of every establishment subject to licensing a person who is mentally and physically competent to maintain the same in safe and sanitary condition, who shall keep the exterior of the premises and all common interior areas, including but not limited to the landings, stairways, hallways and bathrooms, clean, free from garbage and other refuse and free of infestation and who shall attend to the daily removal of garbage as required under § 254-45B(24) of Article IX.  
§ 254-101. - Safety and fire prevention. 
[Amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] 
A.  Hotels; fire protection. 
(1)  Requirements. No license shall issue for the use of any building as a hotel unless the building complies with the requirements of N.J.S.A. 29:1-8 et seq. [16] and with this chapter in the following respects: 
(a)  Fire escapes shall conform to the Tenement House Laws of the State of New Jersey in buildings subject to such laws, and a red light on the passageway or doorway leading to the fire escape shall be lighted at all times and doors leading to such fire escapes shall be unlocked from the inside at all times. 
(b)  Every community kitchen shall have one (1) unit Class B extinguisher as classified by the American Insurance Association. 
(c)  There shall be installed and maintained by the owner in every bedroom above the first floor in any building not subject to the Tenement House Laws a portable fire escape approved by a nationally recognized organization of the Director of Public Safety, securely fastened to the inside of said bedroom, with painted instructions as to its proper use on the metal cover of the box or container. When webbed or rope portable fire escapes are used, the date of installation shall be stamped on each portable fire escape and the fire escape shall not be continued in service for a period of more than ten (10) years from the date of installation. However, the use of all portable fire escapes shall be subject to the findings revealed by periodic examination conducted by the Department of Public Safety, and should such examination reveal any condition hazardous to the safety of the occupants, said portable fire escapes shall immediately be replaced by the owner with portable fire escapes as described above. 
(d)  Portable fire escapes shall not be used when the window sill is more than thirty (30) feet above the ground or grade level. The Director of Public Safety may grant a variance of this section with the approval of the Director, but in no case to exceed more than thirty-five (35) feet. Each request for variance shall be in writing. 
(e)  There shall be placed on each floor one (1) unit of Class A extinguisher for every four (4) sleeping rooms or part thereof. If on two (2) successive floors there are four (4) sleeping rooms, one (1) unit Class A extinguisher shall be placed on the lower of said two (2) floors, but, however, it shall be unlawful to install, service or use a vaporizing liquid extinguisher in any building operated as a hotel, rooming house, lodging house, boardinghouse, furnished apartment, motel or dormitory. 
(f)  The Director of Public Safety, with the consent and approval of the Director, may, in addition to the foregoing minimum requirements, require such other fire protection to such buildings as he or she may deem reasonably necessary for the safety of the occupants thereof. 
(2)  Enforcement. The authority and duty to carry out the provisions of this section shall be vested in the Director of Public Safety and the Director, but the Director of Public Safety shall act only subject to the consent and approval of the Director, who shall appoint inspectors of hotel fire safety who shall be uniform members of the Department of Public Safety, and who shall legally constitute a Division of the Department of Public Safety to be known and designated as the Hotel and Rooming House Bureau, and to which Hotel and Rooming House Bureau and the Director of Public Safety and the Director may delegate the authority necessary to carry out the provisions of this section. 
B.  Fire alarm system. Every establishment subject to licensing shall be provided with a fire alarm system or device approved by the Underwriter's Laboratories, Inc., or by such other laboratories qualified and equipped for the testing of fire protection equipment of materials as approved by the Director of Public Safety. The system or device required hereunder shall be maintained in good working order at all times. The alarm shall be provided with a heat-operated device which will automatically set off the fire alarm system and shall be operated by electrical or by self-contained automatic means. Alarm-sounding devices provided shall be distinctive in pitch and of such quality and so distributed on every floor that they shall be effectively heard in case of fire in every room above the usual sound level. Periodic testing shall be required in accordance with regulations of the Director approved by the Director of Public Safety and/or any authorized and approved inspection agency. 
C.  Directional signs. Every licensed establishment shall have exit signs posted in common hallways, visible from the door of every rooming unit, and these signs shall indicate the direction of the location of the nearest means of egress. All such signs shall be of a size and color and be illuminated in accordance with the regulations of the Director of Public Safety. 
D.  Stairway doors to be self-closing. Whenever there are doors or framework for doors which would close off sections of the stairway from common hallways, areaways or other parts of the stairway, such doors shall be equipped with self-closing devices or such framework shall be equipped with doors having self-closing devices. 
E.  Storage of combustible materials. Storage of combustible materials and temporarily used or unused household furnishings, bedding, mattresses and similar articles only shall be permitted in enclosed fireproof compartments. Storage area shall, as of the effective date of this chapter, comply with § 254-45B(25) of Article IX, notwithstanding the date set forth herein for licensing. 
F.  Disposal of combustible materials. All combustible materials shall be disposed of in self-closing metal cans which shall be provided where needed on the premises for that purpose. 
Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
Editor's note— N.J.S.A. 29:1-8 was repealed by L. 1967, c.76, § 28. See now N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1 et seq. for similar provisions. 
 
§ 254-102. - Community cooking prohibited. 
Community cooking is prohibited, except for cooking performed by the owner or manager or his or her employees for occupants in nursing homes. 
Editor's note— Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.  
§ 254-103. - Nightlights. 
Nightlights shall be provided in all common areaways leading to bathrooms, as well as in hallways, in compliance with § 254-23B(3).  
§ 254-104. - Central heating. 
There shall be central heating in all establishments subject to licensing, which shall supply adequate heat as required under § 254-27A(1) of Article VI to all occupied rooming units and to all bathrooms.  
§ 254-105. - Service of food. 
Where food is served in any establishment subject to licensing, the license therefor and the maintenance of the establishment, pursuant to the license, shall be subject to the regulations and requirements of Chapter 182, Health and Sanitation, as well as to this chapter.  
§ 254-106. - Nursing homes. 
A.  Fireproof construction. All nursing homes shall be of fireproof construction. 
B.  Violations. All nursing homes shall comply with state laws, and any violation of such laws or regulations thereunder shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
Editor's note— Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.  
ARTICLE XVII - Inspection and Status Reports 
 
§ 254-107. - Application for inspection. 
Whenever an owner, manager, occupant, prospective purchaser, mortgagee or prospective occupant shall apply to the Director of Housing Code Enforcement for an inspection in order to ascertain if any section of this chapter has been violated, the Chief shall, upon payment of the fee hereunder stated, cause an inspection to be made of the premises and issue an informational certificate of the inspection to the applicant, indicating therein any violations of this chapter on the premises. The applicant for such inspection shall state in writing his or her full name, residence and the reasons and basis for which the inspection is requested. The Chief may deny the application for failure to comply with this requirement.  
§ 254-108. - Application for status report. 
Where, in lieu of inspection, an owner, manager, occupant, lessee, prospective purchaser, mortgagee or prospective occupant request a status report as to whether or not there are any known violations presently pending on said premises, upon payment of the fee prescribed herein, a copy of any notice or order on any violation then pending shall be sent to the applicant.  
§ 254-109. - Scope of reports. 
A.  No inspection report issued under § 254-107 of this Article or status report under § 254-108 of this Article shall be construed as providing a defense against any violation of this chapter or any other ordinance of the city which may be discovered thereafter, whether or not the condition or violation existed at the time of any such inspection or status report. 
B.  The inspection or status report is provided as a convenience to the public and shall not constitute a limitation on the full enforcement of this chapter.  
§ 254-110. - Inspection and status report fees. 
[Amended 4-14-1983 by Ord. No. MC-340; 10-11-1985 by Ord. No. C-59] 
A.  The fee for any inspection made under § 254-107 of this Article shall be as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges. 
B.  The fee for any status report issued under § 254-108 shall be as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges. 
C.  Informational certificates issued under § 254-107 shall be valid for a period of thirty (30) days. 
Editor's note— Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.  
ARTICLE XVIII - Nuisances 
 
§ 254-111. - Declaration of nuisances; abatement. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed or interpreted to in any way impair or limit the authority of the Chief to define and declare nuisances and to cause the removal or abatement of nuisances by appropriate proceedings provided by law.  
ARTICLE XIX - Violations and Penalties 
 
§ 254-112. - Violations and penalties. 
[Amended 1-23-1986 by Ord. No. C-150] 
Anyone found guilty of violating any section of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25. Additionally, anyone found guilty of violating § 254-27 (heating facilities and duty to supply heat), shall be punished by a minimum fine of at least $100. 
Editor's note— Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.  
§ 254-113. - Meaning of each violation. 
Each violation of a section or subsection of this chapter shall constitute a separate and distinct violation independent of any other section or subsection or any order issued pursuant to this chapter. Each day's failure to comply with any such section or subsection shall constitute a separate violation. 
Editor's note— Original Sec. 13-109, entitled "Additional penalty for second violation," which followed this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.  
§ 254-114. - Application for officers or agents. 
Where the defendant is other than a natural person or persons, § 254-113 of this article shall also apply to any agent, superintendent, officer, member or partner who shall alone or with others have charge, care or control of the premises.  
§ 254-115. - Removal of posted orders. 
No person, firm or corporation, without written consent of the Chief, shall remove or permit the removal of any complaint, notice or order posted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.  
§ 254-116. - Occupancy of unfit buildings. 
[Amended 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050] 
When the Director of The Division of Construction Code Official finds that a dwelling is unfit for human habitation within the meaning of this chapter and has notified the owner to such effect and the time limit set by the Director of The Division of Construction Code Official for the correction of defects or vacating the same has expired, no person shall receive rentals, offer for rent or occupy said dwelling unit as a human habitation, and each day such offense continues shall be deemed a separate offense and the violator shall, upon conviction, be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25.  
§ 254-117. - Drainage or removal facilities. 
[Amended 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050] 
No person shall damage, mutilate or remove, nor shall any person suffer, permit or cause to be mutilated, damaged or removed from or in a dwelling unit any of the facilities referred to in this chapter. Any person violating this section of this article shall, upon conviction, be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25.  
§ 254-118. - Unpaid fine to become lien. 
In the event of the imposition of a fine or penalty by the Municipal Court or any other court of competent jurisdiction against the owner, manager or lessor of any building or structure in the city required to be registered, pursuant to Article XIV herein, for violation of any provision of this chapter or applicable provisions of other chapters of the New Jersey Code, or any state law applicable to the city, the fine or penalty shall be collectible pursuant to the procedures for the appointment of a Receiver, in addition to any other remedies now provided by law.  
ARTICLE XX - Portable Oil-Fired Heating Devices 
[Added 10-16-1979 by Ord. No. S-299] 
 
§ 254-119. - Unlawful acts. 
A.  It shall be unlawful to use in any residence or building in this city any portable oil stove, range or appliance or any other portable oil-fired heating device. 
B.  It shall be unlawful to sell or offer to sell any such portable oil stove, range or appliance or other portable oil-fired heating device for use in any residence or building in this city.  
§ 254-120. - Violations and penalties. 
[Amended 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050] 
Any person violating the provisions of this Article XX shall, upon conviction, be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25. For each day of use of such portable oil heating device, it shall be considered as a separate offense. Each sale of such portable oil heating device shall be considered as a separate offense.  
ARTICLE XXI - Registration of Nonresident Property Owners[17] 
[Added 1-14-1998 by Ord. No. 97-097] 

Footnotes: 
--- (17) --- 
Editor's note— See P.L. 1997, c. 85, an act authorizing municipalities to require address registration by certain property owners (codified in N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.53). 
 
§ 254-121. - Registration required. 
An owner of real property situated within the City of Jersey City shall register with the City Clerk the street address of his or her residence whenever that owner does not reside at the property, in the case of residential premises, or does not operate a business at the property, in the case of commercial property.  
§ 254-122. - Definitions. 
The following terms shall have the meanings indicated when used in this article: 
REAL PROPERTY - Any type of real estate, including commercial or residential, improved or unimproved lots, single-family homes, multiple dwellings and property held in any manner, including fee simple, condominium or cooperative forms of ownership. 
STREET ADDRESS - The address at which the person actually resides and shall include a street name or rural delivery route in addition to any postal office box number which may be included.  
§ 254-123. - Time for compliance. 
A.  Owners of property subject to this article shall have 60 days from the effective date of this article to register in accordance with § 254-121. 
B.  Nonowners who acquire property in the City of Jersey City after the effective date of this article shall have 30 days from the date of acquisition to register in accordance with § 254-121.  
§ 254-124. - Violations and penalties. 
Any nonresident property owner who fails to comply with this article shall be subject to the penalties proscribed in § 1-25.  
ARTICLE XXII - Foreclosure Property Registration 
 
§ 254-125. - Purpose and intent. 
[Added 6-27-2018 by Ord. No. 18-068 ] 
It is the purpose and intent of the City to establish a process to address the blight of City neighborhoods caused by an increasing amount of foreclosure property within the City. It is the City's further intent to create a City-wide registration program as a means to protect neighborhoods from becoming blighted due to the lack of adequate maintenance and security of foreclosure property.  
§ 254-126. - Establishment of a registry. 
[Added 6-27-2018 by Ord. No. 18-068 ] 
The City shall create a registration program and database cataloging each foreclosure property, and which will contain the information required by this Article.  
§ 254-127. - Registration of foreclosure property. 
[Added 6-27-2018 by Ord. No. 18-068 ] 
A.  Mortgagee shall register property subject to its mortgage with the Division of Property Maintenance or its designated agent within 30 days of any of the following events: 
1.  The filing of a lis pendens in the county registrar's office; 
2.  The filing of an action to foreclose the mortgage; 
3.  The acceptance of a deed to the property; 
4.  The appointment of an agent to collect rents or to manage the property. 
B.  In addition to registration, the mortgagee shall conduct an inspection to determine whether the property is legally occupied. If the property is not legally occupied, the mortgagee shall secure the property in accordance with Section 254-21.6 (requirements for vacant properties) and maintain the exterior of the premises in compliance with Sections 254-43 and 254-44 (maintenance of exterior of premises) until title to the property is conveyed to a bona fide purchaser. 
C.  Registration pursuant to this section shall contain the following information: 
1.  The name of the mortgagee and the servicer; 
2.  The direct mailing address of the mortgagee and the servicer; 
3.  A direct contact name and telephone number for both parties; 
4.  E-mail address for both parties; 
5.  The property occupancy status; 
6.  The address and block and lot number of the property; and 
7.  The name and 24-hour contact telephone number of the local property management company responsible for the security and maintenance of the property. 
D.  The foreclosure property shall he inspected by the mortgagee or his designee twice a month to ensure compliance with the requirements of this Article. 
E.  The foreclosing mortgagee shall notify the Division or its designated agent within 15 days of any changes in the registration information by filing an amended registration form. 
F.  Registration under this section is separate and apart from vacant property registration under Section 254-21.4, and mortgagee may he required to register under both sections if both are applicable. 
G.  Mortgagee may be subject to a maximum fine of up to $2,000.00 for any violation of this section.  
§ 254-128. - Fees. 
[Added 6-27-2018 by Ord. No. 18-068 ] 
A.  The registration fee shall be as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges. 
B.  All registration fees shall be paid directly from the lender, servicer, trustee, or owner. Third party registration fees are not allowed without the consent of the City and/or its authorized designee.  
§ 254-129. - Maintenance requirements. 
[Added 6-27-2018 by Ord. No. 18-068 ] 
The mortgagee and/or owner of any foreclosure property must secure the property in accordance with Section 254-21.6 and maintain the exterior of the premises in compliance with Sections 254-43 and 254-44 if the property is not legally occupied.  
§ 254-130. - Applicability. 
[Added 6-27-2018 by Ord. No. 18-068 ] 
These sections shall be considered cumulative and not superseding or subject to any other law or provision for same, but rather be an additional remedy available to the above and beyond any other state, county or local provisions for same.  
§ 254-131. - Inspections for violations. 
Adherence to this Article does not relieve any person, legal entity or agent from any other obligations set forth in any applicable code(s), which may apply to the property. Upon sale or transfer of title to the property, the owner shall be responsible for all violations of the applicable code(s) and the owner shall be responsible for meeting with the City's Code Enforcement Division within 30 days for a final courtesy inspection report.  
§ 254-132. - Severability. 
[Added 6-27-2018 by Ord. No. 18-068 ] 
If any section, sentence, clause, or phrase of this Article is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said holding shall in no way affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Article.  
Chapter 257 - PROPERTY TRANSFERS 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City 5-4-1971 as Ch. 13, Art. XV, of the 1971 Jersey City Code, as readopted 9-19-1978 by Ord. No. S-128. Amendments noted where applicable.] 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Certificates of occupancy — See Ch. 119. 	Property maintenance — See Ch. 254. 
Paint stripping — See Ch. 233. 	
 
 
§ 257-1. - Definitions. 
[Amended 8-23-1984 by Ord. No. MC-650] 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
DWELLING - Any structure occupied wholly or partially as a residence or sleeping quarters by one (1) or more persons. The term "dwelling" includes structures which are sold as private residences by agencies of federal, state or local government. The term "dwelling" includes structures which are sold as private residences by agencies of federal, state or local government.  
§ 257-2. - Notice of violations required at time of transfer. 
Any person who sells or conveys any dwelling, dwelling unit, boardinghouse, dormitory lodging house, lodging house, hotel, motel, apartment house or nursing home located in the city shall include, in or as a part of the agreement or instrument of sale, a copy of any outstanding notice or order issued by the Chief citing violations of the provisions of this chapter or of any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to Chapter 254, Property Maintenance, thereof which has not been complied with, by or before the date of sale.  
§ 257-3. - Presumed warranty. 
A seller or conveyer who violates or fails to conform to the requirements of § 257-2 of this chapter, even if with the consent of the purchaser or transferee, thereby shall be conclusively presumed to have given his or her warranty that the property being sold or conveyed is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the rules or regulations adopted by the Chief for the enforcement and implementation of this chapter at the time and immediately prior to the sale or conveyance.  
§ 257-4. - Disclosure of possible presence of lead-based paints.[1] 
[Amended 8-23-1984 by Ord. No. MC-650] 
A.  Prior to any of the following events: the signing of a binder or commitment for the sale of a dwelling, the signing of a contract for the sale of a dwelling or the acceptance of a deposit for the sale of a dwelling, whichever is earliest, the seller or broker shall furnish the buyer with a copy of the following notice which shall be printed or typed in type of at least ten (10) point: 
NOTICE 
Many houses and apartment buildings in Jersey City have been painted with lead-based paints. It has also been found that a high concentration of lead may exist in the soil in inner cities. The presence of lead paint upon the interior and exterior surfaces of a house or apartment in areas accessible to children constitutes a danger to their health. The presence of lead in the body of a child can cause learning disabilities. 
Regulations of the New Jersey Department of Health require the removal of cracked, chipped and peeling lead paint from all interior and exterior surfaces of a dwelling. 
For further information call the Jersey City Lead Poisoning Center at 547-4567. 
B.  The seller or broker shall also: 
(1)  Require the buyer to acknowledge in writing that he or she has received a copy of the above notice; and 
(2)  Retain a copy of the buyer's written acknowledgment on file for inspection by the Health Officer or his or her designee. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's Note: See also Ch. 254, Property Maintenance, § 254-45. 
 
§ 257-5. - Violations and penalties. 
[Amended 8-23-1984 by Ord. No. MC-650 [2]] 
Anyone who fails to comply with this chapter shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25. 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. 
 
§ 257-6. - Disclosure of availability of zoned parking permits for residential buildings. 
[Added 1-27-2010 by Ord. No. 10-006] 
A.  As used in this sub-chapter, "Residential Building" is defined as any structure containing five (5) or more units, including any unit therein, that is offered for sale or lease, for occupancy in whole or in part, as a residence or sleeping quarter by one (1) CU or more person. 
B.  The seller or landlord, as appropriate, of any residential building located within a zone designated for restricted parking pursuant to Section 332-60 and Schedule 24 of the City Code, shall furnish the prospective buyer or prospective tenant with a copy of the notice appearing in Section C. below, prior to the following events: 
(1)  Sales: the signing of a contract of sale or the acceptance of a deposit for sale of a unit in any residential building, whichever occurs first: or 
(2)  Leases: the signing of a lease or the acceptance of a deposit for a lease of a unit in any residential building, whichever occurs first. 
C.  The notice shall be in the following form and printed or typed in a font of at least ten point 
[Amended 11-12-2014 by Ord. No. 14-017 ; 9-9-2015 by Ord. No. 15-117 ; 1-24-2019 by Ord. No. 19-006 ]: 
NOTICE REGARDING ON STREET RESIDENTIAL PARKING PERMIT ZONES 
RE: _______ 
(address) 
Generally, as a matter of law, the City will not issue an on-street residential parking permit to a resident of this building because the building was required to provide off-street parking for its residents when it was constructed. The City requires that a landlord or seller make you aware of this fact before you agree to rent or buy a residence in the building. There are limited exceptions to the prohibition on the issuance of on-street permits. To determine whether or not you qualify for one of the exceptions, you need to read Section 332-58 of the Jersey City Municipal Code, which is available at https://www.municode.com/library/nj/jersey_city/codes/code_of_ordinances or contact the Division of Parking Enforcement at 201-653-6969. 
[initials] Because an on-street residential parking permit is not available to residents of this building, I understand that if I rent or purchase a residence here, I will be required to pay for parking and I will NOT be eligible for an on-street residential parking permit unless I qualify for one of the exceptions. 
[initials] The landlord or seller informed me that off-street parking for a resident of this building is available at the rate of $_____ per month. 
[initials] I was shown this form and read it, prior to signing my lease or contract to purchase. 
[initials] I understand that if I am eligible for an exception, I am limited to one residential permit per unit. I am ineligible for any other residential permits. 
______________       _______ 
Signature of Prospective Tenant or Purchaser       Date 
D.  The seller or landlord, as appropriate, shall [Amended 9-9-2015 by Ord. No. 15-117 ] : 
(1)  Obtain the signature of the prospective tenant or buyer acknowledging that he or she has timely received a copy of the above notice; and 1 
(2)  Retain a copy of the prospective buyer's or tenant's signed written acknowledgment of receipt of the above notice for at least three (3) years. The seller or landlord shall submit a copy of the signed notice to the City upon ten (10) days' notice.  
Chapter 260 - RENT CONTROL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
History— Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City February 7, 1986 by Ord. No. C-14A. Amendments noted where applicable. 
Cross reference— Condominium conversion, Ch. 128; fees and charges, Ch. 160; housing accommodations, Ch. 188; multiple dwellings, Ch. 218; property maintenance, Ch. 254. 
 
§ 260-1. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
AVAILABLE FOR RENT TO TENANTS—Fit for habitation as defined by the statutes, codes and ordinances in full force and effect in the State of New Jersey, County of Hudson and City of Jersey City, and occupied or unoccupied and offered for rent. 
BASE RENT—The legal rent charged or actually received by the landlord for the rental of a housing space as of January 11, 1983; or if not occupied at that date the "base rent" shall be that actually charged to and received from the previous tenant, plus any increases under § 260-3 of this chapter or the ordinance to which this is an amendment, or if insufficient evidence is available from which the Rent Leveling Administrator or Board can determine the legal rent charged or actually received as provided above, then the Rent Leveling Administrator and Board have the power to determine the legal "base rent" by considering the legal base rent of other units, subject to the provisions of this chapter, which are comparable in size, location and facilities to the subject unit. 
[Amended 4-27-1989 by Ord. No. C-944] 
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT—A permanent improvement that adds to value or substantially extends the useful life of the landlord's property and can be claimed by the landlord for depreciation on his or her federal tax returns. Specifically excluded are ordinary repairs, maintenance and conversion to heat/hot water units for individual apartments where the cost of providing the heat/hot water service is transferred from the landlord to the tenant. 
CONSUMER PRICE INDEX—The consumer price index (all items, base year 1967 = 100) for the region of the United States of which Jersey City is a part, published periodically by the United States Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. 
DWELLING—Any building or other structures containing housing spaces rented or offered for rent to one or more tenants consisting of a household or family as defined in this Chapter. A dwelling includes buildings or structures that are exempt from the restrictions of rent increases mandated under this Chapter. 
[Amended 10-24-12 by Ord. No. 12-137 ; 6-28-2017 by Ord. No. 17-080 ] 
A.  Exempt from this definition are: 
(1)  Dwellings with four or less housing spaces. 
(2)  Low rent public housing developments. 
(3)  Licensed hotels or motels and commercial and industrial space. 
(4)  Newly constructed dwellings with 25 or more dwelling units located within a redevelopment area as defined in Section 5 of the Redevelopment Agencies Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55C-5(o), for which the City Council has approved a redevelopment plan, in accordance with Section 17 of the Redevelopment Agencies Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55C-17. [2] 
(5)  All buildings or structures, hotels, motels or guesthouses which are converted from any previous use as a nonpermanent dwelling to use as a dwelling on or after October 1, 1983. For the purpose of this exemption, a building shall be deemed converted for use as a dwelling on the date on which the certificate of occupancy for dwelling use is issued. 
B.  Any new dwelling or housing spaces being rented for the first time for the initial rental only. 
EQUITY IN REAL PROPERTY INVESTMENT—The actual cash contribution of the purchaser at the time of closing of Title and any principal payments to outstanding mortgages subsequent to acquisition of title by the purchaser. 
FAIR RETURN—The percentage of return on equity of real property investment. The amount of return shall be measured by the net income before depreciation. A "fair return" on the equity investment in real property shall be considered to be 2.5% above the maximum passbook demand deposit savings account interest rate available in the municipality. 
[Amended 5-8-2019 by Ord. No. 19-044 ] 
HOUSING SPACE—Includes that portion of a dwelling rented or offered for rent for living and dwelling purposes with all privileges, services, furnishings, furniture, equipment, facilities and improvements connected with the use or occupancy of such portion of the real property. 
JUST CAUSE FOR EVICTION—That the landlord recovered possession of a housing space or dwelling for one of the reasons outlined in state law ( N.J.S.A. 2A:18-53 as amended or N.J.S.A. 2A:18-61.1 et seq.). 
LANDLORD REGISTRATION STATEMENT—A statement to be completed and filed with the Bureau of Rent Leveling pursuant to § 260-2 E, F and G by all owner(s) and landlord(s) of housing spaces and/or dwellings in the City of Jersey City. [ Added 10-24-12 by Ord. No. 12-137 ] 
LIVING AREA—The amount of total rentable space applicable to any given housing space, measured either in terms of rooms or square footage. 
RENT—Any price for the use of a housing space. It includes any charge, no matter how set forth, paid by the tenant for the use of any service in connection with the housing space. Security deposits and charges for accessories, such as boats, mobile homes and automobiles, not used in connection with the housing space shall not be construed as "rent". No charges shall be permitted for late rent, whether termed a late rental fee or interest on rent paid late, in excess of Thirty-Five ($35.00) Dollars, returned check fees in excess of Thirty-Five ($35.00) Dollars, or any other similar charges. 
[Amended 2-27-02 by Ord. No. 02-017] 
RENTAL STATEMENT—The statement a landlord shall be required to sign and deliver to each tenant at the inception of the tenancy, identifying the name and address of the landlord and his or her agent, if any, identifying the name, address and telephone number of the superintendent, if any, providing a twenty-four-hour emergency telephone number for the landlord or his or her agent, describing the housing space rented, the related services and equipment involved (whether or not including use of basement, garage, clothesline, washing equipment, utilities, heat, hot water, garbage removal, repairs, maintenance and the like) as of January 11, 1973; and the base rental as of the date of the inception of the tenancy; and the rent of the prior tenant and notification of the existence of the rent registration law. 
SERVICE—The provision of light, heat, hot water, maintenance, painting, elevator service, air conditioning, storm windows, screens, superintendent service and any other benefit, privilege or facility connected with the use or occupancy of any dwelling or housing space. 
SERVICE SURCHARGE—An additional charge over and above the rental due for new or additional services. 
SUBSTANTIAL COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICABLE HEALTH AND MAINTENANCE CODES—The housing space and dwelling are free from the major health, safety and fire hazards as well as in compliance with heat and hot water and sanitary requirements. Compliance is to be determined with the aid of appropriate city and state regulatory agencies based upon current code inspection reports which shall be not less than six months old at the time of the initial hearing on a rent increase application under § 260-10, Hardship rental increases, and § 260-5, Capital improvements. 
[Amended 3-13-1986 by Ord. No. C-183] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:55C-5(o) and 40:55C-17 were repealed by L. 1992, c. 79, § 59. For current provisions, see N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et seq. 
 
§ 260-2. - Rent leveling; landlord registration statement; answering devices. 
[Amended 10-24-12 by Ord. No. 12-137 ] 
A.  Establishment of rents between a landlord and tenant in housing space in dwellings to which this chapter is applicable shall hereafter be determined by the provisions of this amended section. 
B.  Any rental increase at a time other than at the expiration of a lease or termination of a periodic lease shall be void. Any rental increase in excess of that authorized by the provisions of this chapter shall be void. 
C.  All rents for rental of housing space and services in dwellings to which this chapter is applicable are hereby controlled at the base rent level received by the landlord as of January 11, 1973, and no rental increases shall be hereinafter demanded, paid or accepted, except as provided in this chapter. 
D.  Any rent increase imposed after January 11, 1973, the date of expiration of federal rent controls, to the extent that such increase is in excess of that which is permitted by this chapter, is hereby declared to be null and void and such excess rent shall be refunded or credited by the landlord forthwith. 
E.  Existing leases and options to renew shall not be affected by this chapter but no new leases shall be executed or performed except as provided in this chapter, and the base rent level in leased housing space shall be the rental in effect at the expiration of the lease. 
F.  Landlord Registration Statement Requirement. 
[Added 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050; 10-24-2012 by Ord. No. 12-137 ] 
(1)  Every owner and/or landlord shall within 90 days following the effective date of this subsection or the creation of the first tenancy in any dwelling containing five (5) or more housing spaces, whether or not subject to the restrictions of rent increases under this Chapter, file a landlord registration statement with the Bureau of Rent Leveling containing the following information: 
(a)  The name and address of the record owner or owners of the dwelling and the record owner or owners of the rental business if not the same person. 
(b)  If the record owner is a corporation, the name and address of the registered agent and corporate officers of the corporation. 
(c)  If the address of any record owner or owners is not located in the County of Hudson, the name and address of a person who resides in the County of Hudson or has an office in the County of Hudson and is authorized to accept notices from tenants and to issue receipts for notices from tenants and to accept service of process on behalf of the record owner or owners. 
(d)  The name and address of the managing agent of the dwelling, if any. 
(e)  The name and address, including the dwelling unit, apartment or room number of the superintendent, janitor, custodian or any other individual employed by the record owner or managing agent to provide regular maintenance service, if any. 
(f)  The name, address and telephone number of any individual representative of the record owner or managing agent who may be called at any time in case of an emergency affecting the dwelling or any housing space within the dwelling, including such emergencies as the failure of any essential service or system, and who has the authority to make emergency decisions concerning the building and any repair to the building or expenditure in connection with the building. 
(g)  A list of the base monthly rents of each housing space, by apartment or room number, within the dwelling as of January 1, 1983. 
(2)  Between January 1 and March 3 of each calendar year, all owners and/or landlords of dwellings shall file with the Bureau of Rent Leveling a new landlord registration statement for each dwelling owned. An owner and/or landlord who purchases a dwelling on or after April 1 of any year shall also file a landlord registration statement within seven (7) days of purchase. Owner(s) and/or landlord(s) entitled to an increase in the base rent as a result of improving vacant housing space shall immediately file an amended landlord registration statement. 
G.  Within 30 days following the effective date of this subsection and at the time of the creation of a new tenancy, every landlord subject to this chapter shall provide each occupant or tenant in his or her dwelling a written statement containing all of the information required to be filed with the Bureau of Rent Leveling in accordance with Subsection F. Commencing 30 days following the effective date of this subsection, this information shall be posted at all times in the lobby, hallway or other conspicuous place within the dwelling. If any information contained in the statement changes, the landlord shall inform each occupant or tenant of the change in writing within 30 days and correct the information posted within seven days after the change. 
[Added 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050] 
H.  From November 1 through March 31 of each year, the telephone numbers of the record owner, any individual representative of the record owner, the managing agent and the corporate officers, if the owner is a corporation, shall be equipped with an answering device capable of receiving and recording messages from any tenant calling with regard to maintenance. Owners have 30 days from the effective date of this act to comply with this requirement. 
[Added 2-11-1988 by Ord. No. C-674]  
§ 260-3. - Allowable increases. [Amended 3-13-1986 by Ord. No. C-183] 
A.  At the expiration of a lease or at the termination of a lease of a periodic tenant, no landlord may request or receive a percentage increase in rent which is greater than 4% or the percentage difference between the consumer price index three months prior to the expiration or termination of the lease and three months prior to the commencement of the lease term, whichever is less. For a periodic tenant or for a tenant whose lease term shall be less than one year, said tenant shall not suffer or be caused to pay more than one rent increase in any twelve-month period, commencing 15 months prior to and ending three months prior to, the effective date of the proposed increase, whichever is less. 
B.  No more than one such cost-of-living rental increase in any one twelve-month period shall be permitted irrespective of the number of different tenants occupying said housing space during said twelve-month period. 
C.  Vacant space. 
[Amended 8-12-1998 by Ord. No. 98-116] 
(1)  In the event of a vacant housing space, the landlord may raise the rental above the cost-of-living increase without prior application being made to the Bureau of Rent Leveling, and only if he or she has made capital improvements to the housing space. Such capital improvements will entitle the landlord to increase the base rent of the vacant unit by the following amount: 
(a)  For capital improvements up to $5,000 in value, the vacant unit's monthly base rent shall be increased by $1.35 per $100 of improvement; and 
(b)  For capital improvements in excess of $5,000, the vacant unit's monthly base rent shall increase by $1.55 per $100 of improvement. 
(2)  It shall be the sole responsibility of the landlord to register the new rent of any improved unit with the Division of Tenant/Landlord Relations pursuant to § 260-2 of this chapter. No capital improvements shall be recognized under this provision unless they are made in accordance with applicable city codes and the appropriate permits are obtained. It shall be the responsibility of the landlord to document to the Bureau of Rent Leveling and prove the cost of any capital improvements in vacant housing space for which he or she desires to increase the rental. 
(3)  The landlord seeking a rent increase under this subsection shall pay an application fee of $75 per unit. 
D.  The landlord shall supply the following information in writing to any new tenant within the first 10 days of a new tenant's tenancy: the name of and rent paid by all tenants who occupied the apartment rented by the new tenant during the prior 12 months. The landlord shall keep a written record of the information described herein. The landlord shall make this record available to the Rent Leveling Administrator or Board upon request. 
E.  It shall be unlawful for any landlord to charge a tenant for the use of a washing machine, refrigerator, cooking stove, air conditioner or any other appliances wherever such appliances were permitted and allowed by the landlord without extra charge. The use of such appliances shall be considered as included in the former rents. Any such extra charge in such situation shall be considered as an unauthorized increase in rents and shall be unlawful unless approved by the Rent Leveling Board. Any landlord who has heretofore charged for such appliances shall be in violation of this chapter and shall be liable for punishment as such. 
F.  Any landlord seeking a major capital improvement rent increase based upon a substantial improvement of the dwelling and/or housing space must include in the notice to the tenant a landlord certification that said dwelling and housing space is in substantial compliance as defined by this chapter. All work done on the structure and premises must have been with approval of the appropriate agency or department as evidenced by requisite permits. The completed construction must be in accord with building, fire and other code regulations. A certificate of occupancy, where required by law, and a certificate of code compliance, including a housing inspection report based upon an actual inspection made within six months of the date of the landlord's application, must be produced as evidence. For the purpose of this section only, "substantial improvement" shall mean that the cost of the capital improvements exceeds 50% of the current assessed value, as adjusted to 100% by the county tax equalization ratio prior to the improvements being made. 
(1)  If a landlord is determined to be in substantial compliance the increase shall be payable from the date set forth in the original notice of rent increase. 
(2)  If a landlord is determined not to be in substantial compliance at the time of the hearing, then the Board may grant provisional approval for the capital improvement and rent increase with such approval to be reviewed within six months. In the event that the subject property is brought into substantial compliance within the six-month period, then the provisional approval shall become final. 
(3)  In the event that the subject property is not brought into substantial compliance within the six-month period, but the owner has within this period made significant progress toward substantial compliance, the provisional approval shall continue with a further review being scheduled within the following three months. If the property is brought into substantial compliance within the additional three months, the provisional approval shall become final. 
(4)  In the event that the owner has not brought the property into substantial compliance or made significant progress toward substantial compliance within the six-month initial period or fails to bring the property into substantial compliance after being accorded the additional three-month extension, the owner provisional approval shall terminate and any capital improvement rent increase collected shall be immediately refunded to the tenant who paid the increase. 
(5)  Any capital improvement rent increase approved pursuant to this section shall take effect from the date of determination by the Board upon proper notice as required by the laws of the State of New Jersey. 
G.  Any landlord seeking a hardship increase shall include with the application an actual inspection report from the local building or property maintenance department based upon an inspection made within six months prior to the application. An application without said inspection report shall be void. The hearing officer may request an inspection if no inspection report is included in such application. The determination of substantial compliance shall be made by the Rent Leveling Board upon reviewing the list of violations, if any, set forth in the inspection report. If there are any objections thereto, then either party may file a complaint with the Board and a hearing shall be scheduled. The Chairperson of the Board shall intervene whenever necessary, upon request of any party to an application, to assure a prompt inspection by the appropriate department. 
(1)  If a landlord is determined to be in substantial compliance, then the hardship request shall be processed subject to the requirements set forth in § 260-10 of this chapter. 
(2)  If a landlord is determined not to be in substantial compliance at the time of the hearing on the hardship application, and the Board determines, after hearing, that the application would otherwise be granted, then the Board may grant provisional approval for the hardship application with such approval to be reviewed within six months. In the event that the subject property is brought into substantial compliance within the six-month period, then the provisional approval shall become final. 
(3)  In the event that the subject property is not brought into substantial compliance within the six-month period but the owner has, within this period, made significant progress toward substantial compliance, the provisional approval shall continue with a further review being scheduled within the following three months. If the property is brought into substantial compliance within the additional three months, the provisional approval shall become final. 
(4)  In the event that the owner has not brought the property into substantial compliance or made significant progress toward substantial compliance within the six-month initial period or fails to bring the property into substantial compliance after being accorded the additional three-month extension, the owner's provisional approval shall terminate and any rent increase collected shall be immediately refunded to the tenant who paid the increase. In the event that a provisional approval is so terminated, the Board shall dismiss the hardship application. An owner whose application has been so dismissed may reapply for a hardship rental increase. Any reapplication shall be considered an original application under § 260-10. 
[Amended 4-23-1987 by Ord. No. C-451] 
H.  The landlord shall register the rent roll with the Rent Leveling Bureau in order to qualify for any rental increase. 
I.  If the landlord does not inform or misinforms the tenant concerning the rent paid by the prior tenants or in any manner illegally increases the tenant's rent, the Rent Leveling Bureau shall then accept, hear and adjudicate a compliance of an illegal increase. 
J.  The landlord shall provide to each tenant a copy of the Truth-In-Renting Statement and subsequent amendments to said statement and be in full compliance with the landlord identity disclosure provision contained within the statement in order to qualify for any rental increase.  
§ 260-4. - Procedure for cost-of-living increases. 
Any landlord seeking a cost-of-living rental increase shall notify the tenant in writing at least 30 days prior to the effective date of the increase as required by law of the calculations involved in computing the increase, including the consumer price index three months prior to the expiration or termination of the lease and the commencement of the lease term, or for a periodic tenant whose lease term is less than one year, the consumer price index 15 months prior to the effective date of the proposed increase, the allowable percentage increase as per § 260-3 and the allowable rental increase. The notice shall state the tenant's right to contest the increase within six months to the Jersey City Rent Leveling Bureau.  
§ 260-5. - Capital improvement and service charge. 
A.  [Amended 3-11-1992 by Ord. No. 92-013] A landlord may apply to the Bureau of Rent Leveling for a service charge for increased or improved services. The landlord shall submit a written proposal with cost estimates to the Rent Leveling Board prior to performing any major or capital improvement work, showing how the work will affect all dwelling units. The landlord shall include the substance of said proposal in the notice of application to each tenant sent pursuant to Subsection C of this section. The aforesaid notice shall advise the tenants that they have a right to request a hearing before the Rent Leveling Board with respect to the proposed capital improvement work. Final approval by the Board shall not be considered until the capital improvement work has been completed and after the Board has received necessary documentation, at which time a final hearing will be scheduled. The landlord shall compute the average cost of the computed capital improvement or service by the number of years of useful life of the improvement as claimed by the landlord for federal income tax depreciation purposes. The landlord shall propose to apportion the average cost of completed improvement or service per year of useful life among the tenants in the dwelling in accordance with one of the following methods: 
(1)  If the capital improvement benefits certain housing spaces only, then the cost of those improvements shall be surcharged to only these units. 
(2)  If the capital improvement benefits all housing spaces but in varying degrees according to the amount of living area of each housing space, then the cost for the improvements shall be charged according to either the number of rooms or the space in proportion to the total rentable area in the dwelling. 
(3)  If the capital improvement is equally beneficial to all housing spaces regardless of the living area within any housing space, then the cost of the improvements shall be charged according to the number of housing spaces within the dwelling. 
B.  All work done on the property must be performed with the appropriate proper local approval as evidenced by permits and the completed capital improvements must be in accord with building, fire, plumbing, electrical and any other code regulations. Before any capital increase is approved, an inspection shall be required to be made by a qualified inspector of the Department of Housing, Economic Development and Commerce together with an inspection by the Office of the Construction Official in order to document the nature of the work performed and that the structure is in substantial compliance. A certificate of occupancy must be secured if required by law. The landlord shall furnish with the application a certification of the true cost of each improvement signed by a qualified inspector and an affidavit by the landlord that the amount claimed in the application is attributable only to the specific building which is the subject of the application. 
[Amended 3-11-1992 by Ord. No. 92-013; 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
C.  Notice procedure. Prior to any application under this section, the landlord shall serve upon each tenant, by registered or certified mail or personal service of a notice of application filing setting forth the basis for said application, the amount of rental increase or surcharge applied for with respect to that tenant and the calculations involved. A sample copy of such notice shall be filed with the application of the landlord together with an affidavit or certification of service of notice of application upon each tenant. Tenants who request a copy of the complete application shall have one provided by the landlord. 
D.  Determination. The Rent Leveling Board may grant the landlord a rental surcharge or increase under the provisions of this section. No landlord shall impose upon any tenant a rent surcharge or increase under this section without first obtaining approval from the Rent Leveling Board. It shall be within the discretion of the Board to fix the effective date of any approval of a rental surcharge or increase to be at any reasonable time after determination. A surcharge granted under the provisions of this section shall not be considered rent for purposes of computing cost-of-living rental increases pursuant to §§ 260-2, 260-3 and 260-4. After the landlord has filed his or her application for an increase with all supporting documents and materials, no new material will be considered by the Hearing Officer or Board unless such new material is filed with the Board and notice identifying such new material and setting forth a description of such material is served upon each tenant no later than 10 days prior to the date of the hearing. Tenants who request a copy of the capital improvement file and any new materials submitted to the Board or hearing officer shall have one provided by the landlord at least five days prior to any hearing date. 
[Amended 3-13-1986 by Ord. No. C-183] 
E.  Computations. 
(1)  A landlord must provide as part of his or her application a completed Rent Leveling Board form indicating the method and term of depreciation of the capital improvements claimed by the landlord. 
(2)  In the case of all capital improvements, the depreciation period shall be calculated according to its useful life, which in no case shall exceed 10 years for major capital improvements and five years for minor capital improvements. 
[Amended 8-12-1998 by Ord. No. 98-116] 
(3)  In the case of such major capital improvements, the capital improvement charge shall be a part of the permanent base rent. 
[Amended 8-12-1998 by Ord. No. 98-116] 
(4)  Major capital improvements shall consist of a substantial change in the housing accommodations such as would materially increase the rental value in a normal market and which consists of capital improvements to building-wide operating systems, including but not limited to items such as complete plumbing or electrical replacement for the entire building or a complete new roof. Major capital improvements shall also include complete kitchen and bathroom replacements for an individual apartment unit. 
(5)  In the case of minor capital improvements, the capital improvement charge shall not be a part of the permanent base rent, nor shall any financing costs be included as part of said surcharge. 
(6)  Minor capital improvements shall consist of all capital improvements not classified as major capital improvements. 
(7)  A capital improvement increase resulting hereunder shall not exceed 15% of the legal rent for the first year of such increase. Any further amount of increase which would have resulted based upon the landlord's application hereunder shall be apportioned equally over the remaining period of the capital improvement charge. 
(8)  Except in the case of emergency capital improvements, as defined in Subsection G, a landlord shall be entitled to only one major capital improvement increase in any twelve-month period. 
F.  The Board, in computing the amount spent for capital improvements, may consider the reasonable value of construction services performed by the owner in the actual capital improvement work. Where allowed, this shall include professional consultation or other similar services of the owner and is limited to actual labor and materials invested by the owner. 
G.  In the case of emergency major capital improvements a landlord shall not be required to obtain Board approval prior to performing said capital improvement work. The landlord shall be required to obtain Board approval for any capital improvement charge after the capital improvement work has been completed as otherwise provided for capital improvement charges herein. For purposes of this section, "emergency capital improvement" shall mean a capital improvement made to correct a condition causing immediate and/or imminent danger to the health or safety of occupants of the subject premises, as defined by the Division of Construction Code Official, Department of Public Safety and/or Building Department. The landlord shall notify the Division of Construction Code Official of this condition as soon as possible. [Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052; [9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ]  
§ 260-6. - Exemptions for new dwellings and new housing space and for dwellings vacant as of July 1, 1998. [Amended 4-27-1989 by Ord. No. C-944; 3-13-1996 by Ord. No. 95-111; 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052; 5-27-1998 by Ord. No. 98-060; 8-12-1998 by Ord. No. 98-116] 
A.  The owner of a newly constructed dwelling and the owner of newly constructed housing space which is rented for the first time shall not be restricted in the initial rent charged, provided that the owner has registered the rent with the Bureau of Rent Leveling. Except as provided in Subsection C of this section, any subsequent rental increases shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Permits as required by law are to be secured from all agencies having control and jurisdiction. All work must adhere to appropriate code standards and must be inspected by all agencies having control and jurisdiction and their approval obtained. A certificate of occupancy must be secured as required by law. 
C.  In accordance with N.J.S.A. 2A:42-84.1 et seq., L. 1987, c. 153, the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to a new dwelling which is constructed between June 25, 1987, through June 25, 1992, and which is not constructed for occupation by senior citizens, for a period of time not to exceed the period of amortization of any initial mortgage loan obtained for the dwelling, or for 30 years following completion of construction, whichever is less. This exemption applies only where an owner complied with all requirements contained in N.J.S.A. 2A:42-84.1 et seq., including the filing with the municipal construction official required by N.J.S.A. 2A:42-84.4 and the service of a written statement upon the tenant required by N.J.S.A. 2A:42-84.3. 
D.  Buyers of multifamily dwellings covered by this chapter which are certified by the Division of Tenant/Landlord Relations to be vacant as of July 1, 1998 shall be granted a permanent exemption from the mandates of this chapter for rental units within that dwelling. Officers designated by the Director of the Division of Tenant/Landlord Relations shall be responsible for certifying, in writing, that a dwelling is vacant as of July 1, 1998.  
§ 260-7. - Anti-harassment and tenant complaints. [Amended 9-10-1987 by Ord. No. C-553; 8-12-1998 by Ord. No. 98-116] 
A.  Any tenants desiring to remain in their units may do so without provocation or retaliation from landlords. For the purpose of this section, harassment of tenants shall mean conduct, whether direct or indirect, committed intentionally or negligently, by a landlord or anyone acting on his behalf. These actions include, but are not limited. 
(1)  A reduction in the quality of basic service to the health, safety and welfare of the tenants; 
(2)  Withholding heat or hot water; 
(3)  Inadequate security; 
(4)  Intermittent failures; 
(5)  Bothersome telephone calls or letters; 
(6)  Frivolous eviction threats or legal proceeding; or 
(7)  Actions which would cause a reasonable person of like age and physical condition of a tenant to, fear for his or her life, limb, property or home. 
B.  Investigation/prosecution of harassment complaints. The Housing Municipal Court shall have jurisdiction over such complaints. The city shall assign one of its municipal prosecutors to investigate and/or prosecute complaints involving harassment filed by either tenants or landlords. Any landlord found guilty of violating this section shall be liable for a fine of up to $1,000 and/or imprisonment for a period of up to 90 days and/or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days. 
C.  Any complaint of an illegal increase or claim to lower rentals must be filed with the Bureau of Rent Leveling no later than two years after the effective date of the disputed increase. This limitations period shall apply to all claims accruing on or after January 1, 1987. 
D.  Payment of rental increase for two consecutive years shall be construed to be an agreed increase and not subject to the provisions of this chapter except that in the event that the Board determines that the landlord has not served upon the tenant the rental statement set forth in § 260-1, the Board shall waive the two-year limitations period. 
E.  If at any time after 30 days of a determination by the Rent Leveling Board or Administrator resulting in a refund of moneys to the tenant the landlord has not paid the refund to the tenant, the tenant may deduct the refund from the next rental payment. 
F.  Rent charges by the landlord shall be reduced or rolled back for any one of the following reasons if so determined by the Rent Leveling Board or Administrator: 
(1)  For the reasons set forth in § 260-14 of this chapter. 
(2)  For an unapproved rent increase beyond the annual cost-of-living increase. 
G.  An individual tenant or group of tenants on behalf of a tenant in the subject premises may file a complaint for a rent rollback based upon the foregoing reasons or any other reason where the value of the housing space is reduced. 
H.  At the time of any complaint made pursuant to Subsection G, the tenant or group of tenants on behalf of a tenant in the subject premises may request an inspection from the local housing or property maintenance department, which department shall undertake the inspection, submit a report and be available to the Rent Leveling Board at the hearing. 
I.  Any rent reduction, if granted by the Board, shall remain in effect until the landlord proves to the Board that the deficiency has been corrected. 
J.  The Board shall adopt guidelines for rent reductions under this section and shall consider the type of deficiency, the cause of deficiency, steps taken to alleviate the deficiency and the severity of the deficiency.  
§ 260-8. - Bureau of Rent Leveling. [Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
A.  There is established within the Department of Housing, Economic Development and Commerce a Bureau of Rent Leveling, the head of which shall be the Rent Leveling Administrator. The Rent Leveling Administrator shall possess all the qualifications necessary to administer this chapter and the Bureau of Rent Leveling but shall not function as a hearing officer. 
B.  The Rent Leveling Administrator shall be appointed by and under the direction of the Director of the Department of Housing, Economic Development and Commerce.  
§ 260-9. - Powers and duties of the Bureau of Rent Leveling. [ ] 
A.  The Bureau of Rent Leveling under the direction of the Rent Leveling Administrator shall have the following powers and functions: 
(1)  To remedy violations of this chapter by adjusting rentals, ordering rebates and bringing appropriate legal charges as provided in this chapter. 
(2)  To accept complaints from tenants of illegal increases, provided that all claims are sworn to and acknowledged by a person authorized by law to administer oaths. 
(3)  To accept any applications from landlords for rental increases under the capital improvement and service surcharge provisions of this chapter, provided that all applications are sworn to and acknowledged by a person authorized by law to administer oaths. 
(4)  To review applications and investigate complaints prior to a final decision being made in any case. 
(5)  To correct rentals which violate the consumer price index. 
(6)  To accept and forward to the Rent Leveling Board any applications for hardship rental increases. 
B.  Any rebate ordered by the Rent Leveling Administrator or Rent Leveling Board shall be considered a penalty against the landlord if said rebate is not made to the tenant within 30 days of the service of a final determination by the Administrator or Board. The tenant may bring an action in Municipal Court for the collection of this penalty after the time allowed as provided in New Jersey Court Rules, 4:70-1. 
C.  Either party to a case shall have the right to appeal the determination of the Rent Leveling Administrator or Board's hearing officer to the Rent Leveling Board. 
D.  There is hereby established the schedule of fees for complaints, applications and landlord registration statement to the Rent Leveling Board, which fees shall be payable to the City of Jersey City as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges. [Amended 10-23-1986 by Ord. No. C-321; Amended 10-24-2012 by Ord. No. 12-137 ] 
(1)  $125 per housing space for capital improvement to vacant housing spaces. 
(2)  $20 per housing space for major or minor capital improvements. 
(3)  $30 per housing space for hardship application. 
(4)  $10 per housing space for the filing of landlord registration statement for all dwellings with five (5) or more housing spaces, including dwellings that are exempt from the restrictions of rent increases mandated under this Chapter, during each registration event. 
(5)  $30 per housing space for condominium and cooperative conversions. 
(6)  $150 per housing space for appeal of a protected tenancy determination. 
E.  No complaint application or rent roll registration will be deemed filed with the Board unless and until submitted on the Board's official forms and accompanied by all appropriate supporting documents and information and the required filing fees.  
§ 260-10. - Hardship rental increases. [Amended 3-13-1986 by Ord. No. C-183] 
A.  In the event that a landlord cannot meet his or her mortgage payments or operating expenses or does not make a fair return on his or her investment, he or she may apply to the Rent Leveling Board for increased rentals, provided that he or she has owned the building for at least nine months prior to the time he or she applies for an increase. 
B.  Notice procedure prior to any application under this section to the Board. The landlord shall serve upon each tenant by registered or certified mail or personal service a notice of said application setting forth the basis for said application, the amount of rental increases applied for with respect to that tenant and the calculations involved. A sample copy of such notice shall be filed with the application of the landlord to the Board, together with an affidavit or certification of service of notice of application upon each tenant. No hearing shall commence earlier than 6:00 p.m. and no hearing shall continue beyond 12:00 midnight. 
[Amended 6-26-1991 by Ord. No. MC-334] 
C.  Determination by Rent Leveling Board. The Board may grant the landlord a rental increase under the provisions of this section. No landlord shall impose upon any tenant an increase in rent under this section without first obtaining approval from the Board. It shall be within the discretion of the Board to fix the effective date of any approved rental increase to commence at a reasonable time as determined by the Board. The Board must decide any hardship case within 60 days from the date of completion of application by the landlord, provided that all necessary and required documentation for said application has been submitted by the landlord to the hearing officer or the Board. 
D.  After the landlord has filed his or her application for an increase with all supporting documents and materials, no new material will be considered by the hearing officer or Board unless such new material is filed with the Board and notice identifying such new material and setting forth a description of such material is served upon each tenant no later than 10 days prior to the date of the hearing. Tenants who request a copy of the hardship file, and any new materials submitted to the Board or hearing officer, shall have one provided by the landlord at least five days prior to any hearing date. 
E.  The Board shall deny all or a part of the relief requested where specific findings of fact support the conclusion that the landlord purchase or operations are not reasonable, prudent and/or efficient. 
F.  The Board shall only include expenses that are reasonable, necessary and usual operating expenses. If an expense is not a usual yearly expense, the Board shall prorate the expense over a reasonable period of time based upon the history of the building and the actual useful life of the expense item. Any expenses connected with repairs and miscellaneous items shall be substantiated with bills and other documents for a twelve-month period prior to the application. No capital improvement or capital expenses shall be considered under this category. 
G.  Documentation presented by the landlord in the hardship application must include the following: 
(1)  The title closing statement or other proofs of purchase. 
(2)  Canceled checks or other proof of payment for all expenses claimed in the hardship application. 
(3)  All canceled checks or other proof of payment for all expenses claimed in the hardship application. 
(4)  All invoices, bills or other proof of work performed, supplies purchased and/or equipment purchased as claimed in the hardship application. 
(5)  A compilation statement of income and expenses relating to the subject property only for the preceding two years or from the date of acquisition of title if the property is owned for less than two years. 
(6)  Copies of those portions of tax returns relating to the property for the preceding two years or the period of the landlord's ownership if less than two years if filed. 
(7)  All mortgages and notes. 
(8)  The deed. 
(9)  Any other documents sought by the Rent Leveling Board and being relevant to the subject application and necessary to the Board's decisionmaking process. 
H.  Claimed expenses that are not supported by bills or invoices and canceled checks, money orders or appropriate proof of payment shall not be allowed. 
I.  If the Board determines that the landlord has withdrawn a part or all of his or her investment through refinancing or through any other means, then said withdrawal shall be deducted from the landlord's equity in real property investment unless used for the subject property. 
J.  If the Board determines that the landlord has unreasonably or excessively financed the property, then the Board may reasonably adjust the financing expense based upon market rates.  
§ 260-11. - Rent Leveling Board established. [Amended 1-9-1986 by Ord. No. C-141; 3-12-1987 by Ord. No. C-429; 1-11-1995 by Ord. No. 94-137] 
A.  There is created a Rent Leveling Board to assist the administration of this chapter. The Board shall consist of (7) members, all of whom shall be residents of the City of Jersey City. Board members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the Municipal Council. Two members shall be appointed for one year, three for two years, two for three years; and thereafter, each new member shall serve a term of three years and until his successor has been appointed and qualified. 
B.  The Mayor may also appoint two alternate members of the Board with the consent of the Municipal Council for a term of one year and until their successors are appointed and qualified. If any vacancy shall occur, other than the expiration of term, it shall be filled by appointments as above-provided for the unexpired term. 
C.  The members and alternate members of the Board shall, insofar as practicable, as a group, be representative of the affected interests in the city. 
D.  An alternate member shall be entitled to sit with and participate as a member in any meeting of or hearing before the Board. An alternate member who has attended the full hearing or hearings and all pertinent meetings may participate in the Board's determination during the absence or disqualification of any regular member. 
E.  No member or alternate member of the Rent Leveling Board shall be permitted to act on any matter in which he or she has, either directly or indirectly, any personal or financial interests. Members and alternate members may be removed for inefficiency, neglect of duty or malfeasance in office by the Mayor at his discretion after proper hearing. Any Board member or alternate member who is absent for three consecutive Board meetings shall automatically be removed from the Board. 
F.  All members of the Board must disclose any/all real estate holdings in Jersey City.  
§ 260-12. - Powers of Rent Leveling Board. 
A.  The Rent Leveling Board is granted and shall have and exercise, in addition to other powers herein granted, all powers necessary and appropriate to see that the purposes of this chapter are carried out and executed, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  To issue and promulgate such procedural rules and regulations as it deems necessary to implement the purposes of this chapter, which rules and regulations shall have the force of law until revised, repealed or amended from time to time by the Board in the exercise of its discretion, provided that such rules are filed with the City Clerk. The Municipal Council may reject any rules of the Board within 60 days of the issuance of such rule and such rejected rule shall be deemed null and void and be of no force. 
(2)  To supply information and assistance to landlords and tenants to help them comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
(3)  To hold appeals hearings and adjudicate appeals from tenants for reduced rental in accordance with provisions of this chapter. 
(4)  To hold hearings for hardship, capital improvement and rent reduction applications in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  The Board shall give both landlord and tenant reasonable opportunity to be heard before making any determination. All determinations of the Board must be approved as to law and form by the Corporation Counsel prior to release. All Board determinations must be in writing. 
C.  The Board may designate any one of the following persons as hearing officers to conduct hearings pursuant to this chapter: any one of its members or any person who was employed by the city to the position of hearing officer. Such hearing officer shall, within five days after the conclusion of the hearing, file a written report with the Board. Said report shall contain the names and addresses of the parties to the hearing, names and addresses of all witnesses other than parties who testified at the hearing, the detailed findings of fact and conclusions of law, a recommended decision and the detailed basis for the recommendation. Attached to the report shall be all documents and papers received in evidence and the tape recording or transcript of the hearing. A copy of the report alone shall be mailed or served upon each party to the hearing. The parties may file written exceptions to the report with the Board. However, no exceptions shall be considered by the Board unless the same has been filed with the Board within 10 days from the date the copy of the report is received by the party submitting the exceptions. The Board shall consider the report and any exceptions to said report and shall render a decision promptly to either adopt, reject or modify the hearing officer's recommended decision. 
[Amended 4-23-1987 by Ord. No. C-451] 
D.  The final decision or order of the Board shall be in writing or stated in the record of the Board's proceedings. Findings of fact, if set forth by reference to the language of this chapter, shall be accompanied by a concise and explicit statement of the underlying facts supporting the findings. The parties shall be notified either personally or by certified mail of the final decision.  
§ 260-13. - Appeal of Board's decision. [Amended 7-19-1991 by Ord. No. McC-340][3] 
Both landlord and tenant may appeal the findings of any determination of the Board to a court of competent jurisdiction according to law. The landlord shall provide written notice to each tenant of any such appeal or complaint and shall certify to the Administrator that notice has been given. Failure to so certify in any case shall be a violation of this chapter punishable by a minimum fine of $100 and maximum penalties as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25. 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. 
 
§ 260-14. - Required services; heating systems. [Amended 4-8-1992 by Ord. No. 92-022] 
A.  During the term of this chapter, the landlord shall maintain the same standards of service, heating, maintenance, furniture, furnishings and equipment in the housing space and dwelling as he or she provided or was required to do by law or lease at the date the lease was entered into. 
B.  When services, care or maintenance or when the standards of service, heating, maintenance, furniture, furnishings and equipment in the housing space or dwelling are not substantially maintained as specified above, any tenant may apply to the Rent Leveling Board for a decrease in rent. A copy of said application shall be served upon the landlord and all other tenants setting forth, in detail, the reasons for such applications. At least 20 days shall elapse before a hearing thereon can be set. 
C.  Conversion of a central heating system paid for by the landlord to an individual dwelling heating system unit paid for by the tenant shall be considered a reduction of services. Any landlord who makes such heating conversion shall notify his or her tenants of their entitlement to a rental decrease commensurate with the additional cost to the tenant. 
D.  The two-year period provided under § 260-7 within which a tenant may apply to the Rent Leveling Board for a decrease in rent based on reduction of service shall not commence until the landlord provides each tenant with written notice of a tenant's entitlement to a rent reduction based on the conversion.  
§ 260-15. - Provisions retroactive. 
No landlord shall after the effective date of this chapter charge any rents in excess of what he or she was receiving from the effective date of this chapter except for increases as authorized by this chapter; nor shall such landlord charge any rents in excess of what he or she was receiving on January 11, 1973, if such excess is in excess of the rental which is authorized by this chapter.  
§ 260-16. - Computations to be rounded off. 
In computing rental increases and surcharges as provided under this chapter, all amounts so computed may be rounded off to the nearest dollar in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles.  
§ 260-17. - Violations and penalties.[4] 
A violation of any provisions of this chapter, including but not limited to the filing with the Rent Leveling Board or the Administrator of any material misstatement of fact, shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25. A violation affecting more than one tenant shall be considered a separate violation as to each tenant. 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. 
 
§ 260-18. - Construal of provisions. 
This chapter being necessary for the welfare of the city and its inhabitants shall be liberally construed to effectuate the purposes thereof.  
§ 260-19. - When effective; other provisions supplemented. 
A.  This chapter shall remain in effect until the Council determines, by ordinance, that rent control is no longer necessary in the City of Jersey City and that it is in the public interest to permit the unrestrained operation of the competitive rental market. 
B.  All provisions of Chapter 218, Multiple Dwellings, of the Jersey City Code as amended and supplemented by this chapter be and they are hereby readopted.  
§ 260-20. - Nonoccupant owner registration of dwelling units. [Added 2-11-1988 by Ord. No. C-674] 
A.  The nonoccupant owner of any dwelling of one to four units which is let or rented for residential use shall file a statement with the Rent Leveling Board registering such unit. 
B.  The statement shall contain: 
(1)  The total number of units in each dwelling rented, the address of each dwelling, the number of persons living in each dwelling unit, the number of rooms in each dwelling unit and the square footage of each dwelling unit. 
(2)  The home address and telephone number where the owner or an agent authorized to act on the owner's behalf with respect to the maintenance of the property can be reached during regular business hours. 
(3)  The address and telephone number of an agent capable of responding to or relaying emergency notices and messages concerning the dwelling at any time. 
C.  If the owner is a corporation or entity other than an individual, in addition to the information requested in Subsection B above, the statement shall also contain: 
(1)  The home address and telephone number of each principal owner as requested above. 
(2)  The address of the corporation and registered agent. 
D.  From November 1 through March 31 of each year, each telephone number listed in the registration statement shall be equipped with an answering device capable of receiving and recording messages from any tenant calling with regard to maintenance. 
E.  Owners shall file an amended statement within seven days of any change in the information required to be filed with the Rent Leveling Board. 
F.  Owners have 30 days after the effective date of this chapter to comply with its requirements.  
Chapter 263 - RETAIL AND COMMERCIAL PREMISES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
History— Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City: Art. I, February 13, 1986 as Ord. No. C-163; Art. II, July 14, 1987 as Ord. No. C-514, amended in its entirety October 8, 1987 by Ord. No. C-608. Subsequent amendments noted where applicable. 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, Ch. 84; curfew, Ch. 137; dance halls, Ch. 142; fire lanes, Ch. 166; food-handling establishments; Ch. 175; sale of ice, Ch. 193; laundries and dry cleaners, Ch. 207; motor vehicle repair shops, Ch. 215; noise, Ch. 222; peddling and soliciting, Ch. 245; security gates, Ch. 278; shopping carts, Ch. 284; responsibility for solid waste disposal, Ch. 287; uniform packaging practices, Ch. 287, Art. II; sale of spray paint, Ch. 290; removal of snow and cleaning of sidewalks, Ch. 296; commercial usage of sidewalks, Ch. 296; used car dealers, Ch. 324; vending machines, Ch. 329; zoning, Ch. 345. 
 
ARTICLE I - Attendants on Duty 
[Adopted 2-13-1986 as Ord. No. C-163] 
 
§ 263-1. - Premises open twenty-four hours per day. 
Any business or commercial premises which is open to the public twenty-four (24) hours a day shall have a minimum of two (2) attendants or employees on duty at all times between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. This requirement shall not apply in the use of those businesses and commercial premises which have alarms connected to the central police console at police headquarters, provided that such alarm is in working order.  
ARTICLE II - Hours of Retail Businesses 
[Adopted 7-14-1987 as Ord. No. C-514; amended in its entirety 10-8-1987 as Ord. No. C-608; amended 9-24-2003 by Ord. No. 03-126; amended 7-14-2004 by Ord. No. 04-067] 
 
§ 263-2. - Purpose; findings.[Amended 8-4-2010 by Ord. No. 10-101] 
A.  The purpose of this Article regulating business hours of restaurants and retail sales and services businesses on described portions of Communipaw Avenue, Franklin Street, Kennedy Boulevard, Martin Luther King Drive, Monticello Avenue, Ocean Avenue, Pacific Avenue, Palisade Avenue, Sip Avenue, Summit Avenue, and Paterson Plank Road and Secaucus Road is to: 
(1)  Decrease noise and disturbance associated with the large crowds of juveniles and young adults which congregate around retail businesses, especially fast-food businesses on these streets. 
(2)  Discourage the criminal activities, especially drug-related criminal activities, on these streets. 
B.  From evidence provided by residents of the neighborhoods of the vicinity of Communipaw Avenue, Franklin Street, Kennedy Boulevard, Martin Luther King Drive, Monticello Avenue, Ocean Avenue, Pacific Avenue, Palisade Avenue, Sip Avenue, Summit Avenue, and Paterson Plank Road and Secaucus Road, and by the Department of Public Safety, the City Council finds that: [ Amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] 
(1)  Retail fast food establishments and retail sales and services businesses on the described portions of these twelve (12) streets provide a haven for criminal activities and that these activities are difficult to control while these establishments remain open. 
(2)  Crowds of juveniles and young adults are attracted to the neighborhoods of the described portions of Communipaw Avenue, Franklin Street, Kennedy Boulevard, Martin Luther King Drive, Monticello Avenue, Ocean Avenue, Pacific Avenue, Palisade Avenue, Sip Avenue, Summit Avenue, and Paterson Plank Road and Secaucus Road, by fast food establishments and retail sales and services businesses, which remain open during late-night hours when such establishments in other parts of the city have closed. 
(3)  Encouraged by the presence of fast-food restaurants and retail sales and services businesses, these crowds of juveniles and young adults congregate not only on the main streets but on the adjoining residential streets and parking lots; residents of these neighborhoods who attempt to use the streets are harassed by panhandlers and by rowdy and even malicious juveniles. 
(4)  These youths and young adults create a disturbance in the neighborhood which prevents residents from sleeping and walking the streets and from enjoying the peace and quiet of their homes. 
(5)  These youths and young adults harass neighborhood residents and pedestrians and cause them to fear for their personal safety and causing an increase in the need for police presence and calls for police service. 
(6)  The presence of all-night food establishments and retail sales and services businesses has increased the volume of noise in these neighborhoods as a result in the increase of automobile and pedestrian traffic. The increase in automobile traffic is accompanied by loud radios, car horns and running automobile engines; the increase in pedestrian traffic by loud belligerent behavior, fights and general commotion on the streets. 
(7)  The all-night operation of restaurants and retail sales and services businesses has left the streets in these areas covered with debris from food wrappings, bottles, cans and decomposing food products.  
§ 263-3. - Definitions. 
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
RETAIL SALES AND RETAIL SERVICES BUSINESSES and RESTAURANTS — In accordance with the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Jersey City, Chapter 345.  
§ 263-4. - Businesses to be closed during certain hours; exceptions. 
[Amended 8-4-2010 by Ord. No. 10-101] 
A.  Subject to Subsection B, no restaurant or retail sales establishment shall conduct any business between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the next day in any of the following districts of Jersey City: 
[Amended 1-13-2016 by Ord. No. 15-176 
Name of Street 	From 	To 
Communipaw Avenue 	Martin Luther King Drive 	Grand Street 
Communipaw Avenue 	Monticello Avenue 	Westside Avenue 
Communipaw Avenue 	Pine Street 	Manning Avenue 
Franklin Street 	Central Avenue 	Palisade Avenue 
Kennedy Boulevard 	North Street 	Secaucus Road 
Martin Luther King Drive 	McAdoo Avenue 	Communipaw Avenue 
Monticello Avenue 	Communipaw Avenue 	Orchard Street 
Ocean Avenue 	Bayonne Line 	Bramhall Avenue 
Pacific Avenue 	Communipaw Avenue 	Grand Street 
Palisade Avenue 	Beacon Avenue 	North Street 
Rose Avenue 	Cator Avenue 	Danforth Avenue 
Sip Avenue 	Summit Avenue 	Bergen Avenue 
Summit Avenue 	North Street 	Secaucus Road 
Paterson Plank Road and Secaucus Road 	Central Avenue 	Summit Avenue 
 
B.  The restriction upon business hours imposed by Subsection A shall not apply to pharmacies or other holders of plenary retail distribution licenses under the Alcoholic Beverage Law, N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq.; except that the holders of such licenses may not conduct any business between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. other than that permitted by N.J.S.A. 33:1-40.3 and Chapter 84, Alcoholic Beverages. 
C.  Subject to Subsection B, no restaurant or retail sales establishment shall conduct any business between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the next day in any of the following districts of Jersey City: 
[Added 8-10-2011 by Ord. No. 11-088; amended 5-23-2012 by Ord. No. 12-069 ] 
Name of Street 	From 	To 
Central Avenue 	Manhattan Avenue 	North Street 
Bowers Street 	Cambridge Avenue 	Central Avenue 
Bergen Avenue 	Jewett Avenue 	Highland Avenue 
Montgomery Street 	Jordan Avenue 	Boland Street 
  
§ 263-5. - Exemptions from closing regulations to be approved; procedure. 
[Amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] 
A.  Existing Establishments. Owners or operators of existing restaurants or retail sales and retail services businesses may apply to the Director of Public Safety for an exemption from the provisions of this Article. By application on a form to be devised by the Director, the applicant must demonstrate: 
(1)  A history of remaining open past 11:00 p.m. on a regularly scheduled basis for a period of one year or more prior to the date of application; and 
(2)  That the owners or operators have never been found guilty under the provisions of N.J.S.A. 2C:33-12 or N.J.S.A. 2C:33-12.1 relative to the restaurant or retail sales or retail services businesses that is the subject of the application. 
The Director shall review the application and shall have Department of Public Safety records reviewed relative to the address for which the application is submitted. The Director shall consider the amount of Department of Public Safety activity related to the particular restaurant or business, including but not limited to the number of arrests effected on the particular premises and the number of police responses dispatched to the premises over the course of one year prior to the date of the application. 
B.  Other Establishments. Owners or operators of restaurants and retail sales and retail services businesses that were not in existence at the time of this ordinance's enactment or for those restaurants and retail sales and retail services businesses that do not meet the requirements of 263-5A (1) and (2) above, may apply to the Director of Public Safety for an exemption from the provisions of this Article. By application on a form to be devised by the Director, the applicant must demonstrate to the Director's satisfaction that the operation of the establishment between the prohibited hours would not likely cause the activities and occurrences which were meant to be eliminated by this Chapter. 
The Director shall review the application and shall have Department of Public Safety records reviewed relative to the particular address or area for which the application is submitted. The Director shall consider the amount of Department of Public Safety activity related to the particular business if such business existed prior to the application (at the requested location or any other location), including but not limited to the number of arrests effected on the particular premises and the number of police responses dispatched to the premises. The Director shall further consider the history of similar businesses in the area, the owner or operators history of operating other restaurants or businesses in and out of the area, and the specific prophylactic measures proposed by the owner/operator to eliminate all detrimental activities and occurrences. 
C.  If, in the discretion of the Director, the restaurant or retail sales or retail services business can conduct activity past the hour of 11:00 p.m. without adversely affecting the safety and welfare of the residential area surrounding the area subject to this regulation, the Director shall issue a written exemption on a form to be prescribed by the Director, which so states. The form shall be posted conspicuously in the restaurant business establishment by the owners or operators and shall be effective only when posted. 
D.  The exemption may be withdrawn by the Director at any time on twenty-four (24) hours notice to the owners or operators and an opportunity to be heard. Notice is effective upon leaving at or posting upon the premises a written notice so stating the withdrawal. An exemption shall be withdrawn upon a finding by the Director that the particular establishment no longer meets the criteria for exemption outlined above.  
ARTICLE III - Use of Disposable Plastic Carryout Bags Prohibited 
 
§ 263-6. - Definitions. 
[Added 6-27-2018 by Ord. No. 18-065 ] 
CARRYOUT BAG shall mean a bag provided by a retail establishment to a customer at the point of sale for customers but shall not include: 
(1)  Bags, whether plastic or not, in which loose produce or products are placed by a consumer to deliver such items to the point of sale or check-out area of a retail establishment; 
(2)  Laundry or dry-cleaning bags; 
(3)  Newspaper bags: 
(4)  Bags used to contain or wrap frozen foods, meat, fish, or other items, whether prepackaged or not, to prevent or contain moisture; 
(5)  Bags provided by pharmacists to contain prescription drugs; or 
(6)  Bags sold in packages containing multiple bags intended for use as garbage, pet waste, or yard waste bags. 
DISPOSABLE PLASTIC CARRYOUT BAG shall mean a bag, made of plastic, which is not a reusable bag. 
FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT shall mean any establishment which serves made- to-order food or beverages for dine-in, take-out or delivery, but not including food trucks and mobile food carts. 
RECYCLABLE shall mean material that can be sorted, cleansed, and reconstituted using Jersey City's available recycling collection programs for the purpose of using the altered form in the manufacture of a new product. "Recycling" does not include burning, incinerating, converting, or otherwise thermally destroying solid waste. 
RECYCLABLE PAPER BAG shall mean a paper bag that is 100% recyclable and contains at least 40% post-consnmer recycled content and displays the words "Recyclable" and "made from 40% post-consumer recycled content" in a visible manner on the outside of the bag. 
RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT shall mean any commercial enterprise, whether or not operated for profit, including, but not limited to, mercantile establishments, department stores, food service establishments, restaurants, pharmacies, convenience and grocery stores, liquor stores, supermarkets, clothing stores, seasonal and temporary businesses, jewelry stores, and stores which sell household goods, or any other commercial establishment not specifically identified herein, which utilizes disposable plastic carryout bags for the conveyance of merchandise, but excluding bazaars or special events operated by a nonprofit organization or religious institution. 
REUSABLE BAG shall mean a bag with handles that is specifically designed and manufactured for multiple reuse and is either made from polyester, polypropylene, cotton or other durable material or plastic which is at least 2.25 mils in thickness and meets the following criteria: 
(1)  Has a minimum lifetime capability of 125 or more uses carrying 22 or more pounds over a distance of at least 175 feet: and 
(2)  Is capable of being washed so as to be cleaned and disinfected multiple times.  
§ 263-7. - Use of reusable and recyclable carryout bags mandatory. 
[Added 6-27-2018 by Ord. No. 18-065 ] 
All retail establishments shall provide customers only reusable bags and/or recyclable paper bags. No retail establishment shall provide any single-use, plastic carryout bags to a customer at the checkout stand, cash register, point of sale, or other point of departure for the purpose of transporting products or goods out of the business or store, except as otherwise provided in this Chapter. 
Nothing in this section shall be read to preclude retail establishments from making reusable bags available for sale to customers or from customers using their own reusable bags.  
§ 263-8. - Violations and penalties. 
[Added 6-27-2018 by Ord. No. 18-065 ] 
The penalty for a violation of this Chapter shall be as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25, except that retail establishments found to be in violation of this Chapter shall be subject to a minimum fine of $100.00 per infraction.  
§ 263-9. - Severability. 
[Added 6-27-2018 by Ord. No. 18-065 ] 
If any sentence, section, clause or other portion of this Article, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, shall for any reason be adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or repeal the remainder of this Article.  
§ 263-10. - Exemptions. 
[Added 6-27-2018 by Ord. No. 18-065 ] 
Items required to be sold or delivered in plastic bags in compliance with state and federal food safety and disposal laws are exempt from the provisions of this Article.  
Chapter 266 - REWARDS 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City 9-30-1992 as Ord. No. 92-131. Amendments noted where applicable.] 
 
§ 266-1. - Reward for information leading to apprehension of persons accused of crime.[1] 
The City of Jersey City offers a reward not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.) for information leading to the detection and apprehension of any person guilty of murder, kidnapping, burglary, robbery, arson or other heinous crime in Jersey City. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's Note: See also Ch. 242, Art. II, Graffiti. 
 
§ 266-2. - Payment of reward. 
Such reward is to be payable after conviction out of a fund established for this purpose.  
§ 266-3. - Eligible persons. 
The reward may be paid to any person or persons whom the governing body may in its discretion consider enTitled thereto, but no reward shall be paid to any public employee whose duty is to investigate or to enforce the law.  
Chapter 269 - SALES 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City as indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.] 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Advertising materials — See Ch. 81. 	Secondhand precious metals dealers — See Ch. 275. 
Auctioneers — See Ch. 93. 	Sale of spray paint — See Ch. 290. 
Fees and charges — See Ch. 160. 	Sale of tires — See Ch. 313. 
Sale of ice — See Ch. 193. 	Sale restrictions — See Ch. 316, Art. I. 
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 245. 	Used car dealers — See Ch. 324. 
Retail and commercial premises — See Ch. 263. 	Vending machines — See Ch. 329. 
  
ARTICLE I - Liquidation Sales 
[Adopted 5-4-1971 as Ch. 8, Art. X, of the 1971 Jersey City Code, as readopted 9-19-1978 by Ord. No. S-128] 
 
§ 269-1. - Definitions. 
As used in this article: 
DIRECTOR - The Director of the Division of Commerce. 
[Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
PUBLISH, PUBLISHING, ADVERTISEMENT and ADVERTISING - Any and all means of conveying to the public notice of sale or notice of intention to conduct a sale, whether by word of mouth, by newspaper advertisement, by magazine advertisement, by handbill, by written notice, by printed notice, by printed display, by billboard display, by poster, by radio announcement and any and all means, including oral, written or printed. 
SALES - The sale or an offer to sell to the public goods, wares and merchandise of any and all kinds and descriptions on hand and in stock in connection with a declared purpose, as set forth by advertising on the part of the seller that such sale is anticipatory to the termination, closing, liquidation, revision, wind up, discontinuance, conclusion or abandonment of the business in connection with such sale. It shall also include any sale advertised to be a fire sale, adjustment sale, creditor's sale, trustee's sale, liquidation sale, reorganization sale, alteration sale, executor's sale, administrator's sale, insolvent sale, insurance sale, insurance salvage sale, mortgage sale, assignee's sale, adjuster's sale, receiver's sale, loss-of-lease sale, wholesaler's closeout sale, creditor's committee sale, forced-out-of-business sale, removal sale and any and all sales advertised in such manner as to reasonably convey to the public that upon the disposal of the stock of goods on hand, the business will cease and be discontinued. It shall also include a water damage sale regardless of intent to discontinue business.  
§ 269-2. - License required. 
No person shall publish or conduct any sale of the type herein defined without a license therefor.  
§ 269-3. - License application. 
Any person intending to conduct a sale of goods, appliances, chattels or merchandise of any nature and character whatsoever in connection with the liquidation of the business of such person or to conduct a sale incident to going out of business shall apply to the Director for a license to conduct the sale. Application shall be made upon a form to be provided by the Director.  
§ 269-4. - Contents of application; fee. 
A.  Application for such a sale license shall be in writing, verified under oath, and shall include the following: 
(1)  The name of the operator of the sale. 
(2)  A description of the place where such sale is to be held. 
(3)  The nature of the occupancy, whether by lease or sublease, and the effective date of termination of such occupancy. 
(4)  The means to be employed in publishing such sale, together with the proposed content of any advertisement. 
(5)  An itemized list of the goods, wares and merchandise to be offered for sale, including the true name of the goods to be offered for sale. 
(6)  The place where such stock was purchased or acquired and, if not purchased, the manner of such acquisition. 
(7)  A statement by the applicant that all personal property taxes assessed on the stock by the city have been paid. Failure to have personal property taxes current shall result in the refusal of a license. 
(8)  Any additional information the Director may require. 
B.  A fee as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges, shall accompany the application. 
[Amended 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050]  
§ 269-5. - License issuance; renewal. 
A.  Upon receipt of the application the Director shall check the accuracy of such inventory so submitted and all other matters pertaining to the application. 
B.  If within five days after receipt of the application he or she shall certify to its accuracy, the Director shall issue a license for the conduct of such sale. The license shall be effective for a period of 30 days, exclusive of Sundays and legal holidays in New Jersey, to be computed from the date of the issuance of the license. If the licensee shall desire a renewal of the license, he or she shall file an application for such renewal at least five days prior to the expiration of the original license, which application shall contain a true and correct inventory in like manner as in the first instance. If the inventory is verified by the Director as to accuracy, a renewal license may be issued for a sum as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges, for the extension. A second or subsequent renewal license may be had in like manner upon filing a similar application and shall be effective for a period of 30 days, exclusive of Sundays and legal holidays in New Jersey, and shall be accompanied by the payment of the sum as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges, for the renewal. [1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. 
 
§ 269-6. - Supervision of sales. 
The Director is authorized to supervise and regulate sales as defined herein. He or she may make such rules and regulations for the conduct and advertisement of such sales as in his or her opinion will serve to prevent deception and to protect the public. If he or she finds, at any time, any addition to or replenishment of stock-in-trade or inventory other than that originally contained in the applicant's premises, he or she may forthwith declare any license forfeited and of no effect.  
§ 269-7. - Records to be kept. 
A.  A duplicate original of the application and stock list shall be available at all times to the Director or to his inspectors, and the licensee shall permit such inspectors to examine all merchandise on the premises for comparison with such stock list. 
B.  At the close of business each day the stock list attached to the application shall be revised and items of such list disposed of during such day shall be noted thereon. 
C.  Suitable books and records as prescribed by the Director shall be kept by the licensee and shall be available at all times to the inspectors of the Division.  
§ 269-8. - Contents of advertising. 
A.  All advertising shall be descriptive of the nature of such sale as stated in the application. The language in such advertising shall be identical with the advertising content as indicated in the application. 
B.  It shall be unlawful to indicate in such advertising, either directly or indirectly, that such sale is held with the approval of the Director. 
C.  Such advertising shall contain a statement in the following words and no other: "Sale held pursuant to License No. _____ of the City of Jersey City granted the _____ day of _____" and in such blank spaces the license number and the requisite dates shall be indicated.  
§ 269-9. - Display of license. 
Upon a commencement of any such sale, the license therefor shall be conspicuously displayed near the entrance to the premises.  
§ 269-10. - Persons exempt. 
The following persons shall be exempt from the provisions of this Article: 
A.  Persons acting pursuant to an order of the process of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
B.  Sheriffs and marshals acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officers. 
C.  Duly licensed auctioneers, selling at auction.  
§ 269-11. - Application fee.[2] 
Upon filing an application for an original or renewal license to advertise and conduct such sale, the applicant shall pay to the Director a fee as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges. If any such application shall be disapproved, such payment shall be forfeited to the Director to defray the cost of investigating the statements contained in such application. 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. 
 
Chapter 275 - SECONDHAND DEALERS 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City 5-4-1971 as Ch. 8, Art. XIII, of the 1971 Jersey City Code, as readopted 9-19-1978 by Ord. No. S-128. Amendments noted where applicable.] 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Auctioneers — See Ch. 93. 	Junkyards — See Ch. 202. 
Fees and charges — See Ch. 160. 	
 
 
§ 275-1. - Definitions. [Amended 4-23-2003 by Ord. No. 03-054] 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
SECONDHAND DEALER - CLASS A — Any person who deals in the purchase or sale of secondhand items, as follows: 
Items of every kind, e.g. furniture, clothes, toys, but not those items specifically listed under Secondhand Dealer - Class B. 
[Amended 2-10-1999 by Ord. No. 99-009] 
SECONDHAND DEALER - CLASS B — Any person who deals in the purchase or sale of secondhand items which include the following: 
A.  Manufactured items composed wholly or in part of gold, silver, platinum or other metals. 
B.  Old gold, silver or platinum or items containing such precious metals. 
[Amended 11-12-1980 by Ord. No. S-516] 
C.  Items comprised of gold, silver or platinum for the purpose of melting or refining. 
D.  Precious metals for the purpose of melting. 
E.  Purchase or sale of pawn tickets or other evidence of pledged articles or in the redemption or sale of pledged articles. 
F.  Paintings, coins, stamps, baseball cards, cameras, business machines or electronic equipment. 
[Added 2-10-1999 by Ord. No. 99-009]  
§ 275-2. - Nonapplicability. [Amended 11-12-1980 by Ord. No. S-516; 2-10-1999 by Ord. No. 99-009] 
This chapter shall not apply to transactions involving the following secondhand items: 
A.  Pianos, books, magazines, rugs, tapestries, artists' burlaps, paintings, sculpture, drawings, etchings and engravings. 
B.  The first purchase or sale in the country of any imported secondhand articles. 
C.  The acceptance of merchandise in a new condition as an exchange or return for credit or refund, if such merchandise was originally purchased as new from the person accepting or receiving the same; nor to any resale of such merchandise as new merchandise or the first subsequent nonretail or exchange of such merchandise as used merchandise. 
D.  The acceptance or receipt of merchandise in a used condition as an exchange or return for credit or refund, if such merchandise was originally purchased as new merchandise from the person accepting or receiving the same; nor to the first subsequent nonretail sale or exchange of such merchandise. 
E.  The first sale, at retail, of merchandise which has been rebuilt by the manufacturer or vendor originally manufacturing it, or the licensed agents thereof, and sold as factory rebuilt merchandise. 
F.  A thrift shop, as defined under the United States Internal Revenue Code, enTitled to an exemption as an eleemosynary corporation or institution.  
§ 275-3. - License required; expiration; fee. [Amended 11-12-1980 by Ord. No. S-516; 4-23-2002 by Ord. No. 03-054] 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to act as a dealer in secondhand articles without either a Class A or B license therefor. 
B.  There shall be two types of licenses: a general license and a temporary license. [Amended 2-11-1998 by Ord. No. 98-004; 2-10-1999 by Ord. No. 99-009] 
(1)  A general license shall authorize the licensee to do business as a dealer in secondhand articles within the city during the license period for a period of one year, provided that said licensee has a permanent place of business in this city. A general license shall expire on December 31 of each year. The initial license fee following the change in expiration date will be subject to proration by the Division of Commerce. 
(2)  A temporary license shall authorize the licensee who has no permanent place of business in the city to buy or sell secondhand items in the city during a period of 30 days commencing on the date of the issuance of the temporary license.  
§ 275-4. - License application; forms. [Amended 11-12-1980 by Ord. No. S-516; 2-10-1999 by Ord. No. 99-009] 
A.  Secondhand dealer licenses shall be issued by the Director of Commerce on forms printed in book form with corresponding stubs for each license. These forms shall be consecutively numbered, with suitable blank spaces for the name and business address of the licensee, the type of license issued, the location and the amount of the fee paid. 
B.  Applicants for a temporary license shall set forth the address where he or she is staying during the period of the temporary license and the licensee's permanent residential address where he or she can be contacted after the license period. 
C.  Applicants for a license under this chapter must file with the Director an application containing the following information: 
(1)  Name and description of the applicant. Individuals operating under a trade name must present a certified copy of the trade name certificate filed in the Hudson County Clerk's office. A partnership conducting business, whether or not under a trade name, must submit a certified copy of the partnership certificate filed in the Hudson County Clerk's office when the partnership was formed. A corporation must furnish a copy of the filing receipt for the certificate of incorporation from the New Jersey Secretary of State. A corporation from outside the State of New Jersey must furnish proof of its authority from the Secretary of State to do business in the state. 
(2)  Address of applicant (local and permanent). 
(3)  A statement that the applicant is of legal age to obtain such a license. 
(4)  A statement that the applicant is a citizen or legal resident of the United States and whether citizenship was obtained by birth or naturalization; if by naturalization, the date and place where obtained. The naturalization certificate or the permanent Board of Elections personal registration card may be used as proof of citizenship. 
(5)  A statement as to whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of or is now under any charge of any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor and such other facts or evidence as is deemed necessary to establish that the applicant is a person fit and capable of properly conducting the business for which the license is sought. 
(6)  A description of the exact type of business the applicant intends to conduct. 
(7)  The name and address of the owner or owners of the land and the nature of the right of occupancy of the applicant to the use of such land. 
(8)  Two photographs of the applicant, taken not more than 60 days prior to the filing of the application, which photographs shall be two inches by two inches, showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner. Two photographs and fingerprints are required of each individual applicant; two photographs and fingerprints are required of each partner; no photographs are required of corporate applicants, but all officers must be fingerprinted, as well as any stockholder of 10% or more of the stock. 
(9)  If the applicant is a corporation, the name, address and title of the officer of the corporation upon whom process or other legal notice may be served. 
D.  Each applicant must submit to a criminal history search, including fingerprinting, by the Department of Public Safety. The applicant must have two bona fide forms of identification and must be fingerprinted by the Bureau of Criminal Investigation, Jersey City, New Jersey. The Division of Commerce shall secure from the applicant the required fees [1] in the form of a money order or certified check. [ Amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] 
E.  The Division of Commerce shall keep a record of all licenses issued, as well as any other matters herein described. 
F.  No license shall be granted under this chapter to any dealer in secondhand articles: 
(1)  Who has been convicted of any crime or offense under the laws of the State of New Jersey or any state in the union or under the laws of the United States government which constitutes a crime of moral turpitude, dishonesty or which reflects adversely upon the applicant's ability to operate his business honestly: 
(2)  Who has been found by any court of the state to have practiced any fraud, deceit or misrepresentation in the conduct of the secondhand dealer business unless the Division of Commerce shall decide upon the facts presented that it is proper to issue the license: 
(3)  Whose license under this chapter has been revoked at any time during the year prior to the time of the application for the license; or 
(4)  Whose license has been suspended under this chapter and the period of such suspension has not expired at the time of this application for the license. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's Note: There shall be a $10 fee for the processing of a local background check by the Bureau of Criminal Investigation, Department of Public Safety, and a $49 feet payable to the New Jersey State Police for a state and federal background check. 
 
§ 275-5. - Temporary licenses; reports and records. [Added 11-12-1980 by Ord. No. S-516; Amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. ] 
All temporary licensees shall file certified copies of the records of all their transactions conducted during the license period. In addition thereto, said licensees shall also file certified reports required by this chapter. Said records and reports shall be in duplicate and shall be filed with the Department of Public Safety and the license issuing authority. Said records of transactions and reports shall be filed forthwith upon the expiration of the term of the license. Forthwith shall mean no later than 4:00 of the day following the expiration of the license period.  
§ 275-6. - License fees; bond; term of license; exemption for nonprofit organizations. [Amended 11-12-1980 by Ord. No. 5-516; 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-0505; 2-10-1999 by Ord. No. 99-009] 
A.  General licenses for secondhand dealers shall be for a term of one year and shall be issued as of January 1 of each year and shall expire on December 31 of each year. The license fee for such general license shall be as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges. 
B.  Temporary licenses for secondhand dealers shall be for a period of 30 days. The fee for such license shall be as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges. 
C.  Each secondhand dealer shall file an approved bond in favor of the city. Said bond shall be conditioned and guaranteed for the due observance and compliance with the provisions of this chapter by the licensee. In the event that the licensee shall fail to observe or comply with the provisions of this chapter, said bond shall be forfeited in favor of the city. The bond shall be in the general sum of $1,500; provided, however, the Director shall have the authority and responsibility of adjusting the amount of the bond to meet the necessity of changed conditions. The license issuing authority shall have the authority and responsibility of approving or disapproving the bond submitted with each application. For this purpose, the license issuing authority shall take into consideration all factors of relevant prevailing conditions for the due observance of the provisions of this chapter. 
D.  The fee requirements set forth under this section shall not apply to nonprofit organizations established under 26 U.S.C. § 501. Verification that the entity is a duly established nonprofit organization must be enclosed with the license application when submitted to the Director.  
§ 275-7. - Display of license. [Amended 11-12-1980 by Ord. No. S-516; 2-10-1999 by Ord. No. 99-009] 
A.  Licenses shall be displayed in a conspicuous place at the licensee's place of business for which it is issued. 
B.  Licenses are personal to the licensees. A licensee does not go with title to land, nor may it be sold, assigned transferred or disposed of.  
§ 275-8. - Changes in address. 
A secondhand dealer shall report any change of residence or place of business within three days after such change.  
§ 275-9. - Rendering of public service. 
When called upon, a secondhand dealer shall render any public service within the scope of the license unless he or she is actually unable to do so.  
§ 275-10. - Record book; contents. [Amended 11-12-1980 by Ord. No. S-516; 9-23-2014 by Ord. No. ] 
A.  Every secondhand dealer shall complete a transaction receipt and shall electronically submit said receipt in a method as prescribed by the Director of Public Safety, in which every purchase and sale shall be legibly written in English at the time of the transaction, as follows: 
(1)  A description of each item involved. 
(2)  The number or numbers of identification which may appear on each item. 
(3)  A complete and accurate description of each, item or piece comprising old gold, silver, platinum or other metals and of any monograms, inscriptions, marks or other identification thereof, 
(4)  The name, residence and general description of the person from whom such purchase was made and to whom sold, as follows: 
(a)  DOB; 
(b)  Height; 
(c)  Weight; 
(d)  Hair color; 
(e)  Eye color; 
(f)  Facial hair; 
(g)  Employer; and 
(h)  Thumbprint of customer. 
(5)  The day and the hour of the purchase or sale. 
(6)  A photograph of the item. 
B.  In the case of a purchase or sale of a pawnbroker ticket or other evidence of a pledged article or a redemption or sale of a pledged article, there shall be recorded in a way as prescribed by the Director of Public Safety at the time of such purchase, sale or redemption: 
(1)  The name and address of the person who issued such ticket or other evidence. 
(2)  The pledge number of such pawn ticket or other evidence. 
(3)  The name and address of the pledgor as it appears upon such pawn ticket or other evidence. 
(4)  The amount loaned or advanced as it appears on such pawn ticket or other evidence. 
(5)  The day and hour of such purchase, sale or redemption, as the case may be. 
(6)  The name, residence and general description of the person from whom or to whom the redeemed article is purchased or sold, as the case may be. 
(7)  The sum paid or received for such pawn ticket or other evidence or the sum paid or received for the redeemed article or pledge. 
(8)  Such description of a pledged article as appears on such pawn ticket or other evidenced and an accurate description of every redeemed pledged article. 
C.  Every dealer in secondhand articles who receives secondhand articles on consignment shall keep a record, in the above-prescribed book, describing the articles and the name and description of the person or dealer such items are received from. 
[Added 2-10-1999 by Ord. No. 99-009] 
D.  As between dealers, all transactions shall be recorded in the above-prescribed book and legible records kept describing the articles, including a detailed description of all jewelry and costume jewelry. 
[Added 2-10-1999 by Ord. No. 99-009] 
E.  Duly licensed dealers in secondhand articles shall keep a record of purchases in a bound book, noting the article number on each purchase. All identifiable secondhand articles shall be entered individually in the ledger book and reported individually to the Director of Public Safety for the City of Jersey City at the close of each business day. The daily reporting requirement set forth in this section shall not apply to nonprofit organizations established under 26 U.S.C. § 501. [Added 2-10-1999 by Ord. No. 99-009; Amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] 
F.  [Added 2-10-1999 by Ord. No. 99-009] Every secondhand dealer shall verify the identity of every person from whom he or she purchases an article and keep a written record of the nature of the evidence submitted such person to prove his or her identity. Each seller must provide two forms of identification, one of which must be a photograph along with one of the following: 
(1)  Any official document, except a social security account number card, issued by the United States government, any state, county, municipality or subdivision thereof, any public agency or department thereof or any public or private employer which requires and bears the signature of the person to whom it was issued; or 
(2)  Other identification documentation which, under the circumstances of any particular purchase, would lead a reasonable person to believe to be accurate and reliable when identification under Subsection F(1) is not available.  
§ 275-11. - Availability of record transaction and items for inspection. [Amended 11-12-1980 by Ord. No. S-516; 2-10-1999 by Ord. No. 99-009; 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. ; 9-23-2014 by Ord. No. ] 
The transaction records and items of each secondhand dealer shall, at all reasonable times, be open to the inspection of the personnel of the Department of Public Safety and the Division of Commerce.  
§ 275-12. - Furnishing record information to Department of Public Safety. [ ] 
When the Department of Public Safety serves a written notice upon a secondhand dealer to furnish any of the information required to be kept in the dealer's record book, official blank forms for that purpose shall be furnished by the Department to the dealer. Thereafter, the dealer shall furnish the requested information on these forms to the Director of Public Safety for appropriate consideration and handling.  
§ 275-13. - Unlawful purchases. [Amended 2-10-1999 by Ord. No. 99-009] 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any dealer in secondhand articles to engage in selling activities at any place of business designated in such license. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any dealer in secondhand articles to purchase any secondhand goods or things from any person whom a dealer knows to be or has reason to believe is a minor. 
C.  It shall be unlawful for any dealer in secondhand articles to purchase any secondhand goods or articles from any person between the hours of 10:00 in the evening and 7:00 in the morning. 
D.  It shall be unlawful for any dealer in secondhand articles to sell or dispose of any secondhand articles, except articles purchased from another licensed secondhand dealer, until the expiration of 30 business days after the acquisition by such dealer of such articles. Duly licensed dealers in antiques may sell or dispose of secondhand articles for a period of time less than the expiration of the said thirty-day period, provided that the required records of purchases and sales are kept in accordance with § 275-10. 
E.  It shall be unlawful for any person licensed as a secondhand dealer to deal in the purchase or sale of any junk, old rope, old iron, brass, copper, tin, lead, rubber, paper, rags, bagging, slush or empty bottles or employ or use a boat, cart or other vehicles for the purpose of collecting any such things or materials unless he or she also holds a junkyard license under Chapter 202. 
F.  It shall be unlawful for any person licensed as a secondhand dealer to deal in the purchase or sale of secondhand motor vehicles or parts therefrom, the processing of used metals for resale and the dumping, storage, burning and disposal of waste, secondhand or used materials of whatever composition unless he or she also holds a junked license under Chapter 202.  
§ 275-14. - Lost or stolen goods; report. [Amended 11-12-1980 by Ord. No. S-516; 2-10-1999 by Ord. No. 99-009; ] [2] 
A.  Any secondhand dealer who has received any goods, items or things which are the same or which answer the description of being the same as ones advertised in a newspaper printed or circulated in the city as lost or stolen, or suspected of being lost or stolen, shall prepare a report of relevant available information, in writing, including the name and address of the person from whom the item was purchased. This information shall be given to the Department of Public Safety. 
B.  A secondhand dealer who has in his or her possession or who receives any items which have been lost or stolen or which are alleged to be or are supposed to have been lost or stolen shall remand the lost or stolen property to the Department of Public Safety property room for safekeeping until a disposition is reached as to the identity of the true owner. 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former §§ 275-14, Waiting period for resale of certain items, as amended 12-11-1980 by Ord. No. S-516, 275-15, Acting as junk dealer unlawful, and 275-17, Exhibition of lost or stolen goods, and renumbered former §§ 275-16, 275-18 and 275-19 as §§ 275-14, 275-15 and 275-16, respectively. 
 
§ 275-15. - Complaint procedure; appeals. [Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052; 2-10-1999 by Ord. No. 99-009] 
A.  Complaints received by the city against licensed secondhand dealers shall be handled as follows: 
(1)  Complaints shall be referred to the Director of Commerce. 
(2)  The Director shall have the power and authority to hear and determine the complaints and to suspend or revoke any secondhand dealer's license. For this purpose the Director may: 
(a)  Investigate any matter pertaining to the granting, issuing, transferring, revoking, suspending or canceling of a license. 
(b)  Take any testimony which may be necessary. 
(c)  Require the appearance of witnesses. 
(d)  Require the production before the Director of necessary books and papers. 
B.  The secondhand dealer involved may appeal any final decision of the Director of the Division of Commerce to the Director of the Department of Housing, Economic Development and Commerce within 10 days after service of the decision of the Director of Commerce.  
§ 275-16. - Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-12-1980 by Ord. No. S-516; 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050; 2-10-1999 by Ord. No. 99-009] 
A.  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25, provided that a minimum fine may be imposed for no less than $100. 
B.  Conviction for any offense against the provisions of this chapter shall constitute and effect an immediate forfeiture of the license. 
C.  In addition to the above-provided penalties and punishment, the Director may maintain an action or proceeding in the name of the City of Jersey City in a court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with the provisions of this chapter or to restrain by injunction an offense against this chapter.  
Chapter 278 - SECURITY GATES 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City 4-10-1991 as Ord. No. McC-292. Amendments noted where applicable.] 
 
§ 278-1. - Permit required. 
A.  No security gates shall be installed without prior approval as to design by the Construction Official. 
B.  A permit shall be issued by the Construction Official prior to installation of any security gate. 
C.  The term "security gate" means any sliding or rolling horizontal or vertical gate on the front of any structure to prevent unauthorized entrance.  
§ 278-2. - Metal construction; finish. 
Security gates shall be constructed of metal and so finished as not to rust or stain either buildings or sidewalks.  
§ 278-3. - Open grill requirements. 
Security gates shall be of an open grill design, except that solid panels shall be allowed from the bottom of the security gate up to a maximum of forty-eight (48) inches from the sidewalk.  
§ 278-4. - Violations and penalties.[1] 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. 
 
Chapter 281 - SEWERS 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City: Art. I, 3-10-1988 as Ord. No. C-695; Art. II, 9-23-1985 as Ord. No. C-26. Amendments noted where applicable.] 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 131. 	Property maintenance — See Ch. 254. 
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 182. 	Subdivision of land — See Ch. 299. 
Housing accommodations — See Ch. 188. 	Water — See Ch. 337. 
 
_____ 
ARTICLE I - Pretreatment and Sewer Protection Program 
[Adopted 3-10-1988 as Ord. No. C-695] 
 
§ 281-1. - Program established; policy. 
There is hereby established in the City of Jersey City a wastewater pretreatment and sewer protection program. The program will enable the city to comply with federal effluent limitations and any other discharge criteria required or authorized by state or federal law and to derive the maximum public benefit by regulating the quality and quantity of wastewater discharged into sewers and wastewater treatment. The policy of this program will be to provide citizens with the best possible protection of their environment and their health, safety and welfare.  
§ 281-2. - Standards adopted; administration. 
A.  The City of Jersey City hereby adopts the National Pretreatment Standards, 40 CFR et seq. 
B.  The Division of Engineering shall be responsible for the administration of the program. 
C.  The Hazmat Coordinator shall issue, through the Municipal Engineer, a quarterly report to the Mayor and Council on the implementation of the Jersey City pretreatment and sewer protection program. 
D.  The Hazmat Coordinator shall, within six (6) months of the effective date of this Article, develop regulations establishing standards and procedures for the implementation of the Jersey City pretreatment and sewer protection program.* 
*  Editor's Note— Such regulations are on file in the office of the Hazmat Coordinator.  
ARTICLE II - Sewage Discharge Regulations 
[Adopted 9-23-1985 as Ord. No. C-26] 
 
§ 281-3. - Definitions. 
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
FLOATABLE OIL - Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. Wastewater shall be considered free of "floatable oil" if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection system. 
NATURAL OUTLET - An outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface- or groundwater, including the Passaic River or any of its tributaries. 
SANITARY SEWER - A sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together with minor quantities of ground-, storm- and surface waters that are not admitted intentionally. 
SANITARY WASTE - Waste derived principally from dwellings, office buildings and sanitary conveniences. When segregated from industrial wastes, sanitary waste may come from industrial plants or commercial enterprises. 
SEWAGE - The spent water of a community. The preferred term is "wastewater." 
SEWER - A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water. 
STORM DRAIN (sometimes called "storm sewer") - A drain or sewer for conveying water, groundwater, subsurface water or unpolluted water from any source. 
STRENGTH OF WASTE - A measurement of suspended solids and/or biochemical oxygen demand and/or chemical oxygen demand, and/or any other parameter determined by the Passaic Valley Sewerage Commission as a fair indicator of the relative use, other than volumetric, of Passaic Valley Sewerage Commission facilities by industrial wastes.  
§ 281-4. - Unlawful acts. 
A.  It shall be unlawful to discharge into any natural outlet within the municipality any wastewater or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided and where a National Pollution Discharge Elimination System permit has been obtained from the appropriate governmental authority, where required. 
B.  No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or drain, which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer, unless approved by the municipality for purpose of disposal of polluted surface drainage. 
C.  All users of the wastewater facilities shall comply with the requirements of the written rules and regulations of the Passaic Valley Sewerage Commission which have been adopted and which, from time to time, shall have been adopted, which regulations shall become effective upon filing of certified copies in the office of the Municipal Clerk after the effective date of this Article.  
§ 281-5. - Violations and penalties. 
A.  The governing body shall appoint or designate some suitable person or agency to administer this Article on or before its effective date. 
B.  Any person violating any of the provisions of this Article shall, upon conviction, be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25. Each and every day in which a violation of any provision of this Article exists shall constitute a separate violation.* 
*  Editor's Note— Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. 
C.  Violations of any of the provisions of this Article or any permit issued under the authority of this Articles may result in the termination of the permit and/or the termination of the authority to discharge into the system. 
D.  This Article shall take effect at such time as the municipality begins pumping its sewerage to the Passaic Valley Sewerage Commission wastewater treatment facility.  
§ 281-6. - Conflicts with other laws. 
No ordinance heretofore adopted by the municipality shall be affected by this Article, except that if any provision of the prior ordinance is in conflict with the provisions of this Article, the provisions of this Article shall control.  
ARTICLE III - Additional Sewage Discharge Regulations 
[Added 8-8-2007 by Ord. No. 07-132] 
 
§ 281-7. - Additional sewage discharge regulations. 
A.  Improper Disposal of Waste. 
(1)  Purpose. An ordinance to prohibit the spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials other than stormwater to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) operated by the Jersey City Municipal Utilities Authority, so as to protect the public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply. 
(2)  Definitions. For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in the text of this Chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
(a)  Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) — a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels or storm drains) that is owned or operated by the City of Jersey City or the Jersey City Municipal Utilities Authority and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater. MS4s do not include combined sewer systems, which are sewer systems that are designed to carry sanitary sewage at all times and to collect and transport stormwater from streets and other sources. 
(b)  Person — any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal jurisdiction. 
(c)  Stormwater — water resulting from precipitation (including rain and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities, or is conveyed by snow removal equipment. 
(3)  Prohibited Conduct. The spilling, dumping or disposal of materials other than stormwater to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Jersey City Municipal Utilities Authority is prohibited. The spilling, dumping or disposal of materials other than stormwater in such a manner as to cause the discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system is also prohibited. 
(4)  Exceptions to Prohibition. 
(a)  Water line flushing and discharges from potable water sources; 
(b)  Uncontaminated ground water (e.g. infiltration, crawl space or basement sump pumps, foundation or footing drains, rising ground waters); 
(c)  Air conditioning condensate (excluding contact and non-contact cooling water); 
(d)  Irrigation water (including landscape and lawn watering runoff); 
(e)  Flows from springs, riparian habitats and wetlands, water reservoir discharges and diverted stream flows; 
(f)  Residential car washing water and residential swimming pool discharges; 
(g)  Sidewalk, driveway and street wash water; flows from fire fighting activities; 
(h)  Flows from rinsing of the following equipment with clean water: 
(1)  Beach maintenance equipment immediately following their use for their intended purpose; and 
(2)  Equipment used in the application of salt and de-icing materials immediately following salt and de-icing material applications. Prior to rinsing with clean water, all residual salt and de-icing materials must be removed from equipment and vehicles to the maximum extent practicable using dry cleaning methods. Recovered materials are to be returned to storage for reuse or properly discarded. Rinsing of equipment, as noted in the above situation is limited to exterior, undercarriage and exposed parts and does not apply to engines or other enclosed machinery. 
(5)  Enforcement. This ordinance shall be enforced by employees of the JCMUA and the employees of the City of Jersey City, including its police officers. 
(6)  Penalties. Any person(s) who continues to be in violation of the provisions of this Ordinance, after being duly notified, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed One Thousand Two Hundred and Fifty Dollars ($1,250.00) per day. 
(7)  Severability. Each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of this Ordinance is declared to be an independent section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase, and the finding or holding of any such portion of this Ordinance to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause, or reason, shall not affect any other portion of this Ordinance. 
B.  Wildlife Feeding. 
(1)  Purpose. An ordinance to prohibit the feeding of unconfined wildlife in any public park or on any other property owned or operated by the City of Jersey City, so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for failure to comply. 
(2)  Definitions. For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in the text of this Chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
(a)  Feed— to give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any edible material with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing wildlife. Feeding does not include baiting in the legal taking of fish and/or game. 
(b)  Person — any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm, association or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal jurisdiction. 
(c)  Wildlife — all animals that are neither human nor domesticated. 
(3)  Prohibited Conduct. No person shall feed in any public park or on any other property owned or operated by the City of Jersey City, any wildlife, excluding confined wildlife (for example, wildlife confined in zoos, parks or rehabilitation centers or unconfined wildlife at environmental education centers). 
(4)  Enforcement. 
(a)  This Ordinance shall be enforced by employees of the JCMUA and the employees of the City of Jersey City, including its police officers. 
(b)  Any person found to be in violation of this Ordinance shall be ordered to cease the feeding immediately. 
(5)  Penalties. Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be subject to a fine not to exceed One Thousand Two Hundred and Fifty Dollars ($1,250.00) per day. 
(6)  Severability. Each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of this Ordinance is declared to be an independent section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase, and the finding or holding of any such portion of this Ordinance to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause, or reason, shall not affect any other portion of this Ordinance. 
C.  Illicit Connection. 
(1)  Purpose. An ordinance to prohibit illicit connections to the municipal separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Jersey City Municipal Utilities Authority, so as to protect the public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for failure to comply. 
(2)  Definitions. For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in the text of this Chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. The definitions below are the same as or based on corresponding definitions in the New Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A-1.2. 
(a)  Domestic sewage — waste and wastewater from humans or household operations. 
(b)  Illicit connection — any physical or non-physical connection that discharges domestic sewage, non-contact cooling water, process wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater) to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Jersey City Municipal Utilities Authority, unless that discharge is authorized under a NJPDES permit other than the Tier A Municipal Stormwater General Permit. Non physical connections may include, but are not limited to, leaks, flows, or overflows into the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(c)  Industrial waste — non-domestic waste, including, but not limited to, those pollutants regulated under Section 307(a), (b), or (c) of the Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. §1317(a), (b), or(c). 
(d)  Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) — a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by the Jersey City Municipal Utilities Authority, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater. MS4s do not include combined sewer systems, which are sewer systems that are designed to carry sanitary sewage at all times and to collect and transport stormwater from streets and other sources. 
(e)  NJPDES Permit — a permit issued by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A. 
(f)  Non-contact cooling water — water used to reduce temperature for the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product (other than heat) or finished product. Non-contact cooling water may however contain algaecides or biocides to control fouling of equipment such as heat exchangers and/or corrosion inhibitors. 
(g)  Person — any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal jurisdiction. 
(h)  Process wastewater — any water which, during manufacturing or processing comes into direct contact with or results from the production or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct or waste product. Process wastewater includes, but is not limited to, leachate and cooling water other than non-contact cooling water. 
(i)  Stormwater — water resulting from precipitation (including rain and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities, or is conveyed by snow removal equipment. 
(3)  Prohibited Conduct. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged through an illicit connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Jersey City Municipal Utilities Authority any domestic sewage, non-contact cooling water, process wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater). 
(4)  Enforcement. This ordinance shall be enforced by employees of the JCMUA and the employees of the City of Jersey City, including its police officers. 
(5)  Penalties. Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be subject to a fine not to exceed One Thousand Two Hundred and Fifty Dollars ($1,250.00) per day. 
(6)  Severability. Each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of this Ordinance is declared to be an independent section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase, and the finding or holding of any such portion of this Ordinance to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause, or reason, shall not affect any other portion of this Ordinance. 
D.  Yard Waste Collection Program. 
(1)  Purpose. An ordinance to establish a yard waste collection and disposal program in the City of Jersey City, so as to protect the public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply. 
(2)  Definitions. For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in the text of this Chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
(a)  Containerized — means the placement of yard waste in a trash can, bucket or bag or other vessel, such as to prevent the yard waste from spilling or blowing out into the street and coming into contact with storm water. 
(b)  Person — any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal jurisdiction. 
(c)  Street — means any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive or other way, which is an existing State, county or municipal roadway, and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or unimproved and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, parking areas, and other areas within the street lines. 
(d)  Yard waste — means leaves and grass clippings. 
(3)  Yard Waste Collection. Sweeping, raking, blowing or otherwise placing yard waste that is not containerized at the curb or along the street is only allowed during the seven days prior to a scheduled and announced collection, and shall not be placed closer than ten (10) feet from any storm drain inlet. Placement of such yard waste at the curb or along the street at any other time or in any other manner is a violation of this Ordinance. If such placement of yard waste occurs, the party responsible for placement of the yard waste must remove the yard waste from the street or said party shall be deemed in violation of this Ordinance. 
(4)  Enforcement. This ordinance shall be enforced by employees of the JCMUA and the employees of the City of Jersey City, including its police officers. 
(5)  Violations and Penalties. Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be subject to a fine not to exceed One Thousand Two Hundred and Fifty Dollars ($1,250.00) per day. 
(6)  Severability. Each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of this Ordinance is declared to be an independent section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase, and the finding or holding of any such portion of this Ordinance to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause, or reason, shall not affect any other portion of this Ordinance.  
ARTICLE IV. - Private Storm Drain Inlets [Added 8-25-2010 by Ord. No. 10-108] 
 
§ 281-8. - Purpose. 
This ordinance shall require the retrofitting of existing storm drain inlets which are in direct contact with repaying, repairing, reconstruction, or resurfacing or alterations of facilities on private property, to prevent flies discharge of solids and floatables (such as plastic bottles, cans, food wrappers and other litter) to the municipal separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Municipal Utilities Authority of the City of Jersey City so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.  
§ 281-9. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in the text of this Chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
a.  Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4)—a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by Municipal Utilities Authority of the City of Jersey City or other public body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater. MS4s do not include combined sewer systems, which are sewer systems that are designed to carry sanitary sewage at all times and to collect and transport stormwater from streets and other sources. 
b.  Person—any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal jurisdiction. 
c.  Storm drain inlet—an opening in a storm drain used to collect stormwater runoff and includes, but is not limited to, a grate inlet, curb-opening inlet, slotted inlet, and combination inlet 
d.  Waters of the State—means the ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural or artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its jurisdiction.  
§ 281-10. - Prohibited conduct. 
No person in control of private property (except a residential lot with one single family house) shall authorize the repaying, repairing (excluding the repair of individual potholes), resurfacing (including top coating or chip sealing with asphalt emulsion or a thin base of hot bitumen), reconstructing or altering any surface that is in direct contact with an existing storm drain inlet on that property unless the storm drain inlet either: 
1.  Already meets the design standard below to control passage of solid and floatable materials; or 
2.  Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard in Section 281-11 below prior to the completion of the project  
§ 281-11. - Design standard. 
Storm drain inlets identified in Section 281-10 above shall comply with the following standard to control passage of solid and floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this paragraph, "solid and floatable materials" means sediment debris, trash, and other floating, suspended, or settleable solids. For exemptions to this standard see Subsection 3. below. 
1.  Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever they use a grate in pavement or another ground surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a storm drain or surface water body under that grate: 
a.  The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJ DOT) bicycle safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways Planning and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or 
b.  A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate has an area of no more than seven square inches, or is no greater than one-half inch across the smallest dimension. 
Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates in grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening portion) of combination inlets, grates on storm sewer manholes, ditch grates, trench grates, and grates of spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground surfaces include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways, parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open channels, and stormwater basin floors. 
2.  Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet the clear space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if the curb opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an area of no more than seven square inches, or be no greater than two inches across the smallest dimension. 
3.  This standard does not apply: 
a.  Where the municipal engineer agrees that this standard would cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could not practicably be overcome by using additional or larger storm drain inlets that meet these standards; 
b.  Where flows are conveyed through any device (e.g., end of pipe netting facility, manufactured treatment device, or a catch basin hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid and floatable materials that could not pass through one of the following: 
i.  A rectangular space four and five-eighths inches long and one and one-half inches wide (this option does not apply for outfall netting facilities); or 
ii.  A bar screen having a bar spacing of one-half inch. 
c.  Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the bars; or 
d.  Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet this standard is an undertaking that constitutes an encroachment or will damage or destroy the New Jersey Register listed historic property.  
§ 281-12. - Enforcement. 
This Article shall be enforced by the Jersey City Municipal Utilities Authority and employees of the City of Jersey City, including its police officers.  
§ 281-13. - Penalties. 
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this ordinance shall be subject to a fine not to exceed one thousand two hundred fifty dollars ($1,250.00) for each storm drain inlet that is not retrofitted to meet the design standard.  
Chapter 282 - SEX OFFENDER RESIDENCY RESTRICTION 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City 11-21-2006 by Ord. No. 06-145.] 
 
§ 282-1. - Sex offender residency prohibition. 
No person over the age of eighteen (18) who has been convicted of a violation of any crime against a minor as identified in N.J.S.A. 2C:7-2, and who as a result of said conviction is required to register with the proper authorities pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:7-1, et seq., Registration and Notification of Release of Certain Offenders, commonly identified as "Megan's Law," shall be permitted to reside or live within two thousand five hundred (2,500) feet of: 
A.  Any public or private school where the dominant school population is eighteen (18) years of age or younger; 
B.  Any daycare center; 
C.  Any day camp; 
D.  Any City, County or State Park, including the so-called "pocket parks" within individual neighborhoods; 
E.  Any public or commercial recreation facility clearly designed to attract children as a "playground;" 
F.  Any commercial recreation facilities frequented by young people, including theaters, bowling alleys, sports fields, exercise or sporting facilities; or 
G.  Any convenience store. 
H.  Any public library.  
§ 282-2. - Relocation requirement. 
Any person meeting the definition set forth herein above who resides or lives within two thousand five hundred (2,500) feet of any of the facilities listed within the City shall have sixty (60) days from receipt of written notice of the prohibition set forth in Section 1 of this Ordinance to move to a location that is not within two thousand five hundred (2,500) feet of one of those facilities within the municipality. Failure to so relocate as stated herein shall constitute a violation of this section.  
§ 282-3. - Prior residency established. 
This prohibition shall not be deemed applicable to a person who had established a residence prior to the effective date of this statute throughout the period of time the person remains a resident at that precise location.  
§ 282-4. - Brown Zones. 
In addition to the foregoing, an area encompassing one hundred fifty (150) feet in all directions from any facilities identified in Section 1 of this Ordinance shall be established and defined as a "Brown Zone." No person identified in Section 1 of this Ordinance shall be permitted to stop, sit, stand or loiter within a Brown Zone for any period of time exceeding the amount of time reasonably necessary to engage in a legitimate activity within the Brown Zone, and only for the period of time actually engaging in that legitimate activity.  
§ 282-5. - Penalty for violation. 
A.  Each and every individual in violation of this Ordinance shall be subject to a fine not exceeding one thousand two hundred fifty dollars ($1,250.00), which fine shall be at least five hundred dollars ($500.00), or shall be required to perform community service not to exceed ninety (90) days for each offense, or shall be imprisoned for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days. In the event of a second offense, even concurrent, occurring within one year of the prior offense, for which the individual was sentenced to pay a fine, the court shall sentence the individual to an additional fine as a repeat offender. The additional fine imposed by the court upon a repeat offender shall not be less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than one thousand two hundred fifty dollars ($1,250.00), but shall be calculated separately from the fine imposed for the violation of this Ordinance. 
B.  Each and every individual in violation of this Ordinance shall be subject to a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00), which fine shall be at least two hundred dollars ($200.00) or shall be required to perform community service not to exceed thirty (30) days for each offense, or shall be imprisoned for a term not exceeding thirty (30) days. In the event of a second offense, even concurrent, occurring within one year of the prior offense, for which the individual was sentenced to pay a fine, the court shall sentence the individual to an additional fine as a repeat offender. The additional fine imposed by the court upon a repeat offender shall not be less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), but shall be calculated separately from the fine imposed for the violation of this Ordinance.  
Chapter 284 - SHOPPING CARTS 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City 11-20-1990 as Ord. No. McC-233. Amendments noted where applicable.] 
 
§ 284-1. - Abandonment unlawful. 
No person shall leave or abandon any shopping cart upon the sidewalks, streets or roadways of the City of Jersey City.  
§ 284-2. - Identification tags required. 
No merchant, corporate or otherwise, shall provide shopping carts for the use of his customers without first affixing thereto a permanent tag of identification setting forth the name and address of the merchant.  
§ 284-3. - Seizure; redemption or sale of abandoned carts; fees. [Amended 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050; 2-26-1997 by Ord. No. 97-007; ] 
All such carts abandoned or otherwise left on public streets, public property or on private property without the express consent of the owner or tenant thereof or the City of Jersey City shall be seized and impounded by the Department of Public Safety or the Department of Public Works, to be sold in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:14-157 at public auction as unclaimed property after a period of six months, unless the owner thereof shall claim them from the Department of Public Safety or the Deprtment of Public Works within said period and pay the sums as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges, to cover municipal retrieval and storage costs. Such fees shall be paid to the Treasurer of the City of Jersey City for the purposes of the City of Jersey City.  
§ 284-4. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of up to fifty dollars ($50).  
Chapter 285 - SIMULATED DRUG PARAPHERNALIA 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City 9-27-1995 as Ord. No. 95-088. Amendments noted where applicable.] 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Drug-free school zones — See Ch. 151. 
 
§ 285-1. - Findings. 
The Municipal Council finds that in light of the limited experience, education and emotional development of children under the age of seventeen (17), they are impressionable and susceptible to the influence of criminal conduct, particularly related to the sale and use of illegal drugs in our society. The display, distribution and sale of materials simulating drug paraphernalia is a contributing factor to juvenile crime and drug use, a basic factor in impairing the ethical and moral development of our youth and a clear and present danger to the people of the city. The city has a responsibility and an exigent interest to protect the welfare of its children and to see that they are safeguarded from influences which might prevent their growth into free and independent well-developed citizens by preventing the distribution to children of material deemed harmful to children. Therefore, the revisions hereinafter prescribed are enacted and their necessity in the public interest is hereby declared as a matter of legislative determination.  
§ 285-2. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
MATERIAL or MATERIALS SIMULATING DRUG PARAPHERNALIA - Any object which appears on cursory inspection to be an object commonly used by persons engaged in the possession, sale or use of illegal drugs, but which object is in fact not used for illegal purposes. Such materials include but are not restricted to objects which have the appearance of hypodermic needles or syringes. 
MINOR - Any person less than seventeen (17) years of old.  
§ 285-3. - Distributing material simulating drug paraphernalia to minors. 
A person is guilty of distributing material simulating drug paraphernalia to minors when, with knowledge of its character and content, he or she sells or conveys to a minor for monetary consideration any material simulating drug paraphernalia and which is harmful to minors.  
§ 285-4. - Presumption and defense. 
A.  A person who engages in the conduct proscribed by § 285-3 of this chapter is presumed to do so with knowledge of the character and content of the material sold or distributed. 
B.  In any prosecution for distributing material simulating drug paraphernalia to minors, it is an affirmative defense that: 
(1)  The defendant had reasonable cause to believe that the minor involved was seventeen (17) years old or more; and 
(2)  The minor exhibited to the defendant a draft card, driver's license, birth certificate or other official or apparently official document purporting to establish that such minor was seventeen (17) years old or more.  
Chapter 287 - SOLID WASTE 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City: Art. I, 5-16-1978 by Ord. No. S-93 as Ch. 22, Art. I, of the 1971 Jersey City Code, as readopted 9-19-1978 by Ord. No. S-128; Art. II, 7-18-1990 as Ord. No. McC-154; Art. III, 10-16-1979 as Ord. No. S-302; Art. IV, 1-14-1988 as Ord. No. C-652. Amendments noted where applicable.] 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Littering — See Ch. 81. 	Junkyards — See Ch. 202. 
Demolition of buildings — See Ch. 105. 	Property maintenance — See Ch. 254. 
Fees and charges — See Ch. 160. 	Rewards — See Ch. 266. 
Food-handling establishments — See Ch. 175. 	Dumpsters on streets — See Ch. 296, Art. IV. 
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 182. 	Sale of tires — See Ch. 313. 
 
_____ 
ARTICLE I - Storage, Collection and Disposal 
[Adopted 5-16-1978 by Ord. No. S-93 as Ch. 22, Art. I, of the 1971 Jersey City Code, as readopted 9-19-1978 by Ord. No. S-128] 
 
§ 287-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Article is to improve the environment of Jersey City by establishing a sanitary and satisfactory method for the storage, collection and disposal of solid waste.  
§ 287-2. - Definitions. 
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
ASHES—The residue from the burning of wood, coal or other combustible material. 
CITY—The City of Jersey City, New Jersey. 
DEMOLITION CONTAINER—A steel, watertight, roll-off container having a capacity of fifteen (15) to forty (40) cubic yards. 
DIRECTOR—The Director of the Department of Public Works. 
DIVISION—Jersey City Department of Public Works. 
[Amended 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050; 11-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-172 ] 
DUMPSTER—A steel, watertight refuse container equipped with a tight-fitting lid, having a capacity of 3/4 to eight cubic yards. 
FOOD PEDDLER—Any mobile purveyor of prepared food and drink as licensed by the Division of Health under the provisions of the Jersey City Code governing itinerant eating and drinking establishments. 
Editor's note— See Ch. 157, Entertainment and Dance Licenses. 
GARBAGE—Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
HAZARDOUS WASTE—Includes but is not limited to 
[Amended 10-27-1988 by Ord. No. C-839]: 
A.  Waste which has been shown in scientific studies to have toxic, carcinogenic, mutagenic or tetrogenic effects on humans or other life forms. 
B.  Waste classified as hazardous under one or more of the following hazard codes: volatile waste, corrosive waste, reactive waste, extoxic waste, acute hazardous waste and toxic waste. 
LITTER—Any item of a solid or liquid nature which, when it is deposited, placed or falls upon the ground 
[Added 10-17-1978 by Ord. No. S-139]: 
A.  Would, of itself, cause an unsightly, dirty, unsanitary or dangerous condition. 
B.  Would add to or cause an accumulation of an unsightly, dirty, unsanitary or dangerous nature. 
C.  Could, if other items are added to it, form an accumulation of an unsightly, dirty, unsanitary or dangerous nature. 
MATTRESS—(a) A fabric case filled with resilient material (such as cotton, hair, feathers, foam rubber, or an arrangement of coiled springs) used either alone as a bed or on a bedstead; or (b) an inflatable airtight sack for use as a mattress. 
[Added 5-24-2017 by Ord. No. 17-057 ] 
MEDICAL WASTE—As defined in the Comprehensive Regulated Medical Waste Management Act ( N.J.S.A. 13:1E-48.1 et seq.). 
[Added 10-27-1988 by Ord. No. C-839; 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050] 
PERSON—Any person, firm, partnership, association, company or organization of any kind. 
RECEPTACLE—Includes both refuse containers and plastic bags. 
REFUSE—Putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body wastes), including garbage, rubbish, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles and solid market and industrial wastes. 
RUBBISH—Nonputrescible solid wastes (excluding ashes), consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes such as paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and other materials. 
SWILL—A semiliquid waste consisting of food scrap and liquids.  
§ 287-3. - Storage of refuse. 
A.  No person may place refuse on any street, sidewalk, park or other public place except in city litter receptacles or in plastic bags or refuse containers for collection in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
B.  No person may place, deposit or accumulate refuse upon or within any private property except in plastic bags or refuse containers in accordance with that provision of this article. 
C.  No person may deposit refuse in a stream, brook or any other body of water. 
D.  It shall be the duty of owners of real property to prevent the accumulation of refuse upon the sidewalks adjacent to their property. 
E.  No person may place household refuse, construction or demolition refuse or street dirt into city litter receptacles. 
F.  It shall be the duty of owners of vacant real property to maintain such property free of refuse, brush, weeds, tree stumps and other noxious plants. 
G.  No owner of real property may permit the growth of brush, weeds or other noxious plants to a height of six inches or more upon or within his or her property or upon the sidewalk adjacent to his or her property. 
H.  No owner of real property may permit the storage in areas zoned residential of any bulky household items such as appliances, furniture or mattresses, except in a fully enclosed structure. 
[Added 10-27-1988 by Ord. No. C-839] 
I.  No owner of real property may permit the storage of tires in areas zoned residential, except in a fully enclosed structure. 
[Added 10-27-1988 by Ord. No. C-839]  
§ 287-4. - Accumulations of refuse and noxious plants on vacant lots. 
[Amended 1-26-1984 by Ord. No. MC-548; 6-25-1997 by Ord. No. 97-041; 9-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-117 ] 
A.  In addition to any other penalty authorized by this article, the Director of Public Works or his designee may notify the owner of any real property to remove from the property brush, weeds, dead and dying trees, stumps, roots, noxious growths, filth, garbage, litter and debris. If the owner fails to comply within ten days after notice from the Director, the Director may authorize the removal by or under the direction of a municipal officer, who shall present the costs of removal together with a copy of the notice to the property owner to the Municipal Council, which shall examine the certification and notice, and if found correct, shall cause the costs to become a lien against the property. As authorized by N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.14, such lien shall become part of the taxes next assessed against the property and bear interest at the same rate. This lien may be enforced by the same officers and in the same manner as taxes. 
B.  All property owners of vacant lots are required to erect a fence to prevent the accumulation of refuse. If a fence is not erected by the property owner, the Director may authorize the erection of a fence around the property to abate accumulation of refuse. 
[Amended 9-9-1998 by Ord. No. 98-118]  
§ 287-5. - Collection, hauling and disposal of refuse. 
Except as otherwise provided in this article, the city shall collect, haul and dispose of all refuse accumulating within the city.  
§ 287-6. - Private disposal of refuse. 
The following shall provide for the collection, haulage and disposal of their own refuse in accordance with the provisions of this article and all other applicable laws and regulations: 
A.  Industrial and institutional buildings. 
B.  Buildings owned, operated or occupied by the county, state or United States Government. 
C.  Restaurants and other places of business selling food for consumption on the premises. 
D.  Private hospitals. 
E.  Persons engaged in construction, repair or demolition work. 
F.  Stores and commercial buildings generating in excess of six thirty-gallon containers, or its equivalent, of refuse per collection period. 
G.  Buildings located within off-street shopping centers, regardless of the amount of refuse generated. 
H.  Generators of hazardous waste. Each and every generator of hazardous waste is jointly and severally liable for ensuring that such hazardous waste is handled and disposed of in accordance with all applicable local and state statutes and regulations. 
[Added 10-27-1988 by Ord. No. C-839; 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050] 
I.  Generators of regulated medical waste regulated by the Comprehensive Regulated Medical Waste Management Act, L. 1989, c. 34 ( N.J.S.A. 13:1E-48.1 et seq.) and the regulations promulgated under its authority. [1] 
[Added 11-8-1989 by Ord. No. McC-27] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The regulations are presently codified as N.J.A.C. 7:26-3A et seq. 
 
§ 287-7. - Precollection procedures. 
A.  Ashes shall be soaked in water and placed in receptacles separate from those used for garbage and rubbish. 
B.  Wet rubbish and garbage shall be drained of all liquids and wrapped in paper before being placed in receptacles for collection. 
C.  Tree trimmings, hedge clippings, lumber and similar material shall be cut to lengths not to exceed four feet each and securely tied in bundles not more than two feet thick. 
D.  Objects which because of their size or shape do not fit into refuse containers or whose weight exceeds 60 pounds shall be placed out for collection only at such places and at times designated by appointment made with the Jersey City Department of Public Works. Doors shall be removed from stoves, ovens, refrigerators and other items which have locking doors. 
[Amended 11-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-172 ] 
E.  Newspapers, boxes, cartons and crates shall be collapsed and securely tied in bundles not to exceed two feet in length, height and width and kept separate from other refuse. 
F.  Fluorescent and mercury lamps shall be securely and completely wrapped in cardboard or heavy wrapping paper. The words "fluorescent lamp" shall be written on the outer wrapping in large, clear letters. 
G.  Hazardous waste. All generators of hazardous waste must ensure that all storage handling and disposal criteria are met and in accordance with all applicable local and state statutes and regulations. 
[Added 10-27-1988 by Ord. No. C-839] 
H.  Medical waste. All generators of medical waste must ensure that all storage handling and disposal criteria are met and in accordance with all applicable local and state statutes and regulations. 
[Added 10-27-1988 by Ord. No. C-839] 
I.  Mattresses, box springs and bedding shall be properly wrapped in plastic bags sufficient to cover all exposed areas. 
[Added 5-24-2017 by Ord. No. 17-057 ] 
J.  Personal property that a pest management professional has determined cannot be treated shall be placed in a properly sealed plastic bag marked "CAUTION UNTREATABLE." 
[Added 5-24-2017 by Ord. No. 17-057 ]  
§ 287-8. - Refuse receptacles, approved containers and plastic bags. 
[Amended 2-24-1981 by Ord. No. S-583; 10-27-1988 by Ord. No. C-839; 11-8-1989 by Ord. No. McC-27] 
A.  There shall be provided for each premises disposable plastic bags or refuse containers sufficient in size and number to hold the refuse accumulating between collections. 
B.  If plastic bags are used they shall be waterproof and capable of holding their contents without leakage, spillage or tearing. Plastic bags containing refuse shall be kept securely sealed or tied so as to prevent leakage or spillage. No plastic bag may be used for the disposal of refuse which contains the words "Asbestos" or "Bio-Hazardous" or any similar markings or logo. The city or its designated contractor may refuse to collect any refuse contained in bags so labeled or marked. 
C.  Refuse containers shall not be smaller than 10 gallons nor larger than 32 gallons and shall be constructed of material capable of holding refuse without leakage or spillage. Refuse containers shall be provided with handles so as to be suitable for collection by one person. 
D.  Refuse containers which do not conform to this article or which have ragged or sharp edges or any defect likely to injure or hamper the person collecting their contents shall be immediately replaced upon notice to the owner, tenant or occupant of the premises by any member of the Jersey City Department of Public Works. The Jersey City Department of Public Works may refuse collection of any container or plastic bag which weighs more than 60 pounds or which has not been replaced upon notice. 
[Amended 11-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-172 ] 
E.  Refuse containers containing refuse shall be kept tightly closed between collections. 
F.  No person may use a refuse receptacle, dumpster or demolition container for refuse storage or collection without the consent of the owner thereof. 
G.  Refuse containers shall not be filled higher than four inches from the top edge. 
H.  Refuse receptacles shall be stored only in areas designated for storage between collections. They shall be placed adjacent to the curb in front of the premises or other area designated for collection no earlier than 7:00 p.m. on the day before collection and shall be promptly returned to the storage area upon collection. Refuse receptacles shall not be stored in front of buildings or houses between collections. No one shall place refuse on the sidewalk or in front of any premises for private collection between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. Between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. no one shall place refuse on the sidewalk or in front of any premises for private collection more than one hour before the scheduled time of collection. 
I.  Itinerant food peddlers shall provide refuse receptacles in readily accessible locations for the use of customers. Receptacles shall be emptied as often as necessary to prevent spillage of refuse and shall be removed upon changing locations.  
§ 287-9. - Accumulations of refuse and swill. 
A.  No person may permit the accumulation of more than 96 hours of refuse and, including but not limited to apartment buildings, commercial premises, industrial buildings and government buildings using dumpsters, may accumulate a maximum of 96 hours of refuse. 
[Amended 10-27-1988 by Ord. No. C-839] 
B.  No restaurant or place of business selling food for consumption on the premises may accumulate more than 24 hours of swill.  
§ 287-10. - Duties of owners and tenants. 
A.  Owners, agents of owners, managing agents and superintendents shall each have the duties imposed by this article. No person shall be relieved from any duty herein by reason of the fact that an occupant or other person shall have the same or similar duties or shall have failed to report a violation; nor shall any person be relieved of liability by the terms of any lease or agreement. 
B.  Owners, agents, tenants and occupants shall place refuse only in receptacles provided for disposal. Refuse shall not be thrown out of windows or down dumbwaiters; nor shall refuse be placed on stairways or fire escapes or in common hallways. 
C.  An occupant shall be liable for violations of this article to the extent that he or she has the power to prevent a violation or assist in abating a violation. Occupants shall be deemed to have the power to abate a violation if the violation is caused by their own act or the act of a member of their family or household or their guests.  
§ 287-11. - Disposal of hazardous refuse. 
A.  Hazardous refuse shall not be placed in receptacles for regular collection but shall be disposed of in accordance with laws and regulations of the United States of America and of the State of New Jersey at the expense of the owner or possessor thereof. Whenever federal or state law does not apply, the Jersey City Department of Public Works shall specify the manner of storage and disposal, except as otherwise directed by this article. 
[Amended 12-10-1981 by Ord. No. MC-77; 11-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-172 ] 
B.  Dead animals and clothing, bedding and other refuse from homes or other places where infectious or contagious disease have prevailed shall be removed under the supervision and direction of the City Health Officer. Such refuse shall not be placed in containers for regular collection. 
C.  Ammunition, military ordinance, firearms and dangerous weaponry shall not be placed out for collection with any garbage or rubbish. Such items shall be referred to the Director of Public Safety for direction as to disposal. 
[Amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ]  
§ 287-12. - Demolition containers and dumpsters. 
A.  No person shall place or use a demolition container or dumpster on the sidewalks or streets of the city without first obtaining a permit therefor from the Division of Traffic and Street Maintenance. 
Cross reference— See also Ch. 296, Streets and Sidewalks, § 296-15. 
B.  Areas beneath and surrounding a demolition container or dumpster shall be kept clean at all times and shall be cleaned immediately after the removal of such container or dumpster. 
C.  Demolition containers and dumpsters shall not be filled higher than four inches from the top edge. Demolition containers and dumpsters shall bear an identification number assigned by the state and the name, address and telephone number of the person responsible for the container and shall be marked at each end with at least one reflector and with at least one iridescent stripe measuring four feet by four inches. 
[Amended 10-11-1985 by Ord. No. C-33] 
Cross reference— See also Ch. 108, Buildings, Demolition of. 
D.  All demolition containers and dumpsters containing refuse shall be kept covered when transported so that none of the material therein shall fall or be blown onto the streets. 
Editor's note— Former Sec. 22-13, entitled "Penalties," which immediately followed this section, as amended 6-28-1984 by Ord. No. MC-648, was deleted 9-13-1984 by Ord. No. MC-690.  
§ 287-13. - Dumping prohibited. 
[Amended 9-13-1984 by Ord. No. MC-690; 10-27-1988 by Ord. No. C-839] 
No person shall discard or dump any refuse, rubbish, household or commercial solid waste in any place or on any land in the city not specifically designated for the purpose of solid waste disposal.  
§ 287-14. - Reward; payment upon collection of fine. [Added 10-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC-21] 
Whenever any individual shall furnish evidence to the city of unlawful dumping activity and such evidence, in the opinion of the Director of Public Works, results in the conviction and fine of the offender, 25% of the fine, when collected, shall be paid to said individual furnishing such evidence; provided, however, that no such reward shall be paid to any person who is charged with the duty to or has the power to enforce any of the provisions of this article.  
§ 287-15. - Removal of material dumped illegally. 
A.  Any person who shall violate § 287-14 shall forthwith remove all of the material which said person has illegally dumped. Any such person found guilty of failing to remove said material illegally dumped shall, upon conviction, be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25. [2] 
B.  Each day said person shall fail to remove all of said illegally dumped material shall constitute a separate and distinct violation of this section and shall be punishable as such. 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. 
 
§ 287-16. - Persons permitting illegal dumping. 
A.  No person who owns any property in the city or who is in possession of said property or who is in control of said property shall allow or permit any person to dump any refuse, rubbish or other material mentioned in this article upon said property. 
B.  Any person found guilty of this section shall, upon conviction, be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25. Each load of such prohibited material so permitted to be illegally dumped by such person shall constitute a separate and distinct offense and be punishable as such. [3] 
C.  Any such person who owns land in the city or who is in possession or in control thereof, who himself dumps said prohibited material on said land, shall be liable as separate and distinct offenses as follows: 
(1)  For illegally dumping in violation of § 287-13, as one separate and distinct offense. 
(2)  For any failure to remove said prohibited material which was dumped in violation of § 287-15, as a second separate and distinct offense. 
(3)  For allowing and permitting the dumping in violation of this section, as a third separate and distinct offense. 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. 
 
§ 287-17. - Burning of refuse, rubbish and other materials prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful to set fire to or burn any refuse, rubbish or other material mentioned in this article on any land in this city.  
§ 287-18. - Licensed solid waste disposal facilities. 
[Amended 10-27-1988 by Ord. No. C-839] 
No licensee shall dump or otherwise deposit any waste matter, as defined in this article, on any licensed solid waste disposal facility unless such waste matter shall have been gathered or collected within the territorial limits of the city.  
§ 287-19. - Depositing litter in public places. 
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter. 
Cross reference— See also Ch. 81, Advertising Materials, and Ch. 296, Streets and Sidewalks.  
§ 287-20. - Owners of business premises; food refuse. 
[Amended 3-24-1988 by Ord. No. C-697; 7-13-1988 by Ord. No. C-780; 6-22-1989 by Ord. No. C-1000] 
A.  No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of business shall keep the sidewalk in front of their business free of litter. 
B.  Each place of business which sells food for both on- and off-premises consumption shall provide for its customers sufficient and suitable receptacles for the disposal of food refuse, food-related litter and any other wastes associated with the consumption of the specific items of food sold by the business premises. Such receptacles shall be constructed of size and material capable of holding any deposited matter without leakage or spillage and shall be placed in locations convenient for use by customers.  
§ 287-21. - Litter from vehicles. 
No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit litter upon any street or other public place.  
§ 287-22. - Litter prohibited; litter receptacles. 
[Amended 10-27-1988 by Ord. No. C-839] 
A.  No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or other public place, except in public litter receptacles or in authorized private litter receptacles or in authorized private litter receptacles for collection or in an official city licensed solid waste disposal facility. 
B.  Litter receptacles are to be maintained and serviced at the following public places, which exist in the city: 
(1)  Sidewalks used by pedestrians in active retail, commercially zoned areas and that at a minimum, there shall be no single linear quarter-mile without a receptacle. 
(2)  Buildings held out for use by the public, including schools, government buildings, railroads and bus stations, parks, all street vendor locations, self-service refreshment areas, construction sites, fast-food establishments, gasoline service stations, shopping centers, parking lots, campgrounds and trailer parks, marinas, boat moorings, fueling stations, boat launching areas, public and private piers operated for public use and at special events to which the public is invited, including sporting events, parades, carnivals, circuses and festivals. 
C.  The owner of the places listed in Subsection B(2) or the sponsors of the events listed in Subsection B(2) shall be responsible for providing and servicing the receptacles such that adequate containerization is available.  
§ 287-23. - Use of litter receptacles. 
Persons placing litter in public litter receptacles or in authorized private litter receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place.  
§ 287-24. - Vehicles to be loaded to prevent littering. 
No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the city unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load or contents of litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or other public place. No person shall drive or move any vehicle or truck, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in any street, alley or other public place mud, dirt, sticky substances or foreign matter of any kind.  
§ 287-25. - Littering in parks. 
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park, except in public litter receptacles and in such a manner that the litter shall be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park or upon any street or other public place. Where public litter receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere. 
Cross reference— See also Ch. 239, Parks and Recreation Areas.  
§ 287-26. - Materials not permitted in litter receptacles. 
No person shall dump or otherwise deposit garbage, rubbish material, trade wastes, ashes, earth or street dirt in a litter receptacle placed upon a sidewalk.  
§ 287-27. - Handbills. 
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street or other public place. 
Cross reference— See also Ch. 81, Advertising Materials.  
§ 287-28. - Duties of building owners and lessees. 
A.  Every owner, tenant, lessee, occupant or person in charge of any building shall provide within and for the exclusive use of such building or part thereof sufficient and suitable receptacles for holding, without leakage, all ashes, garbage, refuse and liquid waste substances that may accumulate between garbage collection in and through the use of buildings or part thereof. 
(1)  For the purpose of this section, "sufficient receptacles" means the number of receptacles required to store all of the waste material that shall accumulate upon the premises until the next regular garbage collection. 
(2)  For the purpose of this section, "suitable receptacles" means a reusable watertight metal, rubber or plastic receptacle with a tight-fitting cover and equipped with pull handles, so constructed as to prevent spilling or leakage of its contents, or a disposable plastic-bag-type container so manufactured as to be waterproof and of sufficient strength to hold its contents without leakage, spilling or tearing. Metal receptacles only are deemed to be sufficient for the storage of ashes, nonflammables, explosives or other dangerous combustible materials. 
B.  Every owner, tenant, lessee, occupant or person in charge of any building shall cause to be put into their respective receptacle all waste materials and substances. No reusable metal, plastic or rubber receptacles shall be filled to a greater height than a line within the receptacle four (4) inches from the top thereof. Receptacles shall be as required in § 287-8. [4] 
C.  The receptacles shall be kept within the building or in the rear of the premises until the time for the removal of the substances, when the receptacles shall be placed on the sidewalk close to the curb. For any building with ten (10) or fewer units, using trash services provided by the city, no receptacles shall be placed on the sidewalk close to the curb before the hour of 7:00 p.m. of the day prior to the scheduled for removal by the designated agency. For any building with more than ten (10) units using trash services provided by the city, no receptacles shall be placed on the sidewalk close to the curb before the hour of 10:00 p.m. of the day prior to the scheduled for removal by the designated agency. For any building or business using a trash pick-up service other than service provided by the City of Jersey City receptacles shall be placed on the sidewalk close to the curb more than two (2) hours before pick-up time and on the day scheduled for removal. All receptacles shall remain so placed until the contents thereof shall have been removed by the designated agency, immediately after which the reusable receptacles shall be returned to the building or to the rear of the premises where the reusable receptacles shall be kept, at all times, covered with, a tight-fitting cover. 
[Amended 1-25-2017 by Ord. No. 17-012 ] 
D.  Newspapers, wrapping paper or other light refuse and rubbish likely to be blown or scattered about the streets shall be securely bundled, tied or packed before being placed for removal, and such newspapers, wrapping paper and other light refuse and rubbish, as well as all other refuse and rubbish, shall be kept within the building or in the rear of the premises until the time for the removal thereof, when they shall be placed as the receptacles hereinbefore mentioned are required to be placed. 
E.  No receptacle or refuse or rubbish shall be placed as to constitute or contribute to the creation of a nuisance. 
F.  Every tenant in one- and two-family houses shall provide himself with the approved receptacles as set forth herein. 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. 
 
§ 287-29. - Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-28-1984 by Ord. No. MC-648; 9-13-1984 by Ord. No. MC-690; 6-11-1987 by Ord. No. C-474; 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050] 
Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25.  
§ 287-30. - Enforcement. 
In enforcing this article the Municipal Court shall utilize the form of summons issued by the administrative office of the courts.  
§ 287-31. - Persons authorized to enforce provisions. 
[Amended 1-24-1981 by Ord. No. MC-71; 10-27-1981 by Ord. No. MC-54; 10-27-1988 by Ord. No. C-839; 4-8-1992 by Ord. No. 92-025; 1-24-1996 by Ord. No. 96-006; 12-9-1998 by Ord. No. 98-162; 11-12-2014 by Ord. No. 14-017 ; 11-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-172 ; 5-24-2017 by Ord. No. 17-057 ] 
This article may be enforced by police officers, code enforcement officers of the Department of Health & Human Services, Division of Environmental Health, Neighborhood Managers appointed by the Director of the Department of Neighborhood Improvement and by the Director of the Jersey City Department of Public Works or their designees. Anyone authorized to enforce this section may sign and issue a complaint and summons upon a defendant in accordance with New Jersey Court Rule 7:3-1.  
§ 287-31.1. - Refuse containers and dumpsters.[Added 8-25-2010 by Ord. No. 10-107] 
A.  Purpose. This Section will require that all dumpsters and other refuse containers that are outdoors or exposed to stormwater are to be covered at all times. It shall prohibit the spilling, dumping, leaking, or otherwise discharge of liquids, semi-liquids or solids from the containers to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Municipal Utilities Authority of the City of Jersey City and/or the waters of the State so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply. 
B.  Definitions. For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in the text of this Chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4)—a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by Municipal Utilities Authority of the City of Jersey City, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater. MS4s do not include combined sewer systems, which are sewer systems that are designed to carry sanitary sewage at all times and to collect and transport stormwater from streets and other sources. 
PERSON—any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal jurisdiction. 
REFUSE CONTAINER—any waste container that a person controls whether owned, leased, or operated, including dumpsters, trash cans, garbage pails, and plastic trash bags. 
STORMWATER—means water resulting from precipitation (including rain and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to .the subsurface, is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities, or is conveyed by snow removal equipment 
WATERS OF THE STATE—means the ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural or artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its jurisdiction. 
C.  Prohibited Conduct. Any person who controls, whether owned, leased, or operated, a refuse container or dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster is covered at all times and shall prevent refuse from spilling out or overflowing. 
Any person who owns, leases or otherwise uses a refuse container or dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster does not leak or otherwise discharge liquids, semi-liquids or solids to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Municipal Utilities Authority of the City of Jersey City. 
D.  Exceptions to Prohibition. 
1.  Permitted temporary demolition containers. 
2.  Litter receptacles (other than dumpsters or other bulk containers). 
3.  Individual homeowner trash and recycling containers. 
4.  Refuse containers at facilities authorized to discharge stormwater under a valid NJPDES permit. 
5.  Large bulky items (e.g., furniture, bound carpet and padding, white goods placed curbside for pickup). 
E.  Enforcement. This Section shall be enforced by the Jersey City Municipal Utilities Authority and employees of the City of Jersey City, including its police officers. 
F.  Penalties. Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this Article shall be subject to a fine not to exceed one thousand two hundred fifty dollars ($1,250.00) per violation per day.  
ARTICLE II - Uniform Packaging Practices 
[Adopted 7-18-1990 by Ord. No. McC-154] 
 
§ 287-32. - Findings; purpose. 
A.  Discarded packaging constitutes the largest single category of waste in the City of Jersey City and is, therefore, a necessary focus of any effort to reduce the amount of waste and the economic and environmental costs of waste management. 
B.  Discarded nondegradable packaging and plastic contained within the waste stream of the City of Jersey City is considered a fundamental cause of problems associated with municipal waste disposal and litter. 
C.  Disposal space is diminishing rapidly; solid waste receiving areas outside of the Hudson County area are becoming increasingly uncertain and expensive; for both economic and environmental reasons, measures to simplify the chemical complexity of solid waste and, thereby, streamline solid waste management must be vigorously pursued. 
D.  The chemical composition and ability of a substance to degrade are meaningful and useful criteria to focus upon when establishing public policy that is intended to improve the management and disposal of solid waste, reduce the cumulative impact of litter, encourage composting and other forms of recycling, minimize the potential for toxic substances to form if solid waste is burned, reduce the volume of ash by-products that may be created by any burning of waste plastic packaging and otherwise anticipate environmental problems that may be caused by the municipal solid waste disposal program. 
E.  The use of plastic nondegradable packaging has become widespread throughout the City of Jersey City and the resulting mixed substance waste stream is a serious impediment to many solid waste management programs being considered for the city. 
F.  The widespread use of plastics, especially polystyrene and polyvinyl chloride, pose a threat to the environment by causing unnecessary taking of landfill space or, when incinerated, by the possible introduction of toxic by-products into the atmosphere. 
G.  The economic and environmental problems associated with a mixed substance waste stream are so severe that a program to modify the composition of solid waste, thereby reducing environmental hazards and toxicity associated with solid waste incineration and encouraging the composting of putrescible biodegradable wastes and encouraging other forms of recycling of solid waste substances, is hereby determined to be a policy goal of the City of Jersey City. 
H.  The waste stream within Jersey City is so large and diverse that any program to establish policies and laws conducive to any waste management program in lieu of landfilling must identify and set new policy for those specific sources of waste packaging which originate with this city. 
I.  Certain retail establishments within Jersey City are points of origin for a significant volume of packaging waste and, therefore, are particularly susceptible to actions which have significant potential for simplifying the composition of this portion of Jersey City's solid waste stream, thereby improving solid waste management within this city. 
J.  The use of polystyrene and polyvinyl chloride for food packaging is problematic because neither of these plastics are readily recyclable; their abundant commercial use in lieu of other plastics, such as polyethylene or polypropylene, unnecessarily complicates the overall chemical composition of municipal waste and subtracts from the possible emergence of a viable plastic recycling market; if burned together, polystyrene and polyvinyl chloride leave a relatively heavier and more expensive ash residue to dispose of which may also create dioxin, hydrochloric acid or other toxic chemicals that could be emitted into the general environment once burned in a resource recovery facility. 
K.  There are readily available plastic and/or paper product substitutes for most of the polystyrene and polyvinyl chloride retail food packaging now being used in the City of Jersey City, the use of which alternatives would be environmentally and economically advantageous to the public of the City of Jersey City. 
L.  Plastic bags in the waste stream constitute an impediment to the development of efficient waste separation, recycling or other waste management programs and are less desirable than paper bags because plastic bags are neither recyclable nor compostable. 
M.  Plastic bags used by retail establishments selling food constitutes the largest single retail source of plastic bags in the waste stream. 
N.  The purpose of this article is to eliminate the use of nondegradable packaging originating at retail establishments within the City of Jersey City in order to protect the air, land and waters of the City of Jersey City against environmental contamination and degradation.  
§ 287-33. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
DEGRADABLE PACKAGING - Packaging made of cellulose-based or other substances that are capable of being readily attacked, decomposed, assimilated and otherwise completely oxidized or broken down by bacteria or other natural biological organisms into carbonaceous soil material or water and carbon dioxide; or in the alternative capable of otherwise degrading within 12 months of manufacture into fragments that are small relative to the original size or into particles of a molecular weight that is low when compared to that of the original material. 
PACKAGING - All food-related wrappings, adhesives, cords, binding, bags, boxes, containers and disposable or nonreusable plates, cups or drinking utensils intended for use with the City of Jersey City. 
RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT - All sales outlets, stores, shops or other places of business located within the City of Jersey City which operate primarily to sell or convey foods directly to the ultimate consumer, which foods are predominantly contained, wrapped or held in or on packaging. "Retail food establishment" shall include, but not be limited to, any place where food is prepared, mixed, cooked, baked, smoked, preserved, bottled, packaged, handled, stored, manufactured and sold or offered for sale, including but not limited to any short order cafe, fast-food outlet, delicatessen, luncheonette, grill, sandwich shop, soda fountain, tavern, bar, cocktail lounge, nightclub, roadside stand, takeout prepared food place, industrial feeding establishment, catering kitchen, grocery store, public food market, food stand or similar place in which food or drink is prepared for sale or for service on the premises or elsewhere and any other establishment or operation, including homes, where food is processed, prepared, stored, served or provided for the public for charge.  
§ 287-34. - Unlawful acts. 
[Amended 10-24-1990 by Ord. No. McC-203] 
A.  No retail food establishment located and doing business within the City of Jersey City shall sell or convey food directly to ultimate consumers within the City of Jersey City unless such food is placed, wrapped or packed in degradable packaging at the conclusion of a sales transaction for the purchase of such food, which takes place on the premises of such a retail food establishment at or near a sales counter or equivalent customer purchasing station but prior to removal of such food from the premises of such retail food establishment. 
B.  No retail food establishment located and doing business within the City of Jersey City shall sell, give or provide eating utensils or food containers to any consumers within the City of Jersey City if such eating utensil or food container is composed of polystyrene or polyvinyl chloride.  
§ 287-35. - Unlawful purchases by city. 
A.  The City of Jersey City shall not purchase any food packaging which contains polystyrene or polyvinyl chloride nor shall it sponsor any event which utilizes such packaging. All food packaging shall be biodegradable. 
B.  The purchasing agent shall exclusively advertise for the receipt of bids for degradable plastic bags for use by the city.  
§ 287-36. - Regulations. 
The Director of the Division of Engineering, Traffic and Transportation shall issue and promulgate such rules and regulations as may be necessary to implement and carry out the provisions of this article.  
§ 287-37. - Exemptions. 
A.  Section 287-34 of this article shall not apply to the following items: 
(1)  Any flexible transparent covering for uncooked or raw meat, poultry, raw fish, hard cheese, cold cuts, fruit and vegetable produce, baked goods or bread; any polystyrene packaging for meat, meat products, fish, poultry, dairy and produce packaged and sold in the City of Jersey City; provided that such packaging does not contain chlorofluorocarbons (CFC's). 
[Amended 10-24-1990 by Ord. No. McC-203] 
(2)  Any food packaging used at hospitals or nursing homes. 
(3)  Any paper or other cellulose-based packaging that is coated with polyethylene plastic on only one side. 
(4)  Any plastic covers, covering material, food containers, lids, eating utensils or straws that are not made of polystyrene or polyvinyl chloride. 
B.  The Director of the Division of Engineering, Traffic and Transportation or its authorized representative may exempt an item or type of packaging from the requirements of this article upon a showing that the item or type has no acceptable equivalent and that imposing the requirements on that item or type would cause undue hardship. Applicants seeking an exemption shall furnish a list of suppliers contacted to determine if substitutes are available. 
C.  The Director of the Division of Engineering, Traffic and Transportation may exempt any packaging not containing chlorofluorocarbons (CFC's) upon documented proof provided by the retail food establishment in a form as prescribed by and satisfactory to the Director of Engineering that recycling of this food packaging is occurring. The retail food establishment shall source-separate and remove the food packaging from the solid waste and shall cause the recycling of the packaging, in an organized manner, into another usable product thus preventing the packaging from being disposed. At minimum, the retail food establishment shall demonstrate monthly that at least sixty percent (60%) of said total packaging utilized is being recycled. This would include in the total that packaging being used within the premises as well as that taken from the premises.  
§ 287-38. - Enforcement. 
[Amended 11-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-172 ] 
The provisions of this Article shall be enforced by the Jersey City Department of Public Works and the Health Officer, which shall designate inspectors empowered to issue complaints for violations of this Article in accordance with the rules governing the courts of the State of New Jersey.  
§ 287-39. - Provisions voided by superseding regulations; violations and penalties. 
A.  This Article shall be void upon the enactment or adoption of any federal and/or state law or regulation restricting the use of polystyrene, polyvinyl chloride or degradable packaging. 
B.  Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this Article shall, upon conviction, be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25.;* 
* Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.  
ARTICLE III - Private Collectors 
[Adopted 10-16-1979 as Ord. No. S-302] 
 
§ 287-40. - Unlawful hours of operation. 
[Amended 3-13-1986 by Ord. No. C-24; amended 1-25-2017 by Ord. No. 17-012 ] 
It shall be unlawful for any private garbage or refuse collector to collect any such material in any residential area or street in the city before the hour of 8:00 a.m. on weekdays and 9:00 a.m. on weekends or after the hour of 10:00 p.m. all days.  
ARTICLE IV - Recycling 
[Adopted 1-14-1988 as Ord. No. C-652; amended 7-16-2008 by Ord. No. 08-098] 
 
§ 287-41. - Definitions. 
Commingled — means a combining of non-putrescible source-separated recyclable materials for the purpose of recycling; 
Designated recyclable materials — means those materials designated within the Hudson County District Solid Waste Management Plan to be source separated for the purpose of recycling. These materials include aluminum, tin and steel; corrugated cardboard; glass containers; grass and brush; household batteries; leaves; masonry (asphalt, brick, block and concrete); mixed paper; motor oil; motor oil filters; newspaper; office paper; plastic containers (#1 and #2); tires; vehicle batteries; white goods; and wood; 
Electronic waste — means a computer central processing unit and associated hardware including keyboards, modems, printers, scanners and fax machines; a cathode ray tube, a cathode ray tube device, a flat panel display or similar video display device with a screen that is greater than four inches measured diagonally and that contains one or more circuit boards, including televisions and cell phones; 
Multi-family dwelling — means any building or structure of complex of buildings in which three or more dwelling units are rented or leased or offered for rental or leave for residential purposes (see N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13a) except hotels, motels or other guest houses serving transient or seasonal guests as those terms are defined under subsection (j) of section 3 of the "Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Law," P.L. 1967, c.76 (C.55:13A-1 et seq.); 
Municipal solid waste (MSW) stream — means all solid waste generated at residential, commercial, and institutional establishments within the boundaries of the municipality of the City of Jersey City; 
Recyclable material — means those materials which would otherwise become solid waste, and which may be collected, separated, or processed and returned to the economic mainstream in the form of raw materials or products; 
Source-separated recyclable materials — means recyclable materials which are separated at the point of generation by the generator thereof from solid waste for the purposes of recycling; 
Source separation — means the process by which recyclable materials are separated at the point of generation by the generator thereof from solid waste for the purposes of recycling.  
§ 287-42. - Source separation; exemption from source separation requirements. 
A.  Mandatory source separation: It shall be mandatory of all persons who are owners, tenants, or occupants of residential and non-residential premises located within the municipality of the City of Jersey City to separate designated recyclable materials from all solid waste. Designated recyclable materials shall be deposited separated and apart from other solid waste generated by the owners, tenants, or occupants of such premises and shall be placed separately at the curb in a manner and on such days and times as may be hereinafter established by regulations promulgated by the City of Jersey City or the Jersey City Department of Public Works. 
[Amended 11-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-172 ] 
B.  Exemptions: Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:1E99.16(d), the governing body of a municipality may exempt persons occupying commercial or institutional premises within its municipal boundaries from the source separation requirements of the ordinance which requires persons generating municipal solid waste within its municipal boundaries to source separate from the municipal solid waste stream, the specified recyclable materials if those persons have otherwise provided for the recycling of all designated recyclable materials. To be eligible for an exemption pursuant to this Chapter, a commercial or institutional generator of solid waste shall file an application for exemption with the municipal recycling coordinator on forms to be provided for this purpose. The form shall include, at a minimum, the following information: the name of the commercial or institutional entity; the street address location and lot and block designation; the name, official title and phone number of the person making application on behalf of the commercial or institutional entity; the name, address, official contact person and telephone number of the facility which provides the service of recycling those designated recyclable materials, and a certification that the designated recyclable materials will be recycled, and that, at least on an annual basis, said recycling service provider shall provide written documentation to the municipal recycling coordinator of the total number of tons collected and recycled for each designated material.  
§ 287-43. - Collection of recyclable materials. 
The collection of recyclable materials shall be in the manner prescribed as follows: 
A.  All receptacles containing recyclable materials shall be placed, prior to collection, between the curb and the sidewalk, or in the absence of curb and sidewalk, as near to the street as not to constitute a danger, where such receptacles shall be readily accessible to the collector without providing obstruction to pedestrians. The owner or occupant of the premises shall keep all receptacles clean and in safe handling condition. Receptacles or other items to be disposed of shall be placed as noted above anytime after 7:00 p.m. of the day immediately preceding the day of collection, but no later than 10:00 p.m. of the day immediately preceding the day of collection. After collection, any containers shall be removed from the curbside by no later than 10:00 a.m. next. 
B.  All receptacles or dumpsters shall be maintained in accordance with the Health Code of the municipality of the City of Jersey City.  
§ 287-44. - Residential dwelling compliance requirements. 
The owner of any property shall be responsible for compliance with this Ordinance. For multi-family/high-rise housing developments, the management or owner is responsible for setting up and maintaining the recycling system, including collection of recyclable materials. Violations and penalty notices will be directed to the owner or management. The management shall issue notification and collection rules to new tenants when they arrive and every six months during their occupancy.  
§ 287-45. - Commercial establishment compliance requirements. 
A.  All commercial, business or industrial facilities shall be required to comply with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
B.  The arrangement for collection of designated recyclables hereunder shall be the responsibility of the commercial, institutional or industrial property owner or their designee. All commercial, institutional or industrial properties which provide outdoor litter receptacles and disposal service for their contents shall also provide receptacles for designated recyclable materials, for those materials commonly deposited, in the location of the litter receptacle, and shall provide for separate recycling service for their contents. 
C.  Every business, institution or industrial facility shall report on an annual basis to the municipal recycling coordinator, on such forms as may be prescribed, on recycling activities at their premises, including the amount of recycled material, by material type, collected and recycled and the vendor or vendors providing recycling service. 
D.  All food service establishments shall, in addition to compliance with all other recycling requirements, be required to recycle grease created in the processing of food or food products, and maintain such records as may be proscribed, for inspection by any code enforcement officer.  
§ 287-46. - New developments of multi-family residential units or commercial, institutional or industrial properties. 
A.  Any application to the planning board of the municipality of the City of Jersey City, for subdivision or site plan approval for the construction of multi-family dwellings of three or more units, or any commercial, institutional or industrial development for the utilization of one thousand (1,000) square feet or more of land, must include a recycling plan. This plan must contain, at a minimum, the following: 
1.  A detailed analysis of the expected composition and amounts of solid waste and recyclables generated at the proposed development and 
2.  Locations documented on the application's site plan that provide for convenient recycling opportunities for all owners, tenants and occupants. 
B.  Prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy by the municipality of the City of Jersey City, the owner of any new multi-family housing or commercial, institutional or industrial development must supply the planning board of the municipality of the City of Jersey City with a copy of a duly executed contract with a hauling company for the purposes of solid waste collection and the collection of recycling of source-separated recyclable materials.  
§ 287-47. - Prohibition of the collection of waste mixed with recyclable materials. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for solid waste collectors to collect solid waste that is mixed with, or contains visible signs of, designated recyclable materials. It is also unlawful for solid waste collectors to remove for disposal those bags or containers of solid waste which visibly display a warning notice sticker or some other device indicating that the load of solid waste contains designated recyclable materials. 
B.  It shall be the responsibility of the resident or occupant to properly segregate the uncollected waste for proper disposal or recycling. Allowing such unseparated solid waste and recyclables to accumulate will be considered a violation of this article and the local sanitary code.  
§ 287-48. - Enforcement. 
[Amended 10-14-2016 by Ord. No. 15-104 ] 
The Code Enforcement Official, the Department of Health, the Jersey City Department of Public Works, the Recycling Coordinator, the Property Maintenance Official, the Neighborhood Improvement District, the Housing Officer, Hudson Regional Health Commission and the Hudson County Improvement Authority are hereby individually and severally empowered to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance. The respective enforcing official may, in his or her discretion, post warning notice stickers for a first time offense. An inspection may consist of sorting through containers and opening of solid waste bags to detect, by sound or sight, the presence of any recyclable material.  
§ 287-49. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person, corporation, occupant or other entity that violated or fails to comply with any provision of this Ordinance or any of the rules and regulations promulgated hereunder shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable as provided for in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Section 1-25. 
[Amended 1-25-2017 by Ord. No. 17-005 ]  
ARTICLE V - Construction, Renovation, and Demolition Debris Recovery 
[Added 7-16-2008 by Ord. No. 08-098] 
 
§ 287-50. - Definitions. 
Covered project — means a construction, renovation or demolition project for which a building permit or a demolition permit is required, and for which a dumpster, roll-off container or any other vehicle in which such material is transported shall be placed on premises for the purpose of the placement of waste materials.  
§ 287-51. - Construction, renovation and demolition debris recovery plan. 
A debris recovery plan shall be filed with the municipal building department, with a copy of the plan forwarded to the municipal recycling coordinator, prior to the commencement of any activity for municipal approval as further identified above. The debris recovery plan shall identify the types and estimated quantities of construction and demolition debris to be generated from the project, how each material will be managed, and the name of each facility or service provider that the entity will use to manage each material. The plan shall further detail how the applicant shall ensure that a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the materials to be generated will be separated and recycled.  
§ 287-52. - Review of debris recovery plan. 
A.  Approval: A debris recovery plan shall be reviewed by the municipal building department and/or the municipal recycling coordinator, and approved if it provides for all of the information required by this Ordinance. An approved debris recovery plan shall be marked "Approved" and returned to the owner of the entity which submitted the plan. 
B.  Denial: A debris recovery plan shall not be approved if it does not provide all of the information required by this Ordinance. If a debris recovery plan is not approved, the owner of the entity which submitted the plan shall be notified in writing that the plan has been rejected, including the reasons for the rejection. In order to obtain the building or demolition permit sought, the owner of the entity which will carry out the construction, renovation or demolition project shall make the required changes and resubmit the debris recovery plan to the municipal building department and/or the municipal recycling coordinator.  
§ 287-53. - Diversion requirement adjustment. 
A.  Application: If the owner of an entity carrying out a covered project experiences circumstances that make it infeasible to comply with the diversion requirement cited in this Ordinance, the owner of the entity may apply to the municipal building department and/or the municipal recycling coordinator for an adjustment. The owner shall indicate in writing why it is infeasible to divert fifty percent (50%) of the materials being generated from the covered project and specify what percentage of diversion could be achieved. Increased costs to the owner of the entity carrying out the covered project will not be an acceptable justification for an adjustment. 
B.  Review: The municipal building department and/or the municipal recycling coordinator shall review the information supplied by the owner. If warranted, the municipal recycling coordinator shall attempt to contact the owner to discuss possible ways of meeting the diversion requirement. 
C.  Granting of an adjustment: If the municipal building department and/or the municipal recycling coordinator determines that it is infeasible for the entity carrying out a covered project to divert fifty percent (50%) of the generated C&D debris from the covered project, the percent of diversion required shall be adjusted. The owner shall be notified in writing of the adjusted diversion requirement. The owner of the entity carrying out the covered project shall be required to divert the percent of C&D debris required by the adjustment. 
D.  Denial of adjustment: If the municipal building department and/or the municipal recycling coordinator determine that it is feasible for the owner of an entity carrying out a covered project to meet the diversion requirement cited in this Ordinance, the owner shall be notified in writing of the denial of the diversion requirement adjustment. 
E.  Adjustment from the fifty percent (50%) diversion requirement shall be granted by the Jersey City Department of Public Works as well as any private entity performing a demolition which needs to be performed on an emergency basis with notification and approval of the Construction Official, Fire Official or Health Officer. 
[Amended 11-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-172 ]  
§ 287-54. - Debris recovery plan reporting requirements. 
Documentation: Upon completion of the covered project, but before the final inspection, the owner of the entity carrying out a covered project shall submit in person or by certified mail to the municipal building department and/or the municipal recycling coordinator, the documentation required to demonstrate that the applicant has met the diversion requirement. The required documentation shall include the following: 
(1)  A completed debris recovery report, signed by the owner of the entity carrying out a covered project, indicating the quantity of each material generated during the covered project diverted to disposed; 
(2)  Receipts from all facilities or service providers utilized to divert and dispose materials generated during the covered project; and 
(3)  Any additional information that the owner of the entity carrying out the covered project believes is relevant to determining compliance with the diversion requirement.  
§ 287-55. - Compliance with diversion requirement. 
The municipal building department and/or the municipal recycling coordinator shall review the information submitted pursuant to this Ordinance and determine whether the owner of the entity carrying out the covered project has complied, or failed to comply, with the diversion requirement. The determination regarding compliance will be provided to the owner of the entity carrying out the covered project in writing.  
§ 287-56. - Appeal. 
An owner of the entity carrying out the covered project may appeal a determination of failure to comply under this Ordinance to the municipality within thirty (30) days of the decision or determination. The appeal shall be in writing and shall state the fact and basis for the appeal. A decision by the Jersey City Business Administrator shall be final.  
§ 287-57. - Enforcement. 
[Amended 11-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-172 ] 
The Code Enforcement Official, the Department of Public Safety, the Division of Health, the Jersey City Department of Public Works, the Recycling Coordinator, the Property Maintenance Official, the Housing Officer, Hudson Regional Health Commission and the Hudson County Improvement Authority are hereby individually and severally empowered to enforce the provision of this Ordinance. The respective enforcing official may, in his or her discretion, post warning notice stickers for a first offense. An inspection may consist of dumping and opening of solid waste bags and containers to detect, by sound or sight, the presence of any recyclable material.  
§ 287-58. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person, corporation, occupant or other entity that violated or fails to comply with any provision of this Ordinance or any of the rules and regulations promulgated hereunder shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine no less than five hundred dollars ($500.00), nor more than the maximum penalty set in accordance with Section 1-25 of this Code. Each day for which a violation of this Ordinance occurs shall be considered a separate offense.  
Chapter 290 - SPRAY PAINT, SALE OF 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City 7-22-1992 by Ord. No. 92-084. Amendments noted where applicable.] 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Graffiti — See Ch. 242, Art. II. 
 
§ 290-1. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
SPRAY PAINT - Any paint or pigmented substance in an aerosol or similar spray container or intended for use in an aerosol or similar spray container.  
§ 290-2. - Unlawful acts. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale to any person under 18 years of age any spray paint or hobby kit or any similar kind of kit containing spray paint and any ink marker which is not water soluble, having a marking tip of one-half (½) inch or more in length or width. 
B.  No person may sell or offer to sell spray paint to any other person unless the buyer presents evidence of his or her identity and age. 
C.  Containers of spray paint and any ink marker which is not water soluble, having a marking tip of one-half (½) inch or more in length or width, may not be displayed in any retail business premises in a manner in which they can be picked up by a customer when standing in an area allocated for customer use.  
§ 290-3. - Possession of certain paints or markers restricted. 
No person under the age of 18 shall possess any paint in a spray can or any marker containing a fluid which is not water soluble and has a point, brush, applicator or other writing surface of one-half (½) inch or greater in length or width. This prohibition shall not apply to: 
A.  A child using paint or marker while under the immediate supervision of his or her parent or legal guardian; 
B.  A student using paint or a marker while under the immediate supervision of his or her teacher; or 
C.  An employee using paint or marker under the supervision of his or her employer.  
§ 290-4. - Possession within public buildings. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess a spray paint container or any marker containing a fluid which is not water soluble and has a point, brush, applicator or other writing surface of one-half (½) inch in length or width or greater, on the property of another or in any public building or upon any public facility. It shall be a defense to an action for violation of this section that the owner, manager or other person having control of the property, building or facility consented to the presence and use of the paint or marker. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess a spray paint or any marker containing fluid which is not water soluble and has a point, brush, applicator or other writing surface of one-half (½) inch in length or width or greater on the public way with intent to use the same to deface any building, structure or property. This prohibition shall not apply to any employee of a public utility or of the municipal, state or federal government using spray paint or any marker within the scope of his or her prescribed duties.  
§ 290-5. - License required for sale of spray paint. 
A.  No person, except a wholesale dealer, may sell, offer to sell or possess with intent to sell any spray paint or hobby kit or any similar kind of kit containing spray paint without first obtaining a license from the Superintendent of Licenses. The words "wholesale dealer" mean any manufacturer and any person who sells spray paint to persons who are reasonably understood not to be the ultimate consumers. Applications for licenses to sell spray paint shall be made in the form prescribed by the Superintendent of Licenses and accompanied by a fee as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges, payable to the City of Jersey City. 
[Amended 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050] 
B.  Licenses shall be valid for a period of one year and shall expire on May 31 of each year. The initial license fee following the change in expiration date will be subject to proration by the Division of Licenses and Fees. 
[Amended 2-11-1998 by Ord. No. 98-004] 
C.  The license or a certified copy of the license shall be displayed at all times in a conspicuous place within the business premises where it can be easily read. 
D.  Effective November 1, 1992, every person engaged in the business of selling spray paint shall keep a record of each sale. The record shall include the name, address and the age of the buyer and the number of units or containers of spray paint purchased. Such record shall be made available at all reasonable hours for inspection by any law enforcement officer. 
E.  A license may be suspended or revoked, after notice and an opportunity to be heard, if the licensee is convicted of a violation of this Article or if the Superintendent of Licenses finds that the licensee has violated any provision of this Article.  
§ 290-6. - Signs; display requirements. 
A.  Every person who engages in the business of selling spray paint or markers regulated by this Article shall post in clear public view at or near the display of such products, using bold lettering at least one inch in height, a placard stating the following: 
ANY PERSON DEFACING REAL PROPERTY NOT HIS OR HER OWN WITH PAINT OR ANY OTHER LIQUID IS SUBJECT TO A FINE OF ONE THOUSAND DOLLARS OR IMPRISONMENT FOR UP TO NINETY DAYS. 
B.  Every person who engages in the business of selling spray paint or markers regulated by this Article shall also post in the direct view of such person or persons responsible for accepting customer payment for such spray paint containers or marker pens, using bold lettering at least one inch in height, a placard stating the following: 
IT IS UNLAWFUL TO SELL OR OTHERWISE CONVEY SPRAY PAINT OR WIDE-TIPPED MARKERS TO PERSONS UNDER EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE IN THE CITY OF JERSEY CITY. VIOLATORS SHALL BE SUBJECT TO A FINE OF UP TO ONE THOUSAND DOLLARS OR IMPRISONMENT FOR UP TO NINETY DAYS.  
§ 290-7. - Aiding or abetting persons under eighteen years of age. 
No person shall aide, assist or abet a person under the age of 18 in obtaining possession of paint in a spray can or any marker containing a fluid which is not water soluble and has a point, brush, applicator or other writing surface of one-half (½) inch or greater. This prohibition shall not apply to: 
A.  A parent or legal guardian assisting and supervising his or her own child or ward in use of paint or a marker; 
B.  A teacher assisting and supervising his or her student in the use of paint or a marker; or 
C.  An employer assisting and supervising his or her employee in the use of paint or a marker.  
§ 290-8. - Violations and penalties.[1] 
Any person who is convicted of a violation of any section of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. 
 
Chapter 296 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City as indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.] 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Advertising materials; littering — See Ch. 81. 	Security gates — See Ch. 278. 
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 108. 	Shopping carts abandoned on streets — See Ch. 284. 
Communications systems — See Ch. 125. 	Trees — See Ch. 321. 
Fire lanes — See Ch. 166. 	Vehicle and traffic regulations — See Ch. 332. 
Use of streets for peddling — See Ch. 245. 	
  
ARTICLE I - Snow and Ice Removal 
[Adopted 5-4-1971 as Ch. 24, Art. I, of the 1971 Jersey City Code, as readopted 9-19-1978 by Ord. No. S-128; amended in its entirety 1-25-2006 by Ord. No. 06-001] 
 
§ 296-1.1. - Duties of owners or occupants of residential properties; time for removal. 
[Amended 12-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-173 ] 
Every owner, occupant or person having charge of a residential building or vacant lot shall, in case of a snowfall, clear any snow and ice from the sidewalks and gutters thereof and create a path of travel along the sidewalk which is at least 36 inches wide in front of the building or lot, space permitting, as well as on the side thereof, space permitting, if the building or lot faces on more than one street, within eight hours after the snow has stopped falling. If the snowfall ceased during the night, removal shall be completed no later than eight hours after sunrise.  
§ 296-1.2. - Duties of owners or occupants of commercial properties and non-structures; time for removal. 
[Amended 12-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-173 ] 
Every owner, occupant or person having charge of a commercial building or non-residential structure shall, in case of a snowfall, clear any snow and ice from the sidewalks and gutters thereof and create a path of travel along the sidewalk which is at least 36 inches wide in front of the building or structure, space permitting, as well as on the side thereof, space permitting, if the building or structure faces on more than one street, within four hours after the snow has stopped falling. If the snowfall ceased during the night, removal shall be completed no later than four hours after sunrise. Snow and ice shall be completely cleared from all parking spaces attached to the commercial building as well as from the area immediately surrounding the parking spaces, and all walking aisles from the parking lot to the commercial building shall have a path of travel which is at least 36 inches wide, space permitting. Curb ramps shall also be cleared of snow and ice and all entrances to any commercial building or non-residential structure, and any exits from any commercial building or non-residential structure shall be cleared of snow and ice in order to facilitate safe and easy access to the building or structure.  
§ 296-2. - Snow removal. 
After a snowstorm, no person shall shovel, throw or deposit any snow or ice from any sidewalk or gutter into the street after it has been plowed and opened up by city snow removal apparatus and personnel for vehicular traffic. Any person finding it necessary to clear a sidewalk or gutter, after said street has been opened for vehicular traffic, shall bank and pile the snow from the sidewalk within three feet inside the curb.  
§ 296-3. - Ice removal. 
No owner, occupant or person having charge of any building or vacant lot shall permit any ice to remain upon any sidewalk so as to impede pedestrian traffic.  
§ 296-4. - Injury to pavement; spreading of ashes, sawdust or sand. 
In case any snow or ice shall be so hardened or in such condition that it cannot be removed without injury to the pavement, the owner, occupant or person having charge of the building or lot shall cause ashes, sawdust or sand to be spread over same.  
§ 296-5. - Deposit of harmful substances prohibited; rock salt. 
A.  No person shall sprinkle, spread or scatter any substance harmful to the health of the inhabitants or injurious to animals upon any sidewalk covered with snow or ice. 
B.  It shall be lawful to use rock salt for the melting of snow upon streets and sidewalks.  
§ 296-6. - Removal by City within twelve hours of daylight after snowfall; costs to become lien.* 
[Amended 2-23-2000 by Ord. No. 00-008] 
In addition to the penalties provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Section 1-25, for failure to comply with this Article within the time specified in Section 296-1, if the snow or ice is not removed within twelve (12) hours of daylight after snowfall, then the snow and ice may be removed by and under the direction of the Director of the Department of Public Works. The expense of removal shall be charged against the abutting property. After the cost of removal, the Director shall file a Certification of Costs with the Governing Body. The Governing Body shall examine the Certification and, if found to be correct, shall cause the cost to be charged against the property. Thereupon, the charge shall become a lien and tax upon the property and be added to and become a part of the taxes next levied and assessed thereon. The lien and tax shall be enforced and collected by the Tax Collector in the same manner as any other taxes, all in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:65-12. 
* Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that "The purpose of this amendment is to clarify that a fine may be imposed for violations of §§ 296-1 through 296-5, in addition to the cost of removal under § 296-6."  
ARTICLE II - Sidewalk Cleaning 
[Adopted 5-4-1971 as Ch. 24, Art. II, of the 1971 Jersey City Code, as readopted 9-19-1978 by Ord. No. S-128] 
 
§ 296-8. - Dirty and littered condition prohibited. 
No owner, occupant or person acting as an agent, janitor or superintendent in charge of any house, apartment, office building, store, stand, factory, garage or other type of building or vacant lot or lots shall maintain and allow the sidewalk or any part of the front or sides of such premises, facing upon any street, to be in a dirty and littered condition at any time. 
Cross reference— Used car dealers, § 324-11.  
§ 296-9. - Definitions. 
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
DIRTY AND LITTERED CONDITION - The sidewalk or any part of the front of any premises facing upon any public street shall be construed to be in a "dirty and littered condition" where there exists thereon, littered, dispersed or scattered about, any accumulation of dirt, dust, ashes, straw, shavings, sweepings, garbage, refuse, tree or shrubbery leaves, bark, branches or twigs, animal or vegetable matter, fruit peels, skins or parts thereof, wood, metal, old rags, waste, bottles or broken glass, newspapers, magazines or books or pages or parts thereof, other printed material, torn pieces of paper, cardboard and the like, wrappings, bags, containers, string, cigar or cigarette butts or parts thereof, matches or any other discarded matter, all of which shall be regarded as refuse, and any combination or accumulation thereof. 
SIDEWALK - The entire ground or space from the established or actual building line to the curb of the public street in front of any building or vacant lot or on the sides thereof, if same is a corner property, facing on two or more public streets, and shall include any right-of-way, public or private, used by the public.  
§ 296-10. - Duty of owners, occupants and workers; depositing materials in streets or gutters. 
A.  Any owner, occupant or any person acting as agent, janitor or superintendent in charge of any property shall regularly sweep, brush and otherwise clean the sidewalk and any part of the front or sides thereof facing upon a public street; provided, however, that the owner, occupant or person in charge of any store, factory, office, building, garage, stand or other commercial property shall sweep, brush or otherwise clean the sidewalk and any part of the front or sides thereof facing upon a public street daily, except Sundays, preferably at the closing hours. 
B.  No owner, occupant or person in charge of such property, or any person undertaking for hire or otherwise to sweep, brush and otherwise clean said refuse, shall sweep any refuse, sweepings or residue thereof into or upon the gutter or any part of a public street and deposit or leave same therein or thereupon. 
C.  No person or firm who, for hire or otherwise, performs any work in front of any premises shall leave same in a dirty and littered condition, but shall remove said refuse pursuant to the provisions of this Article.  
§ 296-11. - Areas of property to be kept clean. 
No owner, occupant or person in charge of any property shall fail or refuse to sweep, brush and otherwise clean and remove refuse from any and all vestibules, entrances, passageways, stoops, cellar steps, courtyards, frontal or otherwise, or porches of any building, store, office or factory; entrances on the sidewalk in front of any show or store window or exterior show or display cases; driveway or delivery, receiving, shipping or loading platform; or theater, hall or auditorium entrance or fire exit of any nature. No such person shall maintain or allow to exist in connection therewith a dirty and littered condition, as defined in this Article, and under no circumstances shall the owner, occupant or person in charge of any property or any person who undertakes, for hire or otherwise, the sweeping and cleaning of the interior of any building or store sweep any refuse therefrom into the sidewalk.  
§ 296-12. - Cleaning by city; costs. 
In the event that the person owning the property cannot be located within the limits of the city, or any such owner fails or refuses to comply with this Article, the Department of Public Works, at the direction of the Director, upon two days' notice, may undertake to sweep, brush and clean said sidewalk and charge the actual labor expense thereof to the owner by including same in the owner's next annual tax bill.  
§ 296-13. - Notices to property owner. 
All notices to owners herein provided for may be signed by a person designated by the Director of the Department of Public Works in the name of the Director of the Department, and such notices may be posted upon the property or mailed to the owner's address as it appears on the tax records of the city, and for all purposes of this Article, the owner shall be considered as the person under the primary obligation to comply herewith.  
ARTICLE III - Curb and Sidewalk Improvements 
[Adopted 5-4-1971 as Ch. 24, Art. III, of the 1971 Jersey City Code, as readopted 9-19-1978 by Ord. No. S-128] 
 
§ 296-14. - Improvement specifications. 
Whenever and wherever any street is widened, rehabilitated, resurfaced or reconstructed, the curbs and sidewalks abutting on such street shall be considered an integral part of such street and shall be reconstructed and improved so as to conform with such street in accordance with the current specifications of the Department of Transportation of the State of New Jersey.  
ARTICLE IV - Obstructions and Encumbrances 
[Adopted 2-17-1976 by Ord. No. J-701 as Ch. 26, Art. VII, Subarticle 5, of the 1971 Jersey City Code, as readopted 9-19-1978 by Ord. No. S-128] 
 
§ 296-15. - Unauthorized objects on streets and sidewalks. 
A.  No person shall park or place any container, dumpster, receptacle for the collection of rubbish or debris or any other object or device upon any street or sidewalk without first obtaining the written permission of the Division of Engineering, Traffic and Transportation. 
B.  A person seeking such permission shall file a written application with the Division of Engineering, Traffic and Transportation, which shall contain the following information: 
(1)  A description of the receptacle or object to be placed on the street or sidewalk, including the dimensions thereof. 
(2)  The location where the object is to be placed. 
(3)  The proposed time period for the placement of the object. 
(4)  Any other additional information which the Division of Engineering, Traffic and Transportation may deem necessary. 
C.  The application shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges. [1] 
D.  In addition to the permit fee, the Division of Engineering, Traffic and Transportation may, in its discretion, require any applicant for a permit to deposit a sum not to exceed $500 as an indemnity for any damage which the city may sustain or any cost for extraordinary cleanup or repairs incidental to the placement of any such object on the street or sidewalk of this city. 
E.  All such containers, dumpsters or receptacles permitted to be placed on the street or sidewalk pursuant to this section shall bear an identification number assigned by the state and the name, address and telephone number of the person responsible for such object. [Added 10-17-1978 by Ord. No. S-139] 
F.  The owner shall be responsible for any parking or placement of a dumpster, container or receptacle in violation of this section. It shall be no defense to such charge that the container, dumpster or receptacle is illegally parked or placed by another unless it is shown that at such time the container, dumpster or receptacle was used without the consent of the owner. [Added 9-11-1986 by Ord. No. C-273] 
Cross reference— Solid waste, ch. 287; used car dealers, § 324-7. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. 
 
§ 296-16. - Reflectors required for objects placed on streets or sidewalks. [Amended 10-17-1978 by Ord. No. S-139] 
A.  Whenever any demolition container, dumpster or receptacle for the collection of rubbish or debris or any other object is permitted on a sidewalk or street during the hours between sunset of one day and sunrise of the next day, it shall be equipped with suitable reflectors on the front, sides and rear capable of reflecting motor vehicle headlamps at a distance of 500 feet. 
B.  No such demolition container, dumpster or receptacle or other object shall be placed on a street less than 25 feet from an intersection or closer than six inches from the curb.  
§ 296-17. - Removal of unauthorized objects. 
A.  Any unauthorized object placed on a street, which constitutes an immediate danger to public safety or which interferes with the efficient movement of traffic, may be removed, without notice, at the owner's expense. 
B.  Any unauthorized object placed on a city street which is not removed within 24 hours after notification of the owner may be removed at the owner's expense. 
C.  Such expenses shall include the cost of removal and all storage fees.  
ARTICLE V - Commercial Usage 
[Adopted 8-23-1976 by Ord. No. J-781 as Ch. 24, Art. IV, of the 1971 Jersey City Code, amended in its entirety 8-21-1990 by Ord. No. McC-185] 
 
§ 296-18. - Commercial usage of sidewalks restricted. [Amended 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050] 
A.  No person may place, leave or display any merchandise, advertising, signs or waste material: 
(1)  On any public street or sidewalk. 
(2)  In front of or adjacent to the exterior of any store or commercial premises between the building line and the public sidewalk. 
(3)  In any vestibule, lobby or exterior area of a shop or commercial premises unless such merchandise is displayed on racks and tables only and does not impede ingress and egress to the store. 
B.  Merchants shall be permitted to hold one sidewalk sale per month for a period not to exceed three consecutive days by permit to be issued by the Zoning Officer upon payment of the fee established in Chapter 160; provided, however, that within any special improvement district, a permit may be issued only to an authorized representative of the district upon payment of the fee specified in Chapter 160. Such permit shall permit any merchant within the district to hold one sidewalk sale for a period of three consecutive days within any calendar month. The dates on which such sale is permitted shall be specified in the permit. No merchant within a special improvement district may hold a sidewalk sale during any other dates. [Amended 9-23-1998 by Ord. No. 98-125] 
C.  The Zoning Officer shall enforce this provision. Violators shall, upon conviction, be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25. [Amended 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050; 6-10-1998 by Ord. No. 98-074] 
D.  Nothing in this section shall prevent the placing of debris or waste materials in proper receptacles for regular municipal or private collection. 
E.  This section shall not apply to a peddler holding a valid peddler's license. 
Cross reference— Peddling, soliciting and canvassing, Ch. 245; solid waste, Ch. 287.  
ARTICLE VII - Excavations 
[Adopted 2-1-1987 by Ord. No. C-285]  
SUBARTICLE 1 - Excavation in the Public Right-of-Way 
 
§ 296-20. - Excavation in the public right-of-way. [Amended 06-13-01 by Ord. No. 01-059; 1-28-2015 by Ord. No. ] 
This chapter shall govern excavation in the public right-of-way within the City that is under the jurisdiction and control of the Division of Architecture, Engineering and Traffic. The Director of the Division of Architecture, Engineering and Traffic shall be responsible for managing the public right-of-way.  
§ 296-21. - Permits required to excavate. [Amended 06-13-01 by Ord. No. 01-059; 4-27-2005 by Ord. No. 05-045; 1-28-2015 by Ord. No. ] 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to make or to cause or permit to be made any excavation in any public right of-way that is under the jurisdiction of the Division without first obtaining from the Division a permit authorizing such excavation. Permits to excavate for the purpose of connecting residential dwellings to municipal sewer and water utilities shall be issued by the Division of the Construction Code Official under the direction of the Division. All other permits shall be issued directly by the Division. 
B.  No permit to excavate shall be required when an excavation is completed within a period of twenty-four (24) hours or less to install a parking meter, street light, street tree, traffic sign, traffic signal, or utility pole or to repair a utility box in a sidewalk; or when an excavation is performed for the sole purpose of repairing a sidewalk. 
C.  Permit requirements pertaining to emergency excavation are addressed in Subarticle 3, § 296-30.  
§ 296-22. - Division orders and regulations. [Amended 06-13-01 by Ord. No. 01-059; 1-28-2015 by Ord. No. ] 
In addition to the requirements set forth in this Article, the Division shall prepare, and file with the office of the City Clerk, Standard Plans and Specifications governing excavations conducted pursuant to this Article. In addition, the Standard plans and Specifications shall be adopted by resolution of the City Council. Each excavation conducted pursuant to this chapter shall be performed in accordance with the Standard Plans and Specifications.  
§ 296-23. - Definitions. [Amended 06-13-01 by Ord. No. 01-059; 1-28-2015 by Ord. No. ] 
For purposes of this Article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
A.  "Applicant" shall mean any owner or duly authorized agent of such owner who has submitted an application for a permit to excavate. 
B.  "Chapter" shall mean this Article of the City of Jersey City Code. 
C.  "Block" shall mean that part of the public right-of-way that includes the street area from the property line to the parallel property line in width and extending from the property line of an intersecting street to the nearest property line of the next intersecting street in length. For purposes of this definition, an intersection also shall be considered a "block." 
D.  "City" shall mean the City of Jersey City. 
E.  "Deposit" shall mean any cash deposit, or other security provided by the applicant in accordance with Subarticle 3, Section 296-33 of this Chapter. 
F.  "Director" shall mean the Director of the Division of Architecture, Engineering and Traffic or his or her designee. 
G.  "Division" shall mean the Division of Architecture, Engineering and Traffic. 
H.  "Excavation" shall mean any work in the surface or subsurface of the public right-of-way, including, but not limited to opening the public right-of-way, installing, servicing, repairing or modifying any facility(ies) in or under the surface or subsurface of the public right-of-way, and restoring the surface and subsurface of the public right-of-way. 
I.  "Facility" or "Facilities" shall include, but not be limited to, any and all cables, cabinets, ducts, conduits, converters, equipment, drains, handholds, manholes, pipes, pipelines, poles, splice boxes, surface location markers, tracks, tunnels, utilities, vaults, and other appurtenances or tangible things owned, leased, operated, or licensed by an owner or person, that are located or are proposed to be located in the public right-of-way. 
J.  "Major Work" shall mean any reasonably foreseeable excavation that will affect the public right-of-way for more than fifteen (15) consecutive calendar days. 
K.  "Municipal Excavator" shall mean any agency, authority, board, commission, department, or subdivision of the City, or agent thereof, that owns, installs, or maintains a facility or facilities in the public right-of-way. 
L.  "Owner" shall mean any person, including the City, who owns any facility or facilities that are or are proposed to be installed or maintained in the public right-of-way. 
M.  "Permit" or "Permit to Excavate" shall mean to perform an excavation as it has been approved, amended, or renewed by the Division. 
N.  "Permittee" shall mean the applicant to whom a permit to excavate has been granted by the Division in accordance with this Chapter. 
O.  "Person" shall mean any natural person, corporation, partnership or entity, any municipal excavator, or any governmental agency, including the State of New Jersey or United States of America. 
P.  "Public Right-of-Way" shall mean the area across, along, beneath, in, on, over, under, upon, and within the dedicated public alleys, boulevards, courts, lanes, roads, sidewalks, spaces, streets, and ways within the City, as they now exist or hereafter will exist and which are or will be under the permitting jurisdiction of the Division. 
Q.  "Sidewalk" shall mean the area from the established or actual building line and the back of the nearest curb in front of any building or vacant lot, or on the sides thereof. 
R.  "Standard Plans and Specifications" shall mean and include those standards and specifications prepared by the Division that govern excavations pursuant to this Article and shall include but not be limited to standards and requirements imposed by the Division relating to the method, location and time of excavation and such other requirements as may now or hereafter be imposed or otherwise required by the Division. 
S.  "Utility Excavator" shall include but not be limited to any owner whose facility or facilities in the public right-of-way are used to provide electricity, gas, information services, sewer service, steam, telecommunications, traffic controls, transit service, video, water, or other services to customers regardless of whether or not such owner is deemed a public utility by the New Jersey Board of Public Utilities (BPU).  
SUBARTICLE 2 - Applications for Permits to Perform an Excavation 
 
§ 296-24. - Applications. [Amended 06-13-01 by Ord. No. 01-059; 1-28-2015 by Ord. No. ] 
A.  Applications shall be submitted in a format and manner specified by the Division and shall contain: 
(1)  The name, address, telephone, and facsimile number of the applicant, including an emergency phone number and contact whereby the applicant can be reached twenty-four (24) hours per day, seven (7) days per week. Where an applicant is not the owner of the facility to be installed, maintained, or repaired in the public right-of-way, the application also shall include the name, address, telephone, and facsimile number of the owner. 
(2)  A description of the location, purpose, method of excavation, and surface and subsurface area of the proposed excavation. 
(3)  A plan showing the proposed location and dimensions of the excavation and the facilities to be installed, maintained, or repaired in connection with the excavation, and such other details as the Division may require. 
(4)  A copy or other documentation of the franchise, easement, encroachment permit, license, or other legal instrument that authorizes the applicant or owner to use or occupy the public right-of-way for the purpose described in the application. Where the applicant is not the owner of the facility or facilities to be installed, maintained, or repaired, the applicant must demonstrate in a form and manner specified by the Division that the applicant is authorized to act on behalf of the owner. 
(5)  The proposed start date of excavation. 
(6)  The proposed duration of the excavation, which shall include the duration of the restoration of the public right-of-way physically disturbed by the excavation. 
(7)  Written acknowledgment that all material to be used in the excavation, installation maintenance, or repair of facilities, and restoration of the public right-of-way, comply with all applicable state and federal environmental laws and regulations. 
(8)  Written acknowledgement that the applicant and owner are in compliance with all terms and conditions of this Chapter, the orders, regulations, and Standard Plans and Specifications of the Division, and that the applicant and owner are not subject to any outstanding assessment, fees, penalties, that have been finally determined by the City or a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(9)  Evidence of insurance as required by Subarticle 3, Section 296-31 of this Chapter. 
(10)  ;hg;A deposit as required by Subarticle 3, Section 296-33 of this Chapter. 
(11)  ;hg;Any other information that may reasonably be required by the Division. 
B.  The Division may allow an applicant to maintain documents complying with subsections (D), (I), (J), and (K) on file with the Division rather than requiring submission of such documents with each separate application. 
C.  Coordination. The Division shall review the plans and identify conflicts and opportunities for coordination of excavations. The Division shall notify affected owners and permittees of such conflicts and opportunities to the extent necessary to maximize coordination of excavation. Each applicant shall coordinate, to the extent practicable, with each potentially affected owner and permittee to minimize disruption in the public right-of-way.  
§ 296-25. - Joint excavation. [Amended 06-13-01 by Ord. No. 01-059; 1-28-2015 by Ord. No. ] 
Municipal Excavator and Utility Excavator. Whenever a municipal excavator(s) and utility excavator(s) propose major work in the same block within a two-year period, the Division may condition permits for such work in a manner that maximizes coordination and minimizes the total period of construction.  
SUBARTICLE 3 - Permits to Excavate 
 
§ 296-26. - Action on applications for permits to excavate. [Amended 06-13-01 by Ord. No. 01-059; Amended 2-27-02 by Ord. No. 02-012; 1-28-2015 by Ord. No. ] 
A.  Any entity seeking to excavate a City street, including autonomous agencies of the City, must apply for a permit to do so. After the receipt of an application for a permit to excavate, the Division, within 45 days, shall determine whether an application is complete. 
B.  If the application is deemed to be incomplete, the Division promptly shall advise the applicant in a written, electronic, or facsimile communication of the reasons for rejecting the application as incomplete. 
C.  Within sixty (60) days of receipt of a complete application, the Division shall deny, approve, or conditionally approve the application. 
(1)  If the application is approved or conditionally approved, the Division shall issue a permit to the Applicant upon payment of all fees required under § 160-1.JJ. Any and all permit fees for autonomous agencies of the City seeking to excavate a City street shall be waived. The Division may condition a permit with specified requirements that preserve and maintain the public health, safety, welfare, and convenience. The Division shall inform the permittee of the basis for such requirements. [Amended 2-27-02 by Ord. No. 02-012] 
(2)  If the application is denied, the Division shall advise the applicant in a written, electronic, or facsimile communication of the basis for denial. 
D.  The Division Director shall notify the Historic Preservation Office before any excavation commences within the legal borders of Jersey City. The Historic Preservation Officer or an assigned agent(s) shall have the right to be present during any excavations. If excavation uncovers or discloses any structure, grave or artifact, which in the opinion of the Historic Preservation Officer may be of cultural, architectural or archaeological significance, he or she may order that excavation to cease immediately; direct that the means or manner of excavation be changed so as to avoid destruction or damage to any such items excavated; or direct that the excavation cease temporarily until arrangements are made to protect, preserve or remove such items. Any permittee shall have the right to appeal any decision of the Historic preservation Officer to the historic Preservation Commission, but no excavation work may continue pending the decision of appeal.  
§ 296-27. - Terms and limitations. [Amended 06-13-01 by Ord. No. 01-059; 1-28-2015 by Ord. No. ] 
A.  The permit shall specify the location, extent, and method of the excavation, the start date and duration of the excavation, the hours of the day in which work will be allowed, the permittee to whom the permit is issued, and any conditions placed on the permit. 
B.  No excavation shall interfere with the free flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic without the approval of the Director. Prior to the issuance of a permit authorizing an excavation with the potential to disrupt the free flow of vehicle traffic, the applicant shall meet with the Municipal Engineer, or his designee, at which time the applicant shall submit plans for ensuring the safe and orderly flow of vehicular traffic during excavation work. Such plans, and any amendments the Municipal Engineer or his designee shall require, will be submitted as part of the applicant's request for a permit. Nothing in this section shall excuse the permittee from complying with any other regulations the Division may have with respect to the closure of streets. 
C.  Any contractor, sub-contractor, utility companies, including those engaged in the installation of gas, water and electric lines, or autonomous agency of the City shall report to the Division yearly their intentions with regard to prospective work requiring future street openings in the community for the purpose of coordinating such activity with pavement projects anticipated by the City. 
1.  Except in the case of an emergency, the City shall have the right to schedule street openings in a manner which will create the least disturbance, in furtherance of which purpose the Division shall provide to the utility companies and autonomous agencies of the City a schedule of expected street construction and resurfacing projects in advance so that these entities can coordinate their plans with the City accordingly. A list of these proposed street construction and resurfacing projects shall be published on the City's website as well. 
2.  Once a year the Director of the Division shall notify public utility providers and autonomous agencies of the City of any and all planned work on City roads. Any work to be done on these roads will have to be done before paving is started. Such notice shall state that no road opening permit shall be issued for openings, cuts or excavations in such City road for a period of five (5) years after the date of paving. The notice shall also notify such permittee that applications for road opening permits for work to be done prior to such paving shall be submitted promptly in order that the work covered by the permit may be completed before paving. 
3.  During such five-year period, no permit shall be issued to open, cut or excavate in such City road unless, in the judgment of the Municipal Engineer, an emergency exists which makes it absolutely essential that the road opening permit be issued. 
4.  Any contractor hired to perform a street excavation in the City shall provide proof that it is licensed and bonded with the State of New Jersey, and the Municipal Engineer is authorized to demand a bond in an amount not less than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) to assure that any road opening on roadways is restored satisfactorily. The restoration shall include milling and repaving of the area so as to blend uniformly with the adjacent roadway as per the conditions stated in the permit, including restoration of pavement markings, signage and all other appurtenances.  
§ 296-28. - Duration and validity. 
[Amended 06-13-01 by Ord. No. 01-059] 
Permits shall be void if the excavation has not begun within 30 calendar days of the start date specified in the permit, if the excavation is not pursued diligently to its conclusion, or if the excavation, including restoration, has not been completed within the specified duration; provided, however, that the Director, in his or her discretion, may issue extensions to the start date, the duration of excavation, or both upon written request from the permittee.  
§ 296-29. - Non-transferability of permits. 
[Amended 06-13-01 by Ord. No. 01-059] 
Permits are not transferable from Owner to Owner or from one Utility Excavator to another without notification and approval of the issuing authority.  
§ 296-30. - Emergency excavation. 
[Amended 06-13-01 by Ord. No. 01-059] 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to prevent any person from taking any action necessary for the preservation of life or property or for the restoration of interrupted service provided by a Municipal or Utility Excavator when such necessity arises during days or times when the Department is closed. In the event that any person takes any action to Excavate or caused to be Excavated the public right-of-way pursuant to this Section, such person shall apply for an emergency permit within eight hours after the Department's offices are first opened. The Applicant for an emergency permit shall submit a written statement of the basis of the emergency action and describe the excavation performed and any work remaining to be performed.  
§ 296-31. - Liability and indemnification. 
[Amended 06-13-01 by Ord. No. 01-059; 2-27-02 by Ord. No. 02-012] 
Each permit shall incorporate by reference and require the permittee and Owner to comply with the facility, indemnity and insurance provisions set forth below in this Section: 
A.  Liability upon Owner and permittee. Each Owner and permittee is wholly responsible for the quality of the excavation performed in the public right-of-way and both the Owner and permittee are jointly and severally liable or all consequences of any condition of such excavation and any Facilities installed in the public right-of-way. The issuance of any permit, inspection, repair, or suggestion, approval, or acquiescence of any person affiliated with the Department shall not excuse any Owner or permittee from such responsibility. 
B.  Indemnification, defense, and hold harmless. 
(1)  Each Owner and permittee shall agree on its behalf and that of any successor or assign to indemnify, defend, protect, and hold harmless the City, including, without limitation, each of its commissions, departments, officers, agents, and employees (hereinafter in this Subsection collectively referred to as "City of Jersey City") from and against any and all actions, claims, costs, damages, demands, expenses, fines, injuries, judgements, liabilities, losses, penalties, or suits, including, without limitation, attorney's fees and costs (collectively, "claims") of any kind allegedly arising directly indirectly from: 
(a)  Any act by, omission by, or negligence of, Owner or permittee or its subcontractors, or the officers, agents, or employees of either, while engaged in the performance of the excavation authorized by the permit, or while in or about the property subject to the permit for any reason connected in any way whatsoever with the performance of the excavation authorized by the permit, or allegedly resulting directly or indirectly from the maintenance or installation of any equipment, Facility(ies), or structures authorized under the permit; 
(b)  Any accident, damage, death, or injury to any contractor or subcontractor, or any officer, agent, or employee of either of them, while engaged in the performance of the excavation authorized by the permit, or arising from liens or claims for services rendered or labor or materials furnished in or for the performance of the excavation authorized by the permit; 
(c)  Any accident, damage, death, or injury to any person(s) or accident, damage, or injury to any real or personal property in, upon, or any way allegedly connected with the excavation authorized by the permit from any cause or claims arising at any time; and, 
(d)  Any release or discharge, or threatened release or discharge, of any hazardous material caused or allowed by permittee about, in, on, or under, the excavation site subject to the permit or the environment. As used herein, "hazardous material" means any gas, material, substance, or waste which, because of its quantity, concentration, or physical or chemical characteristics, is deemed by any federal, state, or local government authority to pose a present or potential hazard to human health or safety or to the environment. "Release" when used with respect to hazardous materials shall include any actual or imminent disposing, dumping, emitting, emptying, escaping, injecting, leaching, leaking, pumping, pouring, or spilling of such material. 
(2)  Upon the request of the City of Jersey City, the Owner of permittee, at no cost or expense to the City Jersey City, must indemnify, defined, and hold harmless the City of Jersey City against any claims, regardless of the alleged negligence of the City of Jersey City or any other party, except only for claims resulting directly from the sole negligence or willful misconduct of the City of Jersey City. Each Owner or permittee specifically acknowledges and agrees that it has an immediate and independent obligation to defend the City of Jersey City from any claims which actually or potentially fall within the indemnity provision, even if the allegations are or may be groundless, false, or fraudulent, which obligation arises at the time of such claim is tendered to Owner or permittee by the City of Jersey City and continues at all times thereafter. In addition, the City of Jersey City shall have a cause of action for indemnity against each Owner and permittee for any costs the City of Jersey City may be required to pay as a result of defending or satisfying any claims that arise from or in connection with the permit, except only for claims resulting directly from the sole negligence or willful misconduct of the City of Jersey City, Owner and permittee agree that the indemnification obligations assumed under the permit shall survive expiration of the permit or completion of excavation. 
C.  Insurance. 
(1)  Each Owner or permittee shall maintain in full force and effect, throughout the term of the permit, an insurance policy or policies issued by an insurance company or companies satisfactory to the City's Business Administrator and Risk Manager. Policy or Policies shall afford insurance covering all operations, vehicles, and employees, as follows: 
(a)  Workers' Compensation with employers' liability limits not less than statutory requests of $100,000. 
(b)  Commercial General Liability Insurance with limits not less than $2,000,000 each occurrence combined single limit for bodily injury and property damage, including contractual liability; personal injury; explosion, collapse, and underground (xcu); products; and completed operations. 
(c)  Business Automobile Liability Insurance with limits not less than $1,000,000 each occurrence combined single limit bodily injury and property damage, including owned, non-owned and hired auto coverage, as applicable. 
(2)  Said policy or policies shall include the City as additional insured. Said policy or policies shall afford full coverage for any claims based on acts, omissions, injury, or damage which occurred or arose, or the onset of which occurrence occurred or arose, in whole or in part, during the policy period. Said policy or policies shall be endorsed to provide thirty (30) calendar days advance written notice of cancellation or any material change to the Department. 
(3)  Should any of the required insurance be provided under a claims-made form, the insured Owner or permittee shall maintain in such coverage continuously throughout the term of the permit, and, without lapse, for a period of one (1) year beyond the expiration or termination of the permit, to that effect that, should occurrences during the term of the permit, or up to one year thereafter, give rise to claims made after expiration or termination of the permit, such claims shall be covered by such claims-made policies. 
(4)  Such insurance shall in no way relieve or decrease permittee's and Owner's obligation to indemnify the City under Subsection (b) or any other provision of this Chapter. 
(5)  Certificates of Insurance, in the form satisfactory to the Department, evidencing all coverages, above, shall be furnished to and maintained on file with the Department before issuance of a permit, with complete copies of policies furnished promptly upon the Department's request.  
§ 296-32. - Permit to be available at excavation site. 
[Amended 06-13-01 by Ord. No. 01-059] 
The permit or a photo duplicate shall be available for review at the site of the excavation for the duration of the excavation and shall be shown, upon request, to any police officer or any employee of a City agency, board, commission, or department with jurisdictional responsibility over activities in the public right-of-way.  
§ 296-33. - Deposit. 
[Amended 06-13-01 by Ord. No. 01-059; 2-27-02 by Ord. No. 02-012] 
Each applicant shall submit and maintain with the Department a cash deposit in accordance with § 160-1JJ or other security acceptable to the Department, securing the faithful performance of the obligations of the Owner and Applicant under any permit(s) to excavate and the compliance with all terms and conditions of this Chapter (the "Deposit"). Municipal excavators and other frequent Applicants may submit a single Deposit for multiple excavations so long as a constant balance of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000) is maintained on file with the Department. If the Director has deducted from such a Deposit pursuant to Subarticle 4, § 296-44, or Subarticle 5, §§ 296-47(A) and 296-48(B), the Utility or Municipal Excavator or other frequent Applicant must restore the full amount of the Deposit prior to the Department's issuance of a subsequent permit.  
§ 296-34. - Reserved.  
§ 296-35. - Reserved.  
§ 296-36. - Additional fees for excavation. 
[Amended 06-13-01 by Ord. No. 01-059] 
In the instance where administration of this Chapter or inspection of an excavation is complex, and therefore unusually costly to the Department to monitor, the Director, in his or her discretion, may require an Applicant or permittee to pay any additional sum in excess of the amounts charged pursuant to Subarticle 4, Sections 296-44(D) and (E). This additional sum shall be sufficient to recover actual costs incurred by the Department and shall be charged solely on a time and materials basis. The Director also may charge for any time and material costs incurred by other agencies, authorities, boards, commissions, or departments of the City in connection with the administration or inspection of the excavation. Whenever additional fees are charged, the Director shall provide in writing the basis for their imposition. The Director shall, whenever practicable, provide the permittee with a cost estimate of additional fees to be levied by the Department prior to the issuance of a permit.  
§ 296-37. - Reserved.  
§ 296-38. - Collection, return, and refund of deposit and fees. 
[Amended 06-13-01 by Ord. No. 01-059] 
A.  Collection of Deposit and Fees. The Director shall establish procedures for billing, collection and refund of Deposits, fees, and other charges provided for in this Chapter. 
B.  Refunds. When an application is either withdrawn by the Applicant or denied by the Department before the start of construction, the Applicant's administrative fee assessed under Subarticle 3, § 296-36 shall be retained and those fees assessed under Subarticle 3, §§ 296-33 and 296-38 shall be returned to the Applicant. 
C.  Deductions from Deposit. The Director may make deductions from the balance of a permittee's Deposit(s) to ensure the faithful performance of the obligations under a permit to excavate, to pay fees, to offset the costs for any excavation done or repairs made by the Department, or to pay any assessed penalties or costs associated with violations of this Chapter. 
D.  Retention of Deposit for One (1) Year. Each Deposit made pursuant to Subarticle 3, § 296-33shall be retained by the City for a period of one (1) year after the satisfactory completion of the excavation to secure the obligations in the permit and this Chapter. 
E.  Return of Deposit. Upon the expiration of one year from the satisfactory completion of the excavation, the permittee's Deposit(s), less the deductions made pursuant to Subarticle 3, shall be returned to the permittee or to its assigns.  
SUBARTICLE IV - Excavations 
 
§ 296-39. - Notices. 
[Amended 06-13-01 by Ord. No. 01-059] 
Any permittee who Excavates or causes to be made an excavation in the public right-of-way shall provide notice as follows: 
A.  Two (2) to fourteen (14) day excavations. For excavations that will be completed and restored in a period exceeding twenty-four (24) hours but within fourteen (14) calendar days of commencement, the permittee shall post and maintain notice at the site of the excavation. Such notice must clearly identify the permittee, permit number, the time, location and duration of excavation, and a name and telephone number of a person who can be contacted to respond to complaints and/or emergencies related to the excavation to be performed. The notice shall be posted at least every one hundred feet (100') along any Block where the excavation is to take place at least seventy-two (72) hours prior to commencement of the excavation, excavation project signs shall be in a format, quantity, and size specified by the Department. 
B.  Notice of Major Work. 
(1)  The permittee shall post and maintain notice at the site of the excavation at least five (5) calendar days prior to commencement of the excavation in the same manner as above. The permittee also shall deliver a written notice to each dwelling unit on the Block(s) affected by the excavation. This written notice shall identify the name and address of the Owner and Excavator, its permit number, the name and phone number of a person who can be contacted to respond to complaints and/or emergencies and describe the location, time, manner, duration and purpose for the excavation. 
(2)  Before commencement of construction, a permittee for Major Work shall post and maintain excavation project signs at the site of the excavation that describe the excavation being done and bear the name, address, and 24-hour telephone number of a contact person for the Owner and permittee. Said excavation projects signs shall be posted at least every one hundred feet (100') along any Block where the excavation is to take place. Excavation project signs shall be in a format, quantity, and size specified by the Department. 
C.  Notice of Emergency Excavation. For emergency excavation, the permittee, or the Applicant if a permit has not been issued, shall post and maintain notice at the site of the excavation during the construction period. The notice shall include the name, 24-hour telephone number, and address of the Owner and permittee, a description of the excavation to be performed, and the duration of the excavation. The notice shall be posted at least every one hundred feet (100') along any Block where the excavation is to take place.  
§ 296-40. - Notice for the making of subsurface facilities. 
[Amended 06-13-01 by Ord. No. 01-059] 
In accordance with State law, specifically N.J.S.A. 48:2-73 thru 80, and N.J.A.C. 14:2-1.1 thru 6.5, any person excavating in the public right-of-way shall comply with the requirements regarding the making of subsurface Facilities. Prior to the issuance of any permit, such person shall provide the Department with its subsurface designation, permit number or other information as may be necessary to properly identify the proposed excavation pursuant to this statute.  
§ 296-41. - Limits upon excavation in the public right-of-way. 
[Amended 06-13-01 by Ord. No. 01-059] 
A.  Scope. It is unlawful for any permittee to make, to cause, or permit to be made, any excavation in the public right-of-way outside the boundaries, times, and description set forth in the permit. 
B.  Trench-less Technology. Use of trenchless technology to excavate in the public right-of-way is unlawful without prior written approval of the Director. 
C.  Single Excavation Maximum of 800 Feet. No single excavation site shall be longer than eight hundred (800) feet in length at any time, except with the prior written approval of the Director.  
§ 296-42. - Regulations concerning excavation sites. [Amended 06-13-01 by Ord. No. 01-059; 1-28-2015 by Ord. No. ] 
Each owner and permittee shall be subject to requirements for excavation sites that are set forth in Division orders or regulations. Such orders or regulations shall include, but not be limited to, the following measures: 
A.  Protection of the excavation. Each permittee shall cover open excavation with steel plates ramped to the elevation of the contiguous street, pavement, or other public right-of-way, or otherwise protected in accordance with guidelines prescribed by the Division. 
B.  Housekeeping and removal of excavated material. Each permittee shall keep the area surrounding the excavation clean and free of loose dirt or other debris in a manner deemed satisfactory to the Division. Excavation sites shall be cleaned at the completion of each work day. In addition, the permittee shall remove all excess excavated material from the site of the excavation no later than the end of each work day. 
C.  Storage of Materials and Equipment. Materials and equipment that are to be used for the excavation within five (5) calendar days may be stored at the site of the excavation. 
D.  Hazardous material. Each permittee shall be subject to hazardous material guidelines for data collection; disposal, handling, release, and treatment of hazardous material; site remediation; and worker safety and training. The permittee shall be required to comply with all federal, state, and local laws regarding hazardous material. For purposes of this Subsection, hazardous material shall mean any gas, material, substance, or waste which, because of its quantity, concentration, or physical or chemical characteristics, is deemed by any federal, state, or local government authority to pose a present or potential hazard to human health or safety or to the environment. 
E.  Roadway restoration requirements for all excavation work involving roads of the City shall be done in compliance with the most recent standards promulgated by the Municipal Engineer. 
F.  Any road in the City which has been resurfaced in the last ten (10) years for which a new road opening permit is issued shall include the requirement that the party performing the work must resurface the road from curb to curb and from street corner to street corner. Furthermore, all driveways and/or sidewalks at any intersection impacted by work done under a road opening permit must be restored as per the Municipal Engineer's standards. All regular sidewalks, when being restored or replaced as part of a road opening permit, must also be restored as per the Municipal Engineer's standards. The acceptance of all work done under the aforesaid specifications shall be under the supervision of the Municipal Engineer. 
G.  Any crosswalks on the impacted street must be re-striped and brick-inlayed crosswalks must be restored, if applicable. 
H.  If an individual property owner of a building less than ten (10) units is seeking permission to excavate a street to make emergency repairs or necessary service upgrades to his/her property, the property owner need only restore the trench in accordance with the Municipal Engineer's standards. 
I.  If an individual property owner is seeking to construct a new building, and its construction will require the opening of a street, then the property owner needs to arrange for the restoration of the street as per the Municipal Engineer's standards and as specified in the site plan approval. 
J.  All street patch repairs/trench restoration must use the infrared paving method as per the most recent standards promulgated by the Municipal Engineer. The backfilling and patching operations of any such excavating project must be supervised by a City inspector to ensure compliance with the Municipal Engineer's standards.  
§ 296-43. - Stop work order, permit modification, and permit revocation. 
[Amended 06-13-01 by Ord. No. 01-059] 
When the Director, or his or her authorized representative, has determined that a person has violated this Chapter or that an Excavation poses a hazardous situation or constitutes a public nuisance, public emergency, or other threat to the public health, safety, or welfare, or when the Director determines that there is a paramount public purpose, the Director is authorized to issue a stop work order to impose new conditions upon a permit, or to suspend or revoke a permit by notifying the permittee of such action in a written, electronic, or facsimile communication.  
§ 296-44. - Restoration of the public right-of-way. [Amended 06-13-01 by Ord. No. 01-059; 1-28-2015 by Ord. No. ] 
A.  Restoration. In any case in which the sidewalk, street, or other public right-of-way is or is caused to be Excavated, the Owner and permittee shall restore or cause to be restored such excavation in the manner prescribed by the orders, regulations, and Standard Plans and Specifications of the Division. At a minimum, trench restoration shall include resurfacing to a constant width equal to the widest part of the excavation on each block, plus one additional foot in width on each side of the excavation, in accordance with the Division's Standards and Guidelines. 
B.  Backfill, replacement of pavement base, and finished pavement. Activities concerning backfilling, replacement of pavement base, and finished pavement shall be performed in a manner specified by the orders, regulations and Standard Plans and Specifications of the Division. In addition, these activities shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Backfill. Each excavation shall be backfilled and compacted within seventy-two (72) hours from the time the construction related to the excavation is completed. The backfilling operations must be supervised by a City inspector to ensure compliance with the Municipal Engineer's standards. 
(2)  Replacement of pavement base. Replacement of the pavement base shall be completed within seventy-two (72) hours from the time excavation is backfilled. Replacement of the pavement base must be supervised by a City inspector to ensure compliance with the Municipal Engineer's standards. 
(3)  Finished pavement. Finished pavement restoration shall be completed within seventy-two (72) hours of replacement of the pavement base. Finishing operations must be supervised by a City inspector to ensure compliance with the Municipal Engineer's standards. 
(4)  Streets with paved with cobblestones or brick pavers must be returned to their condition prior to excavation. If at all possible, the original cobblestones or bricks should be set aside to be re-used post-excavation. The following is a list of streets paved in cobblestones and yellow bricks: 
COBBLESTONE PAVED STREETS: 
Holland Street 
Manning Avenue 
High Street 
17th Street/Lackawanna Terminal Viaduct 
Provost Street 
Audrey Zatro Drive 
YELLOW-BRICK PAVED STREETS: 
Fairmont Terrace 
Apollo Court 
Duncan Court 
Virginia Terrace 
C.  Modification to requirements. Upon written request from the permittee, the Director may grant written approval for modifications to the requirements of Subsection (2). 
D.  Incomplete excavation; completion by the Division. In any case where an excavation is not completed or restored in the time and manner specified in the permit, this Chapter, or the orders, regulations, and Standard Plans and Specifications of the Division, the Director shall order the owner or permittee to complete the excavation as directed within twenty-four (24) hours. If the owner or the permittee should fail, neglect, or refuse to comply with the order, the Director may complete or cause to be completed such excavation in such manner as the Director deems expedient and appropriate. The owner or permittee shall compensate the Division for any costs associated with the administration and construction required to restore the excavation, including but not limited to any costs related to consultants, equipment, inspection, notification, remediation, repair, restoration, or any other actual costs incurred by the Division or other agencies, authorities, boards, commissions, or departments of the City that were made necessary by said excavation. The cost of such work also may be deducted from the permittee's deposit pursuant to Subarticle 3, Section 296-33. The Director's determination as to the cost of any work done or repairs made shall be final. In addition, the owner, his agent or permittee may be subject to those enforcement actions set forth in Subarticle 5. 
E.  Subject to the limitation set forth in Subarticle 5, § 296-45, completion of an excavation or restoration by the Division in accordance with Subsection (D) above shall not relieve the owner or permittee from liability for future pavement at the excavating site.  
SUBARTICLE V - Post-excavation repair, maintenance, and pavement 
 
§ 296-45. - Repair and maintenance obligation of permittee. [Amended 06-13-01 by Ord. No. 01-059] 
Each owner and permittee that excavates or causes to be made an excavation in the public right-of-way shall be responsible to maintain, repair, or reconstruct the site of the excavation so as to maintain a condition acceptable to the Director for a period of one (1) year after its restoration.  
§ 296-46. - Subsurface or pavement failures. [Amended 06-13-01 by Ord. No. 01-059] 
In the event that subsurface material or pavement over or immediately adjacent to any excavation should become depressed, broken, or fail in anyway at any time after the excavation has been completed, the Director shall exercise his or her best judgment to determine the person(s) responsible, if any, for the failure in the subsurface or surface of the public right-of-way and shall designate such person as the responsible party. The Director shall notify said person(s) of the condition, its location, and the required remedy. Such person(s) shall repair or restore, or cause to be repaired or restored, such condition to the satisfaction of the Director within seventy-two (72) hours of the notification. The Director may, in his or her discretion, extend the time for the responsible party to repair or restore the affected public right-of-way.  
§ 296-47. - Repair by the Division. [Amended 06-13-01 by Ord. No. 01-059; 1-28-2015 by Ord. No. ] 
A.  In the event that any person(s) fails, neglects, or refuses to repair any condition pursuant to the Director's notice as set forth in Subarticle 5, Section 296-46, the Director may repair or restore, or cause to be repaired or restored, such condition in such manner as the Director deems expedient and appropriate. The person(s) identified by the Director as the responsible party shall compensate the Division for any costs associated with the administration, construction, consultants, equipment, inspection, notification, remediation, repair, restoration, or any other actual costs incurred by the City that were made necessary by reason of the repair or restoration undertaken by the Division. The cost of such work also may be deducted from the permittees Deposit pursuant to Subarticle 3, Section 296-38. The Director's determination as to the cost of the repair or restoration performed shall be final. In addition, the responsible party may be subject to those enforcement actions set forth in this subarticle. 
B.  Repair or restoration by the Division in accordance with this Section shall not relieve the person(s) from liability for future pavement failures at the site of the repair or restoration.  
§ 296-48. - Emergency remediation by the Division. [Amended 06-13-01 by Ord. No. 01-059; 1-28-2015 by Ord. No. ] 
A.  If, in the judgment of the Director, the site of an excavation is considered hazardous or if it constitutes a public nuisance, public emergency, or other imminent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare that requires immediate action, the Director may order the condition remedied by a written, electronic, or facsimile communication to the person(s) responsible, if any, for remedying the condition and shall designate such person as the responsible party. 
B.  If the responsible party is inaccessible or fails, neglects, or refuses to take immediate action to remedy the condition as specified in said communication, the Director may remedy the condition or cause the condition to be remedied in such manner as the Director deems expedient and appropriate. The person(s) identified by the Director as the responsible party shall compensate the Division for any reasonable costs associated with the administration, construction, consultants, equipment, inspection, notification, remediation, repair, restoration, or any other actual costs incurred by the Division or other agencies, boards, commissions, or departments of the City that were made necessary by reason of the emergency remediation undertaken by the Division. The cost of such work also may be deducted from the permittee's Deposit pursuant to Subarticle 4, § 296-44, or Subarticle 5, § 296-47. The Director's determination as to the cost of any remediation performed shall be final. In addition, the responsible party may be subject to those enforcement actions set forth in Subarticle 5, §§ 296-49, 296-50 and 296-51. 
C.  Remediation by the Division in accordance with this Section shall not relieve the person(s) from liability for future pavement failures at the site of the remediation.  
§ 296-49. - Violation of chapter. [Amended 06-13-01 by Ord. No. 01-059] 
A.  The Corporation Counsel may in his or her discretion institute an action for injunctive relief to restrain any non-compliance with this chapter and/or to cause the correction on abatement of any violation of this chapter and seek civil penalties and assessments as provided for in (2) hereunder and reasonable attorney's fees for the prosecution of each violation. 
B.  Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter may be liable for civil penalties, not to exceed five hundred ($500.00) dollars for each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue. Such penalty shall be assessed and recovered in an action brought in the Municipal Court of the City of Jersey City or any other court of competent jurisdiction.  
§ 296-50. - Penalties and fees. [Amended 06-13-01 by Ord. No. 01-059; 1-28-2015 by Ord. No. ] 
A.  The Director shall have the authority to enforce this Chapter against violation thereof. Upon the Director's determination that a person has violated any provision of this Chapter, the Standard Plans and Specification, notices, orders, or regulations of the Division; any term, condition, or limitation of any permit or is subject to any outstanding fees, deposits, or other charges, the Director shall serve notice on said person to abate the violation. Any person whom the Director determines to be responsible for violating this Chapter may be subject to any or all of the enforcement mechanisms specified within Subarticle 5. 
B.  Violations by Municipal Excavators are not subject to the penalties and fines specified in this Section. However, the Director is empowered to abate the violations of the Municipal Excavator, deduct the costs of abatement from the Municipal Excavator's deposit, and take other appropriate action against such Excavator that is within the Director's authority. 
C.  Among other violations, citations may be issued for the following specific violations: 
(1)  Excavation without a valid permit: 
(2)  Excavation without proof of the permit issuance on site; 
(3)  Excavation without proper notice in accordance with Subarticle 4, § 296-40 and N.J.A.C. 14:2-1.1 through 6.5; 
(4)  Excavation without proper public notice; 
(5)  Excavation that violates the City of Jersey City Traffic Code; 
(6)  Excavation that violates the regulations concerning excavation sites (Subarticle 4, Sections C and D), which include, but are not limited to, protection of the excavation, housekeeping and removal of excavated material, and hazardous material; 
(7)  Excavation that does not meet the 72-hour requirements for restoration concerning backfill, replacement of pavement base, and finished pavement (Subarticle 4, § 296-44); or 
(8)  Excavation that exceeds the scope of the permit, including, but not limited to, obstructing the path of automobile or pedestrian travel in excess of the permitted area. 
D.  The non-payment of fines or citation imposed to this Section, or the continued existence of a condition in violation of this Section, shall be grounds for the Director to deny a permit to the responsible person until such fines or citations have been paid and the condition corrected.  
§ 296-51. - Suspension of action on applications. 
[Amended 06-13-01 by Ord. No. 01-059] 
A person who is in willful noncompliance with this Chapter shall not apply for nor be issued a subsequent permit to excavate in the public right-of-way unless the Director, by written authorization, grants a waiver to this prohibition.  
SUBARTICLE VI - Miscellaneous Provisions 
 
§ 296-52. - Abandonment of underground facilities, reports and maps. 
[Amended 06-13-01 by Ord. No. 01-059] 
A.  Whenever any Facility(ies) is abandoned in the public right-of-way, the person owning, using, controlling or having an interest therein, shall, within thirty (30) calendar days after such abandonment, file in the office of the Director a statement in writing, giving in detail the location of the Facility(ies) so abandoned. Each map, set of maps, or plans filed pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, including those maps or plans, or plans filed pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, including those maps or plans required by Subarticle 2, Section A shall show in detail the location of each such Facility(ies) abandoned subsequent to the filling of the last preceding map, set of maps, or plans. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any person to fail, refuse, or neglect to file any map or set of maps at the time, and in all respects as required by this Section.  
§ 296-53. - Identification of visible facilities. 
[Amended 06-13-01 by Ord. No. 01-059] 
A.  Each visible Facility installed in the public right-of-way shall be clearly identified with the name of the Owner of the Facility. The Department shall adopt orders or regulations to specify other appropriate methods for identification of utility facilities. 
B.  Owners of existing utility facilities which are within the public right-of-way shall submit to the Department any and all plans, drawings, maps, sketches, or other materials necessary to identify the dimensions, location, depth, horizontal and vertical alignment, and orientation of their facility(ies). Submission of the materials described above must be submitted by Owners within one hundred and eighty (180) days after the effective date of this Ordinance. 
C.  The submission of plans, drawings, maps, sketches, or other materials necessary to identify the dimensions, location, depth, horizontal and vertical alignment, and orientation of the extension, modification, replacement, or improvement of existing utility facilities, or the installation of any new utility facilities, must be submitted to the Department within sixty (60) days of its installation.  
§ 296-54. - City's obligation. 
[Amended 06-13-01 by Ord. No. 01-059] 
In undertaking enforcement of this Chapter, the City is assuming an undertaking only to promote the general welfare. It is not assuming, nor is it imposing on its officers and employees, an obligation for breach of which it is liable in money damages to any person who claims that such breach proximately caused injury.  
§ 296-55. - Severability. 
[Amended 06-13-01 by Ord. No. 01-059] 
If any part of this Chapter, or the application thereof to any person or circumstances, is held invalid, the remainder of this Chapter, including the application of such part of provision to other persons or circumstances, shall not be affected thereby and shall continue in full force and effect. To this end, provisions of this Chapter are severable.  
§ 296-56. - Establishment of street restoration fund. 
[Amended 06-13-01 by Ord. No. 01-059] 
A.  Establishment of Fund. There is hereby established a fund in the City Treasury for the purpose of receiving Street Restoration Fee amounts paid pursuant to Subarticle 3, § 296-38(A). This special fund shall be known as the Street Restoration Fund. The Fund shall be administered by the Department of Public Works. All donation of money, gifts, grants, and bequests which may be offered to the Street Restoration Fund are hereby accepted. 
B.  Use of Monies. Monies in the Street Restoration Fund shall be used exclusively for the design, construction, repair and resurfacing of streets. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Director of the Department of Public Works may order refunds to be made from the Street Restoration Fund consistent with procedures adopted pursuant to Subarticle 3, § 296-38. 
C.  Interest; Accrual of Monies in Fund. Interest earned on monies in the Fund shall become part of the principal thereof and shall not be expended for any purpose other than those set forth in subsection (2). The balance remaining in the Fund at the close of any fiscal year shall be deemed to have been provided for a specific purpose and shall be carried forward and accumulated in the fund for the purposes set forth in subsection (2) above.  
§ 296-57. - Establishment of an excavation fund. 
[Amended 06-13-01 by Ord. No. 01-059] 
A.  Establishment of Fund. There is hereby established the Excavation Fund for the purpose of receiving all amounts paid pursuant to Subarticle 3 with the exception of Street Restoration Fees paid pursuant to Section L. The Fund shall be administered by the Department of Public Works. All donation of money, gifts, grant, and bequests which may be offered to the Excavation Fund are hereby accepted. 
B.  Use of Monies. Monies in the Excavation Fund shall be used exclusively to defray City costs in connection with the excavation and the administration of Chapter 260 of the City of Jersey City Code; including, but not limited to, administration, construction, consultants, equipment, inspection, legal services, remediation, repair, restoration, training, travel, and other costs incurred by the City. 
C.  Interest; Accrual of Monies in the Fund. Interest earned on monies in the Fund shall become part of the principal thereof and shall not be expended for any purpose other than those set forth in subsection (2). The balance remaining in the Fund at the close of any fiscal year shall be deemed to have been provided for a specific purpose and shall be carried forward and accumulated in the fund for the purposes set forth in subsection (2).  
ARTICLE VIII - Vacation of Streets 
[Adopted 7-8-1980 as Ord. No. S-415] 
 
§ 296-58. - Notice to owners and occupants. 
A.  No petition for an ordinance requesting vacation of a street shall be considered by the Municipal Council unless all owners and occupants of property located within two hundred (200) feet from the boundaries of the street sought to be vacated shall have received notice from the petitioner of the place, date and time of the public hearing for such ordinance. Prior to the public hearing, the petitioner shall submit to the City Clerk proof that all such notices have been given as set forth herein. In the event that such notices have not been served or proof of such service has not been presented to the City Clerk prior to the public hearing, the Municipal Council shall adjourn the public hearing to the next regular meeting of the Council and direct the City Clerk to readvertise the ordinance with a notice of the date, place and time of the public hearing for said ordinance. The cost of the re-advertisement of the public hearing, together with a fee as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges, which is in addition to all other fees which have been paid, shall be assessed to the petitioner and shall be paid to the City Clerk prior to the date of the adjourned public hearing. 
B.  In the event that the public hearing was adjourned by reason of failure of the petitioner to serve the occupants and owners of property within a two hundred (200) foot radius as aforesaid, and the petitioner fails to so serve said persons or fails to file proofs of service with the City Clerk or fails to pay the costs of the additional advertisement and the additional fee as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges, before the date and time of the adjourned public hearing, no further adjournments shall be granted, and after the public hearing is held the Council may defeat the ordinance for failure to comply with the aforesaid conditions.  
ARTICLE IX - Placement of Telephones 
[Adopted 3-27-1991 as Ord. No. McC-272; amended in its entirety 4-26-1995 by Ord. No. 95-030] 
 
§ 296-59. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
CITY — The City of Jersey City. 
CORNER — That full width of sidewalk area beginning at the point at which the extended curblines form an intersection and running therefrom a distance of twenty-five (25) feet along such curb in either direction. 
DIAL TONE SERVICE PROVIDER — The entity providing dial tone service to distributors in the City of Jersey City. 
DISTRIBUTOR — Any person responsible for placing or maintaining a pay telephone in a public way hereinafter defined. 
FACILITATE CRIMINAL ACTIVITY — That on at least four occasions within any thirty (30) day period the police have responded to the location of a pay telephone due to allegations of criminal activity in connection with that pay telephone and the activity alleged constitutes a crime of the fourth degree or higher. 
PAY TELEPHONE — Any self-service or coin-operated telephone. 
PERSON — An individual, business, firm, corporation, association, partnership or other organization or group of persons. 
SIDEWALK — Any surface and air space above such surface provided for the use of pedestrians. 
STREET — All that area dedicated to public use for public street purposes and shall include but not be limited to roadways, parkways, alleys and sidewalks and air space above such surfaces.  
§ 296-60. - Permit required; fee. 
A.  No person may place or maintain any pay telephone on or above any public street or sidewalk without having first obtained a permit as provided in this article. Permits shall be issued by the Division of Licenses subject to compliance with this article. A permit or written denial thereof stating reasons shall be issued by the Division of Licenses within twenty (20) days of its receipt of a completed application. Distributors shall have thirty (30) days within which to cure deficiencies or defects in their applications without the necessity for reapplication. The permit number shall be affixed to the underside of the pay telephone in a manner and form approved by the Division of Licenses. The permit required by this article shall be in addition to any permit which may be required pursuant to the Uniform Construction Code, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq. 
B.  Before installation, a plan or sketch of the pay telephone shall be furnished to the Division of Licenses in sufficient detail to describe the size, location, equipment and means of installation and cabling. 
C.  Before dial tone service can be provided to any pay telephone located on or above any public street or sidewalk, a permit must be obtained for the pay telephone by the distributor. The distributor may apply to the dial tone service provider for dial tone service immediately upon filing an application for a permit with the Division of Licenses; however, dial tone service shall not be provided by the dial tone service provider or accepted by the distributor until the dial tone service provider is presented with a copy of the approved permit. The copy can be provided to the dial tone service provider by the Division of Licenses or by the distributor and can be served upon the dial tone service provider by hand, mail or facsimile. The dial tone service provider shall not knowingly provide dial tone service to a distributor that has not obtained a permit. For any pay telephone which is not located on or above any public street or sidewalk, the distributor shall provide a certification to the dial tone service provider stating that the particular application is for a pay telephone located on private property. 
D.  The initial fee for a permit shall be as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges; provided, however, that no fee shall be charged for pay telephones furnished by or under contract to the City of Jersey City as an accommodation to the public or for permits issued to any person or entity which pays a franchise fee or tax for the use of public facilities. Such person or entity shall not, however, be exempt from the remaining provisions of this article. Permits shall expire on March 31 of each year. The initial license fee following the change in expiration date will be subject to proration by the Division of Licenses and Fees. 
[Amended 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050; 2-11-1998 by Ord. No. 98-004] 
E.  The Division of Licenses shall be informed of the intent of any person to remove or relocate a pay telephone. Relocation of a pay telephone shall necessitate obtaining a new permit; provided, however, that relocation of a telephone within the extended side lot lines of the same property will require only an amendment to the original application detailing the change. In either case, no change of location shall be undertaken until approval is obtained from the Division of Licenses. 
F.  Before receiving a permit, an applicant shall: 
(1)  Execute an indemnification agreement substantially as follows: 
The applicant and any other persons on whose behalf the application is made agree to defend, indemnify and hold harmless the City of Jersey City against liability for all claims for damage to property or injury to or death of persons arising out of or resulting from the issuance of the permit or the control, maintenance or ownership or use of each pay telephone. 
(2)  File with the Risk Manager evidence of a general liability insurance policy from an insurer licensed to do business in the State of New Jersey in the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for bodily injury and fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for property damage, naming the city as additionally insured against any injury, loss or damage that may result from placing or maintaining the pay telephone or pay telephone equipment on or above the sidewalk. In lieu of this insurance requirement, the distributor shall provide evidence that it is authorized by New Jersey or federal law to operate as a self-insurer. 
(3)  Submit a certification attesting to the fact that notice of the proposal in a form approved by the Division of Licenses has been published in the local newspaper having the largest circulation. The notice shall advise that any person may submit comments, in writing, to the Division of Licenses within ten (10) days of the date of publication. The certification shall include a copy of the notice. A copy of the notice shall also be served upon the City Clerk. 
G.  Before approving a permit, the Division of Licenses shall request an opinion from the Department of Public Safety as to the proposed location and compliance with § 296-63(A)(5). Such opinion shall be in writing and submitted to the Division of Licenses within seven days of the request. [ Amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] 
H.  The Division of Licenses shall send notice of the proposal to the Ward and At-Large Councilpersons.  
§ 296-61. - Rates to be posted; emergency calls. [ ] 
A.  Pay telephones shall permit the following calls to be placed without charge: 
(1)  Calls to the 911 emergency number. 
(2)  Emergency calls placed through operator assistance to the Department of Public Safety. 
(3)  Calls placed through operator assistance to the Department of Public Safety by anyone identified as a member of the department. 
B.  A notice shall be posted on the pay telephone or the pay telephone booth advising that the caller may ascertain the cost of a call by dialing "operator" before placing the call.  
§ 296-62. - Maintenance and installation. 
A pay telephone shall comply with the following standards: 
A.  No booth surrounding a pay telephone shall exceed eight feet in height, four feet in width or four feet in thickness. 
B.  Each coin-operated pay telephone shall be equipped with a coin return mechanism to permit a person using the machine to secure an immediate refund if a call cannot be placed. The coin mechanism shall be maintained in good working order. 
C.  Each pay telephone shall have affixed to it, in a place visible to everyone using the pay telephone, the name and address of the distributor and the telephone number of a working telephone service to report a malfunction, secure a refund, ascertain name, address and telephone number of the long distance carrier or give the notices provided for in this article. 
D.  Pay telephones shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition and in good repair at all times. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, a pay telephone shall be serviced and maintained so that: 
(1)  It is reasonably free of chipped, faded, peeling and cracked paint in the visible painted areas thereof. 
(2)  It is reasonably free of rust and corrosion in the visible unpainted metal areas thereon. 
(3)  Any clear plastic or glass parts are unbroken and reasonably free of cracks, dents, graffiti, blemishes and discolorations. 
(4)  Any paper or cardboard parts or inserts are reasonably free of tears, peeling or fading. 
(5)  The structural parts thereof are not broken or unduly misshapen. 
(6)  The pay telephone receiver is attached to the telephone. 
E.  Any person who fails to maintain a pay telephone as described in § 296-62(D) shall be given a ten (10) day notice to repair the pay telephone by the Division of Licenses. If the pay telephone is not in working condition at the end of the ten (10) day period, the Division of Licenses shall issue a written notice of violation describing the reasons for violation unless the permittee provides adequate assurance that the telephone shall be repaired or removed. 
F.  Each pay telephone shall, upon written request from the Division of Licenses, be capable of being restricted to outgoing calls only within ten (10) days of the request.  
§ 296-63. - Location and placement of phones; number. 
A.  No pay telephone shall be permitted to rest upon, in or over any public street or sidewalk when such installation, use or maintenance: 
(1)  Endangers the safety of persons or property. 
(2)  Unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrians or vehicular traffic, including any legally parked or stopped vehicles. 
(3)  Unreasonably interferes with the ingress or egress from any residence or place of business. 
(4)  Interferes with the use of traffic signs or signals, hydrants or mailboxes permitted at or near said location. 
(5)  Will, in the opinion of the Department of Public Safety, and based upon reasonable grounds, facilitate criminal activity or unreasonably interfere with the quiet enjoyment of the area. [ Amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] 
B.  Pay telephones shall be placed or otherwise secured so as to prevent their being blown down or around the public street or sidewalk, but shall not be chained or otherwise secured to any traffic or street signs, signals, hydrants, utility poles or mailboxes. 
C.  No pay telephones shall be placed, installed, used or maintained: 
(1)  Within any marked crosswalk. 
(2)  Within three feet of a curb return of any unmarked crosswalks. 
(3)  Within five feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box, police call box or other emergency facility. 
(4)  Within five feet of any driveway. 
(5)  Within three feet of any public area improved with a lawn, flowers, shrubs, trees or other landscaping. 
(6)  At any location whereby the clear space for the passageway of pedestrians is reduced to less than four feet. 
(7)  On any sidewalk unless the abutting property owner or authorized agent has given consent, in writing. 
(8)  Except on a corner as defined in § 296-59. 
(9)  Within a six hundred (600) foot radius of any other pay telephone in an R-1 or R-2 Zone as described in the Zoning and Redevelopment Map of the City of Jersey City. 
(10)  ;hg;Within a four hundred (400) foot radius of any other pay telephone in an R-3 or R-4 Zone as described in the Zoning and Redevelopment Map of the City of Jersey City, except that one pay telephone may be installed on one additional corner of an intersection comprising four or more corners. 
(11)  ;hg;Within a two hundred (200) foot radius of any other pay telephone in any zone other than R-1 through R-4, except that a distributor may apply for up to one additional pay telephone abutting an existing pay telephone placed and maintained by that distributor and except that one pay telephone or two abutting pay telephones may be installed on one additional corner of an intersection comprising four or more corners.  
§ 296-64. - Variance. 
[Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
In the event that a pay telephone does not meet the requirements of this article, an applicant may apply, in writing, together with relevant documentation, to the Business Administrator for a variance therefrom. A copy of the application for variance, together with relevant documentation, shall also be served upon the Division of Licenses. A variance shall only be granted if the Business Administrator finds that good cause exists for relieving the applicant from strict compliance with this article and that the proposed alternative will not violate § 296-63(A)(1) through (5). The applicant seeking a variance shall submit a certification attesting to the fact that notice of the proposal in a form approved by the Division of Licenses has been published in the local newspaper having the largest circulation. The notice shall advise that any person may submit comments, in writing, to the Business Administrator within ten (10) days of the date of publication. The certification shall include a copy of the notice. A copy of the notice shall also be served upon the City Clerk. Approval or denial of a variance shall be issued within twenty (20) days of the Business Administrator's receipt of a completed application for variance and shall be in writing, giving reasons for the decision.  
§ 296-65. - Appeals. 
A.  An aggrieved party, within twenty (20) days of notice of any decision made by the Division of Licenses, other than a written notice of violation, or by the Business Administrator pursuant to this article, may appeal the decision by submitting a request for appeal, in writing, together with relevant documentation, to the Business Administrator. The aggrieved party shall also serve a copy of this request with documentation to the Division of Licenses. 
[Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
B.  The Division of Licenses shall then provide the Business Administrator with its response, in writing, together with relevant documentation, within ten (10) days. The Division of Licenses shall serve a copy of its response with documentation to the aggrieved party. 
C.  If the Business Administrator cannot make a decision on the basis of documentation submitted by the parties or if the distributor requests a hearing, such hearing shall be held upon at least ten (10) days' notice to the parties. A decision shall be issued within twenty (20) days of completion of this process and shall be in writing, giving reasons for the decision. 
D.  It will be the burden of the aggrieved party to show that the decision appealed was clearly erroneous, except that on an appeal from a decision made by the Business Administrator, the burden shall be by a preponderance of the evidence. 
[Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
E.  During the pendency of the appeal, the effect of the decision being appealed shall be stayed unless the Division of Licenses provides a certification to the Business Administrator stating that a stay would cause an immediate threat to public safety or an immediate hazard to life or property.  
§ 296-66. - Applicability to existing pay telephones. 
All existing pay telephones installed on or before February 15, 1994 (the effective date of the prior pay telephone ordinance), shall be exempt from the following sections of this article: §§ 296-60(C), 296-63(C)(8), (9), (10) and (11); provided, however, that any distributor desiring this status must certify to the Division of Licenses within forty-five (45) days of the effective date of this article all locations of said distributor's pay telephones for which the exempt status is being requested. Distributors shall be required to apply for and obtain a permit for the pay telephones exempted as well as all other pay telephones existing on the effective date of this article.  
§ 296-67. - Violations and penalties. 
A.  The distributor shall be given written notice of a violation which shall be heard and decided in the Municipal Court for the City of Jersey City. The notice shall state the article section violated and reasons for the violation. Violation of this article shall subject the violator to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than the amount provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25. Each noncomplying pay telephone violation will constitute a separate violation. Each week of said violation shall constitute a separate violation. 
[Amended 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050] 
B.  In addition to other remedies and penalties described herein, if a violation upheld in the Municipal Court is not abated within thirty (30) days of the Municipal Court decision or if a fine is not paid within thirty (30) days, the City of Jersey City may order that dial tone service be disconnected and/or may have the pay telephone and all structures pertaining thereto removed, and the cost of such disconnect and/or removal shall be charged to the distributor. The City of Jersey City shall not be required to wait the thirty (30) days where the Division of Licenses certifies that the violation is an immediate threat to public safety or an immediate hazard to life or property. If equipment that is removed by the City of Jersey City pursuant to this article is not claimed within six months of its removal, it will be considered abandoned, and the City of Jersey City may dispose of the same pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-157. The city shall not be responsible for any damages occurring to equipment during disconnect and/or removal or for disposing of abandoned equipment. Before the city releases claimed equipment, the distributor shall pay in full all fines and costs associated therewith. 
C.  In addition to other remedies and penalties described herein, if a distributor places or maintains a pay telephone upon a city right-of-way without first securing a permit as described hereunder, the Division of Commerce shall issue notice to the distributor at the last known address on file with the Division of Commerce or that address listed on the subject pay telephone, by certified and regular mail, giving the distributor ten (10) days from the date of the notice to submit a valid and current permit to the Division of Commerce or remove the subject pay telephone from the city right-of-way. In the event that a valid and current permit is not submitted to the Division of Commerce or the subject pay telephone is not removed from the city right-of-way within the ten (10) day period, or if the name and address of the distributor cannot be reasonably ascertained by the Division of Commerce, the city may remove the subject pay telephone and the cost of removal shall be charged to the distributor. The City of Jersey City shall not be required to wait the ten (10) days where the Division of Commerce certifies that the placement or maintenance of the subject pay telephone is an immediate threat to public safety or an immediate hazard to life or property. If equipment that is removed by the City of Jersey City pursuant to this article is not claimed within six months of its removal, it will be considered abandoned, and the City of Jersey City may dispose of same pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-157. The city shall not be responsible for any damages occurring to equipment during removal or for disposing of abandoned equipment. Before the city releases claimed equipment, the distributor shall pay in full all fines and costs associated therewith. Placement or maintenance of a pay telephone without a valid and current permit may constitute just cause to deny new or renewal applications submitted by the distributor. 
[Added 9-8-1999 by Ord. No. 99-110]  
ARTICLE X - Reserved 
 
§§ 296-68—296-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI - Closing of Streets to Traffic 
[Adopted 8-11-1983 by Ord. No. MC-425; amended in its entirety 10-11-1984 by Ord. No. MC-706] 
 
§ 296-71. - Conditions precedent to closing of streets for certain activities. 
In accordance with the provisions of § 296-72, a street may be temporarily closed for a block party or any recreational event to be conducted within an area not exceeding one city block under the following conditions: 
A.  At least 2/3 of the area is residentially zoned. 
B.  The majority of the owners, residents or tenants of properties fronting upon the block to be closed and within one hundred (100) feet of all properties fronting on the block to be closed consent to the closing. 
[Amended 10-13-1993 by Ord. No. 93-111; 9-27-1995 by Ord. No. 95-082] 
C.  The event is sponsored solely by the owners, residents or tenants and is not for commercial or advertising purposes or profit. 
D.  The application for a permit is filed by a bona fide resident of the street to be closed. Such a bona fide resident may file individually or through any civil or cultural organization of which the resident is a member in the later case, the resident must be listed on the application as per § 296-72(B)(1). 
E.  All noise emanating from festival activities in any manner must be in compliance with the specific standards restricting noise levels set in Chapter 222 (Noise), Article I (Noise Restrictions), Section 3 (Specific Standards) of the Jersey City Municipal Code. 
[Added 9-27-1995 by Ord. No. 95-082] 
F.  The contents of all bottled beverages, including, but not limited to alcoholic beverages and soft drinks, must be served in a plastic, paper or styrofoam cup. 
[Added 9-27-1995 by Ord. No. 95-082]  
§ 296-72. - Permit required for closing of street; procedures. 
A.  No person may close or attempt to close any street within the city to motor vehicle traffic without first obtaining a permit from the Municipal Engineer. Any activity conducted within a closed street shall be conducted strictly in accordance with the conditions specified in the permit issued by the Municipal Engineer. 
B.  Applications to permit the temporary closing of a City street for a public assembly as defined in Section 122-1 are included with the application for public assemblies available through the Office of Cultural Affairs. Applications for a permit for temporary street closing for any other purpose shall be made upon forms provided by the Municipal Engineer at least five days before the proposed closing and shall contain all of the following information: 
[Amended 9-27-1995 by Ord. No. 95-082; 9-9-1998 by Ord. No. 98-122; 4-26-2017 by Ord. No. 17-044 ] 
(1)  The name, residence and business addresses and phone number of each person and/or organization sponsoring the temporary street closing. If the sponsor is an organization, the application shall contain the names, residence and business address and phone numbers of the head of the organization and all persons: 
(a)  Having an interest or position of management or control in the organization; and 
(b)  Who are or will be engaged in organizing, promoting, controlling, managing or soliciting participation in the temporary street closing; 
(2)  The date or dates of the temporary street closing with daily hours of operation from 10:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. on Sunday through Thursday and from 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight on Friday and Saturday. 
(3)  The block to be closed. 
(4)  The estimated number of persons who will participate in the block party or recreational event for which the closing is sought. 
(5)  The purpose of the street closing. 
(6)  Whether parking is requested to be restricted or prohibited during the closing. 
(7)  Whether any sound amplification equipment is proposed to be used, and if so, a description of the sound information equipment. 
(8)  Whether or not charity, gratuity or offerings will be solicited or accepted or food, beverages or any merchandise will be sold. 
(9)  Whether the temporary closing will occupy all or any part of the street. 
(10)  ;hg;Any other information which the Municipal Engineer considers reasonably necessary in order to carry out the provisions of this article. 
C.  An application for a street closing shall be filed not less than 30 days before the scheduled date of the temporary street closing. Failure to file within this period is sufficient ground for denial of the permit. 
[Amended 4-26-2017 by Ord. No. 17-044 ]  
§ 296-73. - Responsibilities of applicants. 
Barricades; litter collection; claims for damages; personnel cost; compliance and conditions for issuance of permits. 
A.  Applicants shall provide and remove such barricades and warning devices as are necessary under the direction of the Municipal Engineer. Applicants shall also provide for the collection and removal of all garbage and litter arising out of the temporary street closing. 
B.  Applicants shall agree to assume the defense and indemnify the city, its employees and agents from all suits and claims for damages of any kind whatsoever resulting from the temporary closing of any street and any activities conducted in connection with the closing. 
[Added 10-13-1993 by Ord. No. 93-111] 
C.  Applicants shall pay the cost of city personnel who are required by the city to work overtime hours or other than regular shift hours, or perform special duties during the temporary street closing. 
[Added 10-13-1993 by Ord. No. 93-111] 
D.  Any person, organization or corporation engaged in any activity for profit within the public right-of-way closed via the provisions of this regulation shall pay a fee in advance of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per day for said activity. Any person, organization or corporation that engages in any for profit activity within said right-of-way without paying the advance fee shall be liable for a fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day for said activity. [Added 10-13-1993 by Ord. No. 93-111] 
E.  Prior to the issuance of a permit, applicants must comply with all applicable state laws and city ordinances, including but not limited to laws and ordinances governing charitable solicitations, sale of food, beverages and merchandise and the use of candles, torches or other combustibles. 
F.  Any permit issued under this section shall contain conditions reasonably necessary to minimize the hazards to vehicular and pedestrian traffic and the public health, safety and welfare of the residents of Jersey City.  
§ 296-74. - Standards for issuance of permits; waiver of standards in appropriate cases. 
A.  The Municipal Engineer may issue a permit authorizing the closing of a street when, based upon the information contained in the permit and any other information he considers relevant, he finds that all of the following circumstances exist: 
(1)  The applicant has not made any false or misleading statement of material fact in the application for a permit, or any other document required by the Municipal Engineer. 
(2)  The application complies with the standards of this article and the applicant has paid in advance any fee required and agrees to the conditions imposed in the permit. 
(3)  The time, duration and extent of the temporary street closing will not substantially disrupt the orderly and safe movement of other traffic. 
(4)  The temporary street closing will not prevent the diversion of so great a number of police officers to areas contiguous to the closing as to prevent normal police protection within the city. 
(5)  The concentration of persons will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection or ambulance services to areas contiguous to the street to be closed. 
(6)  The temporary street closing will not unduly interfere with the orderly operation of parks, hospitals, churches, schools or other public and quasi-public institutions within the city. 
(7)  The applicant has provided reasonable means for informing all persons within the street to be closed and all persons participating in the street closing of the terms of the permit and all applicable laws and ordinances. 
(8)  The temporary street closing will not conflict with any other temporary street closing for which a permit has be granted. 
B.  The Municipal Engineer may recommend to the City Council that one or more of the requirements of Subsection A be waived if he finds that such waiver will not affect public safety or convenience. Upon receipt of such recommendation by the Municipal Engineer, the City Council may approve such waiver by resolution. 
C.  Any application for a street closing which is to extend beyond twenty-four (24) continuous hours shall be approved first by the City Council via a resolution. 
[Added 10-13-1993 by Ord. No. 93-111]  
§ 296-75. - Notice of issuance or denial of permit; appeal procedure. 
A.  The Municipal Engineer shall furnish the applicant with written notice of the issuance or denial of a permit within five days after receipt of a completed application or as soon as practicable if the application is made less than ten (10) days in advance of the proposed date of the proposed street closing. If a permit is denied, the Municipal Engineer shall state the reason for the denial. 
B.  An applicant may appeal the denial of a permit to the Business Administrator within two days of the date of denial by the Municipal Engineer. The Business Administrator or his designated representative shall set a hearing on the appeal within 48 hours. After holding a hearing, the Business Administrator may reverse, affirm or modify in any respect the decision of the Municipal Engineer. 
C.  The Municipal Engineer may waive the time limitations in § 296-72 for filing an application and the Business Administrator may waive the time limitations in this section for filing an appeal if either of them finds that unusual circumstances for good cause exist and no unreasonable burden upon the city or its citizens will be created by any waiver. 
D.  The Municipal Engineer shall forward a copy of the permit to the City Clerk who shall keep same on file for inspection. If the proposed closing is to last forty-eight (48) continuous hours or more, the Municipal Engineer shall also forward a copy of said permit to the Commissioner of the New Jersey Department of Transportation pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-8. 
[Amended 10-13-1993 by Ord. No. 93-111]  
§ 296-76. - Revocation of permit. 
Any permit for a temporary street closing may be revoked by the Municipal Engineer or the Chief of Police at any time when by reason of emergency, disaster, disorder, traffic conditions, violation of the conditions of the permit or undue burden on public services, he determines that the health, safety and welfare of the city requires revocation. Notice of revocation of a permit shall be delivered in writing to at least one person named upon the permit by his personal service or by certified mail; or if the closing has commenced, notice may be given orally or in writing, by personal contact or service or by telephone.  
§ 296-77. - Posting of warning signs. 
The Municipal Engineer shall require the posting of proper warning signs of any street closing in any street or portion of a street during the time of closing.  
§ 296-78. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person who closes or attempts to close a street to vehicular or pedestrian traffic without first having obtained a permit from the Municipal Engineer shall be subject to a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00).  
ARTICLE XII - Sidewalk Cafes 
[Adopted 6-24-1998 by Ord. No. 98-080] 
 
§ 296-79. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — A facility established primarily for the service of food and drink which shall include restaurants of all classes, bakeries, ice cream parlors, taverns and delicatessens. [Added 7-20-2011 by Ord. No. 11-076] 
SIDEWALK — That portion of the public easement which lies between the building line and the curb. 
SIDEWALK CAFÉ — The use of partitioned sidewalk space beyond the building line to accommodate tables, chairs, and the serving of food and drink to patrons of a restaurant fronting on that space.  
§ 296-80. - Operation of a Sidewalk Café; Projection into sidewalks.[Amended 7-20-2011 by Ord. No. 11-076] 
A.  No person may operate a sidewalk café without obtaining a license from the Division of Commerce pursuant to the procedures provided for in 296-83 herein. 
B.  No sidewalk café shall be permitted to project into a sidewalk more than half the width of said sidewalk, but only to a maximum of ten (10) feet. In no case shall it extend so far as to leave less than six (6) feet for pedestrian traffic. 
C.  Prior to the issuance of a license, Division of Commerce Inspector will visit and measure the site, take photographs and gather such information as is necessary to fully inform the Departments set forth in 296-83(b).  
§ 296-81. - Permitted location; regulations.[Amended 7-20-2011 by Ord. No. 11-076] 
A.  Sidewalk cafés shall only be permitted in front of a food service establishment that is permitted current conforming under the City's zoning ordinances. Food service establishments seeking to expand a prior nonconforming use shall be required to obtain the appropriate variance from the Jersey City Zoning Board of Adjustment. In those situations where a food service establishment is located on a corner, both the front and side sidewalk areas fronting the food service establishment may be used for the sidewalk café. A survey, schematic, or other evidence of the location of the boundary line must be provided to the Division of Commerce. 
* Editor's Note: See Ch. 345, Zoning. 
B.  All sidewalk cafés shall comply with the following regulations: 
(1)  The sidewalk café area shall be partitioned by a three-sided, movable structure separating the sidewalk café from the public portion of the sidewalk, and which is no less than 30 inches in height and no more than 36 inches in height, providing one opening for entrance and exit which is no less than 42 inches in width and no more than 60 inches in width, and whose boundaries allow patrons and pedestrians to clearly ascertain the entrance and exit to the sidewalk café area. 
(2)  All fence partitions shall be secured in place by means of drilling holes in the sidewalk for the insertion of fence partition posts so as to prevent encroachment of the pedestrian right-of-way. 
(3)  All fence partitions shall be removed and all sidewalk holes shall be capped at the end of each business day and whenever the café is not in use. 
(4)  In a Historic District (as defined in Chapter 34), the movable structures described herein shall be in keeping with the style of the building and the surrounding historic resources. The use of traditional fencing materials such as iron, steel, or other metals, in traditional forms, is encouraged. All partitions must be topped with a horizontal rail with no projections above it. All sidewalk cafés within a Historic District shall obtain a Certificate of No Effect or a Certificate of Appropriateness from the Jersey City Historic Preservation Commission before installation of the structure described herein. 
(5)  The sidewalk café may have an overhead covering consisting of either an individual umbrella over each table or a retractable awning covering all tables and chairs, and no part of the covering shall project over the railing into the public sidewalk area; and umbrellas must be of sufficient height to allow free passage under them. In the Historic District, all awnings and/or umbrellas shall conform to the awning and umbrella standards contained in Section 345-71. 
(6)  Alcoholic beverages, when permitted under this article, shall not be served or consumed on any sidewalk or any other public area which is outside the partitioned area of the sidewalk café. 
(7)  All areas comprising the sidewalk café, including tables and chairs, shall remain clean and orderly at all times. 
(8)  The number of patrons served in the sidewalk café shall be limited to the maximum number indicated on the sidewalk café license. No persons other than those being served and restaurant personnel shall be within the sidewalk café area except for those persons passing through the sidewalk café area to enter or exit the restaurant proper. 
(9)  No planters, flower boxes, menu stands and/or other decorative items are allowed to protrude outside the fence partition area in order to keep clear the pedestrian right-of-way. 
(10)   ;hg;No audio speakers may be placed outside of the Food Service Establishment. 
(11)   ;hg;No advertising signs, banners, or menus shall be placed (on), draped, or attached to the fence partition.  
§ 296-82. - Permitted months and hours of operation.[Amended 7-20-2011 by Ord. No. 11-076] 
Operation of sidewalk cafés shall be permitted from March 15 through November 30 inclusive, or on any day December 1 through March 14 that the temperature rises above 55 degrees Fahrenheit. The hours of operation of sidewalk cafés shall be between 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., Sunday through Wednesday; 8:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., Thursday; and between 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight, Friday and Saturday, except that no alcoholic beverages, when permitted under this article, shall be served in a sidewalk café before noon on any day.  
§ 296-83. - License fee, term, maximum number of patrons, and application; approvals required; revocation; closure; hearing.[Amended 6-22-2005 by Ord. No. 05-073] 
A.  The annual license fee for a sidewalk café shall be as provided in Chapter 160 (Fees and Charges) with no proration for part year, payable to the Division of Commerce. All licenses shall be renewable no later than March 31 of each year. The license shall indicate the maximum number of patrons to be served in the sidewalk café. The Division of Commerce shall issue such license upon duly presented application, together with plans and specifications detailing the sidewalk café area to be licensed, including number of patrons to be served, and adherence to all conditions set forth in this article as well as all applicable city and state laws and regulations. 
B.  Prior to the granting of any license, the Division of Commerce shall notify the Departments of Police and Fire, the Directors of Zoning and Health, the Construction Official and, in the case of restaurants possessing a liquor license, the Alcoholic Beverage Control (ABC) Board. If no objection is received within thirty (30) days, the approval will be granted; provided, however, if a restaurant with a liquor license seeks an outdoor café that would constitute an expansion of the licensed premises, a permit will not be issued until the ABC Board approves the expansion. Any objection shall be in writing and shall set forth the reasons therefor. Sidewalk cafés located within the Historic District meeting all of the requirements contained in Section 345-71 shall obtain a certificate of no effect from the Jersey City Historic Preservation Commission for the partition, tables, chairs and overhead coverings and any other café appurtenances. Any cafés within a Historic District that are deemed by the Historic Preservation Officer not to meet those standards shall require a certificate of appropriateness. Upon receiving an application for a certificate of appropriateness, the Historic Commission shall decide whether to grant the certificate within one month of the receipt of the application. [Amended 7-20-2011 by Ord. No. 11-076] 
C.  The City of Jersey City, through its duly authorized agent, shall revoke the license of any sidewalk café licensee who, upon the expiration of five days after receipt of notice from the City of Jersey City or its agents of a violation of city or state law or any of the requirements set forth in this article, fails to cure the violation. 
D.  The City of Jersey City may require the immediate closure and removal of all sidewalk cafés or other projections or encumbrances upon any street, sidewalk or public easement which are improperly constructed or maintained, or which otherwise create a hazard to the public. 
E.  A licensee aggrieved by any decision to revoke a license, or to close or remove a sidewalk café, shall be afforded a hearing before the Director of the Department of Housing, Economic Development, and Commerce, or his or her designee. Such request for hearing shall be in writing and delivered to the Director of the Division of Commerce, 30 Montgomery Street, Jersey City, New Jersey, 07302. Thereafter, a hearing shall be scheduled and a written decision explaining the reasons for affirming or reversing the decision aggrieved shall be issued. Any revocation shall render the licensee ineligible to receive another license under this article for a period of at least one year from the effective date of the revocation.  
§ 296-84. - Enforcement. [ ] 
The Department of Public Safety and the Division of Commerce shall have the authority to enforce this article.  
§ 296-85. - Insurance required. 
The applicant shall file with the City Clerk and the Division of Commerce, a certificate of liability insurance in the minimum amount of $1,000,000, naming the City of Jersey City and its agents, servants, and employees as additional insureds, which policy shall be kept in full force during the operation of the sidewalk cafe. The policy of insurance must be occurrence based coverage.  
Chapter 299 - SUBDIVISION OF LAND 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City 9-5-1978 as Ord. No. S-114 as Ch. 25 of the 1971 Jersey City Code, as readopted 9-19-1978 by Ord. No. S-128. Amendments noted where applicable.] 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Certificates of occupancy — See Ch. 119. 	Sewers — See Ch. 281. 
Condominium conversion — See Ch. 128. 	Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 296. 
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 131. 	Zoning — See Ch. 345. 
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 172. 	
 
 
§ 299-1. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Land Subdivision Ordinance of Jersey City."  
§ 299-2. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter shall be to provide rules, regulations and standards to guide land subdivision in the City of Jersey City in order to promote the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare of the municipality. It shall be administered to ensure orderly growth and development, the conservation, protection and proper use of land and adequate provision for circulation, utilities and services.  
§ 299-3. - Administration; appeals. 
The approval provisions of this chapter shall be administered by the Jersey City Planning Board whose decision may be appealed to the Municipal Council of the City of Jersey City.  
§ 299-4. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning indicated: 
BUFFER STRIP - An area containing plants, trees, shrubs or other such items deemed appropriate by the Planning Board serving as a division line between two (2) subdivisions or a street and a subdivision. Where live plant material may be impractical or undesirable, a decorative brick wall may be substituted at the discretion of the Planning Board. 
COMPLETE APPLICATION - Any and all material required by this chapter to review the subdivision (application form, affidavit of ownership, boundary descriptions, plat maps in accordance with ordinance specifications, etc.) 
CITY COUNCIL - The chief legislative body of the municipality. 
DESIGNATED REPRESENTATIVE - That person or office so named by the Planning Board to dispense, receive, classify and review subdivision applications. 
DRAINAGE - The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by drains, grading or other means and includes control of runoff to minimize erosion and sedimentation during and after construction or development, as well as prevention and alleviation of flooding. All water shall be contained within the lot and drain from the lot using catch basins, trench drains or their comparable systems. 
DRAINAGE RIGHT-OF-WAY - The lands required for the installation of stormwater sewers or drainage ditches or required along a natural stream or watercourse for preserving the channel and providing for the flow of water therein to safeguard the public against flood damage. 
FINAL APPROVAL - The official action of the Planning Board taken on a preliminary approved major subdivision after all conditions, engineering plans and other requirements have been completed or fulfilled and the required improvements have been installed or guarantees properly posted for their completion. 
FINAL PLANT - The final map of all or a portion of the subdivision which is presented to the Planning Board for final approval in accordance with these regulations and which, if approved, shall be filed with the county recording officer. 
LOT - A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or otherwise permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a unit. 
LOT CONSOLIDATION - An action by the Planning Board eliminating lot lines from contiguous lots for tax billing purposes. 
LOT GROUPING - An action by the Planning Board to group lots for tax billing purposes within the elimination of lot lines. 
LOT SIZE - In conformance with those lot areas and dimensions as determined by Chapter 345, Zoning, of the Code of the City of Jersey City. 
MAINTENANCE GUARANTY - Any security, other than cash, which may be accepted by a municipality for the maintenance of any improvements. 
MAJOR SUBDIVISION - Any subdivision not classified as a minor subdivision. 
MASTER PLAN - A composite of one (1) or more written or graphic proposals for the development of the municipality as set forth and adopted by the Planning Board ( N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28). 
MINOR SUBDIVISION [Amended 5-10-1995 by Ord. No. 95-028] [1] - A subdivision of land for the creation of four (4) or fewer lots, provided that such subdivision does not involve: 
A.  A planned development; 
B.  Any new street; or 
C.  The extension of any off-tract improvement, the cost of which is to be prorated pursuant to Section 30 of P.L. 1975, c. 291 ( N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42). 
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT - Planned unit development, planned unit residential development, residential cluster, planned commercial development or planned industrial development ( N.J.S.A. 40:55D-6). 
OFFICIAL MAP - A map adopted by ordinance which shall be deemed to be conclusive with respect to the location and width of streets, public parks and playgrounds, and drainage rights-of-way shown thereon ( N.J.S.A. 40:50D-32). 
OWNER - An individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership or corporation having sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to subdivide the same under this chapter. 
PERFORMANCE GUARANTY - Any security which may be accepted in lieu of a requirement that certain improvements be made before the Planning Board approves a plat, including cash, performance bonds, escrow agreements and other similar collateral agreements, provided that a municipality shall not require more than ten percent (10%) of the total performance guaranty in cash. 
PLAT - A map or maps of a subdivision. 
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL - Confer on the applicant the following rights for a three-year period from the date of preliminary approval ( N.J.S.A. 40:55D-46): 
A.  That the general terms and conditions on which the preliminary approval was granted shall not be changed. 
B.  That the applicant may submit for final approval on or before the expiration of this three-year period. 
PRELIMINARY PLAT - The preliminary map indicating the proposed layout of the subdivision which is submitted to the Division of City Planning for Planning Board consideration and approval. [2] 
SKETCH PLAT - The sketch map of a subdivision of sufficient accuracy to be used for the purpose of discussion and classification and meeting the requirements of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. [3] 
STREET - Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway, viaduct, alley or other way which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway or a street or way shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law or approved by official action pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law ( N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., as amended) or a street or way on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the county recording officer prior to the appointment of a Planning Board and the grant to such Board of the power to review plats, and any way shown on a plat approved by the city, and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, sidewalks, parking areas and other areas within the street line. 
SUBDIVIDER - Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, company, partnership, corporation, trust or other legal entity commencing proceedings under this chapter to effect a subdivision of land for himself or herself or for another. 
SUBDIVISION - The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for sale or development. The following shall not be considered subdivisions within the meaning of this chapter, if no new streets are created: divisions of land found by the Planning Board or Subdivision Committee thereof appointed by the Chairman to be for agricultural purposes where all resulting parcels are five (5) acres or larger in size; divisions of property by testamentary or intestate provisions; divisions of property upon court order, including but not limited to judgments of foreclosure; consolidation of existing lots by deed or other recorded instrument; and the conveyance of one (1) or more adjoining lots, tracts or parcels of land owned by the same person or persons and all of which are found and certified by the administrative officer to conform to the requirements of the municipal development regulations and are shown and designated as separate lots, tracts or parcels on the Tax Map or atlas of the municipality. The term "subdivision" shall also include the term "resubdivision." [4] 
VARIANCE - Permission to depart from the literal requirements of a zoning ordinance. [5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. 

--- (2) --- 
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. 

--- (3) --- 
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. 

--- (4) --- 
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. 

--- (5) --- 
Editor's Note: Original Articles V through VII, which immediately followed this section and dealt with plat submission requirements and details, were deleted 11-25-1987 by Ord. No. C-544. 
 
§ 299-5. - Design standards. 
The subdivider shall observe the following requirements and principles of land subdivision in the design of each subdivision or portion thereof: 
A.  General standards. The subdivision plat shall conform to design standards set for encouraging good development patterns within the city. Where an Official Map or Master Plan have been adopted, the subdivision shall conform to the proposals and conditions set therein. The streets, drainage rights-of-way, school sites, public parks and playgrounds as shown on an officially adopted Master Plan or Official Map shall be considered in approval of subdivision plats. Where no official map exists, streets and drainage rights-of-way shall be shown on the final plat in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-39 and shall be such as to lend themselves to the harmonious development of the municipality and enhance the public welfare in accordance with the following design standards: 
B.  Street standards. 
(1)  The arrangement of streets not shown on the Master Plan or Official Map shall be such as to provide for the appropriate extension of existing streets. 
(2)  Minor streets shall be so designed as to discourage through traffic. 
(3)  Subdivisions abutting arterial streets shall be provided with a buffer strip for planting or some other means of separation of through and local traffic as the Planning Board may determine appropriate. 
(4)  The width of streets shall be measured from lot line to lot line and shall not be less than the following: 
(a)  Principal arterial street: eighty (80) feet. 
(b)  Minor arterial street: seventy (70) feet. 
(c)  Collector street: sixty (60) feet. 
(d)  Local street: forty (40) feet. 
(e)  The right-of-way width for internal roads and alleys in multifamily, commercial and industrial developments shall be determined on an individual basis and shall in all cases be of sufficient width and design to safely accommodate the maximum traffic, parking and loading needs and maximum access for firefighting equipment. 
(5)  No subdivision showing reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be approved except where the control and disposal of land comprising such strips has been placed in the governing body under conditions approved by the Planning Board. 
(6)  Subdivisions that adjoin or include existing streets that do not conform to width as shown on the Master Plan or Official Map or the street width requirements of this chapter shall dedicate additional width along either one or both sides of the said road. If the subdivision is along one (1) side only, one-half (½) of the required extra width shall be dedicated. 
(7)  Grades of arterial streets shall not exceed four percent (4%). Grades of other streets shall not exceed ten percent (10%). 
(8)  Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as is possible and in no case shall be less than sixty degrees (60°). The block corners at intersections shall be rounded at the curbline with a curve radius of not less than twenty-five (25) feet for residential development and fifty (50) feet for industrial development. 
(9)  Street jogs with center-line offsets of less than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet shall be prohibited. 
(10)  Dead-end streets (culs-de-sac) shall not be longer than six hundred (600) feet and shall provide a turnaround at the end with a radius of not less than thirty (30) feet and tangent wherever possible to the right side of the street. 
(11)  If a dead-end street is of temporary nature, a similar turnaround shall be provided and provisions made for future extension of the street and reversion of the excess right-of-way to the adjoining property. 
(12)  No street shall have a name which will duplicate, or nearly duplicate, the names of existing streets. The continuation of an existing street shall have the same name. All streets shall be approved by the Planning Board. 
C.  Block standards. 
(1)  Block length and width shall be of sufficient acreage so as to accommodate the size of lots required by Chapter 345, Zoning, and shall provide convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street traffic. 
(2)  In blocks over one thousand (1,000) feet long, pedestrian crosswalks may be required in locations deemed necessary by the Planning Board. Such walkway shall be ten (10) feet wide, landscaped and be straight from sidewalk to sidewalk. 
D.  Lot standards. 
(1)  Lot dimensions and area shall not be less than the requirements of Chapter 345, Zoning. 
(2)  So far as is practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight streets and radial to curved streets. 
(3)  Each lot shall front upon an improved street, except in those instances conforming with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-35 and 40:55D-36. 
(4)  Where land has been dedicated for a widening of existing streets, lots shall begin at such new street line and all setbacks shall be measured from such lines. 
E.  Public use and service area standards. 
(1)  In a large-scale development, easements along rear property lines or elsewhere for utility installations may be required. Such easements shall be at least fifteen (15) feet wide and located after consultation with whose companies and municipal departments concerned. 
(2)  Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourse and such further width and construction, or both, as would be adequate for the purpose. 
(3)  Natural features such as trees, brooks, hilltops and views shall be preserved wherever possible in designing any subdivision containing such features.  
§ 299-6. - Violations and penalties. 
A.  If, before favorable approval by the Planning Board has been obtained, any person transfers or sells or agrees to sell as owner or agent any land which forms a part of a subdivision on which the Planning Board is required to act, such person shall be subject to a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.), and each parcel, plat or lot so disposed shall be deemed a separate violation ( N.J.S.A. 40:55D-55). 
B.  In addition to the foregoing, if the streets in the subdivision are not such that a structure on said land in the subdivision would meet requirements for a building permit, the city may institute and maintain a civil action: 
(1)  For injunctive relief; 
(2)  To set aside and invalidate any conveyance made pursuant to such a contract or sale if a certificate of compliance has not been issued in accordance with Section 44 of the Municipal Land Use Law ( N.J.S.A. 40:55D-56) but only if the municipality has a Planning Board. 
C.  In any such action, the transferee, purchaser or grantee shall be entitled to a lien upon the portion of land from which the subdivision was made that remains in the possession of the subdivider or his assigns or successors, to secure the return of any deposit made or purchase price paid, and also a reasonable search fee, survey expense and title-closing expense, if any. Any such action must be brought within two (2) years after the date of the recording of the instrument of transfer, sale or conveyance of such land, or within six (6) years, if unrecorded ( N.J.S.A. 40:55D-55).  
§ 299-7. - Vacancies. 
These rules, regulations and standards shall be considered the minimum requirements for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Jersey City. Any action taken by the Planning Board under the terms of this chapter shall give primary consideration to the above-mentioned matters and to the welfare of the entire community. However, if the subdivider or his agent can clearly demonstrate that, because of peculiar conditions pertaining to his land, a literal enforcement of one (1) or more of these regulations is impracticable or will exact undue hardship, the Planning Board may permit such variance or variances as may be reasonable and within the general purpose and intent of the rules, regulations and standards established by this chapter ( N.J.S.A. 40:55D-51).  
Chapter 304 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
History— Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City as indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable. 
Cross reference— Condominium conversions, Ch. 128; fees and charges, Ch. 160; multiple dwellings, Ch. 218. 
 
ARTICLE IV - 2018 Payroll Tax  
ARTICLE I - Parking Tax 
[Adopted 2-25-1982 by Ord. No. MC-114; amended in its entirety 6-14-2000 by Ord. No. 00-065] 
 
§ 304-1. - Title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Jersey City Parking Tax."  
§ 304-2. - Tax imposed. 
[Amended 9-22-2004 by Ord. No. 04-100; 11-10-2004 by Ord. No. 04-137] 
A.  There is hereby imposed a fifteen percent (15%) tax on any fees whether paid directly, or paid as part of the rent charged in a lease for parking, garaging or storing of motor vehicles, in any commercial, industrial or residential property. The tax is imposed on all fees, including but not limited to, valet parking fees and any fees charged by any hospital, whether such hospital is organized as a for-profit or nonprofit organization, and fees charged by any body corporate and politic or instrumentality of the State of New Jersey, including, but not limited to, New Jersey Transit Corporation, which is a body corporate and politic of the State of New Jersey pursuant to N.J.S.A. 27:25-4. 
B.  All taxes imposed by this section shall be collected on behalf of the City of Jersey City by the person providing parking services to the customer. 
C.  The Division of Licenses and Fees is hereby designated as collector of parking taxes. The methods for reporting taxes due shall be on forms and in accordance with procedures prescribed by the Business Administrator from time to time. 
D.  Every person required to collect any taxes imposed by this article shall be personally liable for the tax imposed, collected or required to be collected. Any such person shall have the same right in respect to collecting the tax from his or her customer or in respect to nonpayment of the tax by the customer as if the tax were a part of the parking or storage fee and payable at the same time; provided, however, that the Business Administrator of the City of Jersey City shall be joined as a party in any action brought to collect the tax. 
E.  No person required to collect any tax hereunder shall advertise or hold out to any person or to the public in general in any manner, directly or indirectly, that the tax is not considered as an element in the fee payable by the customer, that he will pay the tax, that the tax will not be separately charged and stated to the customer or that the tax will be refunded to the customer. 
F.  If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at a rate of twelve percent (12%) per annum. on the amount of the tax due and an additional penalty of ½ of 1% of the amount of the unpaid tax for each month or fraction thereof during which the tax remains unpaid shall be added and collected. Where action is brought for the recovery of any tax hereunder, the person liable shall, in addition, be liable for the cost of collection and the interest and penalties imposed. 
G.  No tax shall be imposed with respect to any parking, garaging or motor vehicle storage fees charged by: [Amended 11-12-2014 by Ord. No. 14-017 ] 
(1)  Any religious, charitable, educational institution. 
(2)  Any nonprofit organization except a hospital. 
(3)  Garages or parking areas which are part of premises (a) occupied solely as a private one or two family dwelling or (b) leased to residential tenants of multiple dwellings. 
(4)  The Division of Parking Enforcement; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to fees for the parking, garaging or storing of motor vehicles on property owned by an exempt organization and leased to any nonexempt organization. 
(5)  Under the express language of N.J.S.A. 40:48C-42, bodies corporate and politic or instrumentalities of the State of New Jersey, including, but not limited to New Jersey Transit Corporation, which is a body corporate and politic of the State of New Jersey pursuant to N.J.S.A. 27:25-4, are not exempt from this tax.  
§ 304-3. - Payment of tax; records to be kept. 
A.  Taxes due under this article shall be paid quarterly. Returns for each quarter are due on or before the 15th of the month following the end of the quarter, that is, April 15, July 15, October 15 and January 15. 
B.  A quarterly parking tax return is required to be filed by every person responsible for the collection of parking taxes whether or not any tax is due for that quarter. Payment of the tax due shall be made with the filed return. 
C.  Every person responsible for the collection of parking taxes shall maintain books and/or records to substantiate the quarterly tax returns, even if no tax is due. 
D.  Pursuant to state law, any person who fails or refuses to file any return required under this article, any person who refuses to permit an officer or agent designated by the City of Jersey City to examine his or her books, records and papers and any person who knowingly files an incomplete, false or fraudulent return or attempts to do anything whatsoever to avoid the full disclosure of the tax due under this article to avoid the payment of the whole or any part thereof is a disorderly person. 
E.  The failure of any person to receive or procure the forms required for filing returns required under this article shall not excuse him from filing a return.  
§ 304-4. - Use of revenues. 
A maximum of twelve percent (12%) of the revenues collected from the tax imposed under this article in any prior calendar year shall be used for administrative costs.  
ARTICLE II - Delinquent Taxes 
[Adopted 5-28-1987 by Ord. No. C-478; amended in its entirety 4-28-1993 by Ord. No. 93-040] 
 
§ 304-5. - Installment payments; applications. 
A.  The City Council may from time to time enter into agreements for the redemption of tax sale liens and water and sewerage liens held by the city with financially qualified owners of the real property listed in Subsection I. 
B.  Such agreements shall provide for a reasonable down payment in an amount to be recommended by the Tax Collector based upon the financial condition of the taxpayer and to be approved by Council and for the redemption of the balance of the lien in substantially equal monthly installments over a period of not to exceed three years. 
C.  Owners of buildings subject to tax-sale liens and water and sewerage liens may apply to the Tax Collector for redemption of the lien by installment payments. All applications for redemption by installment payments shall include such information as the Tax Collector considers relevant, including evidence that the applicant has been unable to secure a bank loan, and such financial information as will enable the Tax Collector to determine the ability of the applicant to discharge his or her obligation by installment payments. In appropriate cases, the Tax Collector may waive the requirement that an applicant has unsuccessfully applied for a bank loan if the director determines that the applicant is otherwise qualified for an installment agreement. The Tax Collector shall then forward the application to an ad hoc committee of the Council with a recommendation to either approve or reject the application, or to modify the terms of the installment payment agreement. The committee shall review all applications and provide its recommendation to the Council as a whole. The recommendation of the committee may include the amount of downpayment to be required by the owner as a condition to approving the installment payment agreement. 
D.  The Tax Collector shall review each application and shall forward approved applications to the City Council, together with a proposed resolution and redemption agreement which shall specify: 
(1)  The total taxes owed. 
(2)  The down payment to be made by the applicant. 
(3)  The balance due on the tax sale certificate. 
(4)  The amount of each monthly payment. 
(5)  The term of redemption. 
E.  The resolution shall provide for the suspension pending redemption of any action by the municipality to foreclose the right of the redemption if the installment payments are regularly and properly made in accordance with the schedule of payments provided in the resolution. 
F.  If an installment is not paid when due or redemption is not completed in the time fixed in the resolution, the Tax Collector may, in his or her discretion, cancel the agreement and begin an action in the Superior Court to foreclose the right of redemption of the tax sale lien. 
G.  The Tax Collector shall establish such records and procedures as are necessary to administer and enforce agreements approved by the Municipal Council under this article. The Tax Collector shall furnish quarterly reports to the Municipal Council as to the number of installment agreements in effect, the payments made under each agreement and number and amount of delinquent payments, if any. 
H.  When the city agrees to grant a delinquent taxpayer the opportunity to pay delinquent taxes on an installment basis where there is a tax sale lien held by the city, pursuant to N.S.J.A. 54:5-65, and said taxpayer fails to comply with said agreement, no further agreement on any and all property of said taxpayer, whether said taxpayer held such property prior to or acquired after said taxpayer's reneging, shall be entered into by the city with said taxpayer, unless the taxpayer shall make application to the Municipal Council and obtain its approval for any such further agreement. 
I.  Tax-sale liens against the following real property shall be eligible for redemption pursuant to this section: 
(1)  Real property residential or commercial units or a combination of each. 
(2)  Real property owned by a nonprofit organization which is not otherwise exempt from taxation. 
(3)  Real property without any capital improvements thereon. 
(4)  Real property which qualifies as an industrial use under Chapter 345, Zoning, of the Code of the City of Jersey City.  
ARTICLE III - Five-Year Tax Exemption[2] 
[Adopted 9-8-1999 by Ord. No. 99-138; 6-8-2005 by Ord. 05-060] [3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— For statutory provisions relating to this topic, see N.J.SA. 40A:21-1 et seq. 

--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— This ordinance also repealed former Art. III, Five-Year Tax Exemption, adopted 3-9-1994 by Ord. No. 94-011, as amended 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050. 
 
§ 304-6. - Exemptions authorized. 
[Amended 4-24-02 by Ord. No. 02-048; 6-8-2005 by Ord. 05-060] 
The city hereby authorizes the utilization of tax exemption in accordance with Article VIII, Section I, paragraph 6, of the New Jersey Constitution and establishes the eligibility of residential and multiple dwellings, commercial and industrial structures for five-year tax exemptions to the maximum degree permitted by N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1 et seq. throughout the city.  
§ 304-7. - Definitions. 
[Amended 4-24-02 by Ord. No. 02-048] 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
ASSESSOR — The officer of the City charged with the duty of assessing real property for the purpose of general taxation. 
COMMERCIAL or INDUSTRIAL STRUCTURE — A structure or part thereof used for the manufacturing, processing or assembling of material or manufactured products or for research, office, industrial, commercial, retail, recreational, hotel or motel facilities or warehousing purposes or for any combination thereof, which the Municipal Council determines will tend to maintain or provide gainful employment within the city, assist in the economic development of the city, maintain or increase the tax base of the city and maintain or diversify and expand commerce within the city. However, it shall not include any structure or part thereof used or to be used by any business relocated from another qualifying municipality unless the total square footage of the floor area of the structure or part thereof used or to be used by the business at the new site, together with the total square footage of the land used or to be used by the business at the new site, exceeds the total square footage of that utilized by the business at its current site of operations by at least ten percent; and the property that the business is relocating to has been the subject of a remedial action plan costing in excess of two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) performed pursuant to an administrative consent order entered into pursuant to authority vested in the Commissioner of Environmental Protection under N.J.S.A. 13:1D-1 et seq., the Water Pollution Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:10A-1 et seq., the Solid Waste Management Act, N.J.S.A. , 13:1E-1 et seq., and the Spill Compensation and Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:10-23.11 et seq. 
COMPLETION or COMPLETED — Substantially ready for the intended use for which a building or structure is constructed, improved or converted, which shall ordinarily mean the date upon which a certificate of occupancy whether temporary or final, is issued. 
CONDOMINIUM — A property created or recorded as a condominium pursuant to the Condominium Act, N.J.S.A. 46:8B-1 et seq. 
CONSTRUCTION — The provision of a new dwelling, multiple dwelling or commercial or industrial structure or the enlargement of the volume of an existing multiple dwelling or commercial or industrial structure by more than thirty percent (30%), but shall not mean the conversion of an existing building or structure to another use. 
CONVERSION or CONVERSION ALTERATION — The alteration or renovation of a nonresidential building or structure, or hotel, motel, motor hotel or guest house, in such manner as to convert the building or structure from its previous use to use as a dwelling or multiple dwelling. 
COOPERATIVE — A housing corporation or association wherein the holder of a share or membership interest thereof is entitled to possess and occupy for dwelling purposes a house, apartment or other unit of housing owned by the corporation or association or to purchase a unit of housing owned by the corporation or association. 
COST — When used with respect to exemptions for dwellings or multiple dwellings, only the cost or fair market value of direct labor and materials used in improving a multiple dwelling, or of converting another building or structure to a multiple dwelling or of constructing a dwelling, or of converting another building or structure to a dwelling, including any architectural, engineering and contractor's fees associated therewith, as the owner of the property, following completion of the project, shall cause to be certified to the Municipal Council by an independent and qualified architect, licensed in the State of New Jersey or a certified construction cost audit by an independent certified accountant licensed in the State of New Jersey. 
DWELLING or DWELLING USE — A building or part of a building used, to be used or held for use as a home or residence, including accessory buildings located on the same premises, together with the land upon which such building or buildings are erected and which may be necessary for the fair enjoyment thereof, but shall not mean any building or part of a building defined as a multiple dwelling pursuant to the Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Law, N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1 et seq. A dwelling shall include, as they are separately conveyed to individual owners, individual residences within a cooperative, if purchased separately by the occupants thereof, and individual residences within a horizontal property regime or a condominium, but shall not include general common elements or common elements of such horizontal property regime or condominium as defined pursuant to the Horizontal Property Act, N.J.S.A. 46:8A-1 et seq., or the Condominium Act, N.J.S.A. 46:8B-1 et seq., or of a cooperative, if the residential units are owned separately. 
EXEMPTION — That portion of the Assessor's full and true value of any improvement, conversion alteration or construction not regarded as increasing the taxable value of a property pursuant to the law. 
HORIZONTAL PROPERTY REGIME — A property submitted to a horizontal property regime pursuant to the Horizontal Property Act, N.J.S.A. 46:8A-1 et seq. 
IMPROVEMENT — A modernization, rehabilitation, renovation, alteration or repair which produces a physical change in an existing building or structure that improves the safety, sanitation, decency or attractiveness of the building or structure as a place for human habitation or work, and which does not change its permitted use. In the case of a multiple dwelling, it includes only improvements which affect common areas or elements, or three or more dwelling units within the multiple dwelling. In the case of a multiple dwelling or commercial or industrial structure, it shall not include ordinary painting, repairs and replacements of maintenance items or an enlargement of the volume of an existing structure by more than thirty percent (30%). In no case shall it include the repair of fire or other damage to a property for which payment of a claim was received by any person from an insurance company at any time during the three-year period immediately preceding the filing of an application pursuant to this Act. 
MULTIPLE DWELLING or MULTIPLE DWELLING USE — A building or structure meeting the definition of "multiple dwelling" set forth in the Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Law, N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1 et seq., and means for the purpose of improvement or construction the general common elements and common elements of a condominium, a cooperative or a horizontal property regime. 
MUNICIPAL CHARGES — Property taxes, assessments, water or sewer charges and any other charge for which a lien may be created, together with interest and penalties thereon, including all advertising fees and costs of sale.  
§ 304-8. - Improvements to dwellings. 
[Amended 4-24-02 by Ord. No. 02-048] 
A.  Improvements to dwellings more than twenty (20) years old are eligible for tax exemption for a period of five years. This exemption is subject to the approval of the Tax Assessor. 
B.  Upon approval, the city, in determining value, shall regard the first twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000) in the Assessor's full and true value of improvements for each dwelling unit primarily and directly affected by the improvements as not increasing the value of the property, notwithstanding that the value of the property to which the improvements are made is increased thereby. 
C.  During the exemption period, the assessment on the property shall not be less than the assessment thereon existing immediately prior to the improvements, unless there is damage to the dwelling through action of the elements sufficient to warrant a reduction.  
§ 304-9. - New construction of dwellings and conversions to dwelling use. 
A.  Construction of new dwellings or the conversion of other buildings and structures, including unutilized public buildings, to dwelling use are eligible for tax exemption for a period of five years. This exemption is subject to the approval of the Assessor or by resolution of the Municipal Council. 
B.  Tax exemptions for projects whose estimated conventional taxes on the improvement would be less than two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) per annum are subject to approval of the Tax Assessor. 
C.  Tax exemptions for projects whose estimated conventional taxes on the improvement would be more than two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) per annum, may only be approved by resolution of the Municipal Council. 
D.  Upon approval, the city, in determining value, shall regard thirty percent (30%) of the Assessor's full and true value of the dwelling constructed or conversion alterations made as not increasing the value of the property for a period of five years. This exemption is to be granted notwithstanding that the value of the property upon which the construction or conversion occurs is increased thereby.  
§ 304-10. - Improvements to multiple dwellings and conversions to multiple dwellings. 
A.  Improvements to multiple dwellings or conversions of other buildings and structures, including unutilized public buildings, to multiple dwelling use are eligible for tax exemption for a period of five years. This exemption is subject to the approval of the Assessor or by Resolution of the Municipal Council. 
B.  Tax exemptions for projects whose estimated conventional taxes on the improvement would be less than two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) per annum are subject to the approval of the Assessor. Upon approval, the city, in determining value, shall regard thirty percent (30%) of the Assessor's full and true value of the improvements or conversion alterations as not increasing the value of the property for a period of five years. 
C.  Tax exemptions for projects whose estimated conventional taxes on the improvement would be more than two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) per annum, may only be approved by resolution of the Municipal. Upon approval, the city in determining value, shall regard up to the Assessor's full and true value of the improvements or conversion alterations as not increasing the value of the property for a period of five years. 
D.  This exemption is to be granted notwithstanding that the value of the property to which the improvements or conversion alterations are made is increased thereby. During the exemption period, the assessment on the property shall not be less than the assessment existing thereon immediately prior to the improvement or conversion alteration, unless there is damage to the multiple dwelling through action of the elements sufficient to warrant a reduction.  
§ 304-11. - Improvements to commercial and industrial structures. 
A.  Improvements to commercial and industrial structures are eligible for tax exemption for a period of five years. This exemption is subject to the approval of the assessor or by resolution of the Municipal Council. 
B.  Tax exemptions for projects whose estimated conventional taxes on the improvement would be less than two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) per annum, are subject to the approval of the assessor. Upon approval, the city, in determining value, shall regard thirty percent (30%) of the assessor's full and true value of the improvements as not increasing the value of the property for a period of five years. 
C.  Tax exemptions for projects whose estimated conventional taxes on the improvement would be more than two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) per annum, may only be approved by resolution of the Municipal. Upon approval, the city in determining value, shall regard up to the assessor's full and true value of the improvements as not increasing the value of the property for a period of five years. 
D.  This exemption is to be granted notwithstanding that the value of the property to which the improvement is made is increased thereby. During the exemption period, the assessment on the property shall not be less than the assessment thereon existing immediately prior to the improvements, unless there is damage to the structure through action of the elements sufficient to warrant a reduction.  
§ 304-12. - New construction of commercial or industrial structures or multiple dwellings by tax agreement. 
[Amended 4-24-02 by Ord. No. 02-048; 8-22-2007 by Ord. No. 07-146] 
A.  New construction of commercial and industrial structures and multiple dwellings are eligible for tax exemption for a period of five years. This exemption may only be approved by Ordinance of the Municipal Council. 
B.  Applicants for tax exemption shall provide the Director of the Department of Housing, Economic Development and Commerce and the Municipal Council with an application setting forth the following information: 
(1)  A general description of a project for which exemption is sought. 
(2)  A legal description of all real estate necessary for the project. 
(3)  Plans, drawings and other documents as may be required by the Municipal Council to demonstrate the structure and design of the project. 
(4)  A description of the number, classes and type of employees to be employed at the project site within two years of completion of the project. 
(5)  A statement of the reasons for seeking tax exemption on the project and a description of the benefits to be realized by the applicant if a tax agreement is granted. 
(6)  A Good Faith estimate of the cost of completing such project, together with the expected method or plan of financing the Improvements. 
(7)  A construction time schedule and projected time schedule. 
(8)  A statement showing the real property taxes currently being assessed at the project site; estimated tax payments that would be made annually by the applicant on the project during the period of the agreement; and estimated tax payments that would be made by the applicant on the project during the first full year following the termination or expiration of the tax agreement. 
(9)  If the project is a Commercial or Industrial Structure, a description of any lease agreement between the applicant and proposed users of the project and a history and description of the users' businesses. 
(10)  If the project is a Multiple Dwelling, a description of the number and type of Dwellings units to be provided, a description of the common elements or general common elements and a statement of the proposed initial rentals or sales prices of the Dwellings units according to type and of any rental lease or resale restrictions to apply to the Dwellings units respecting low or moderate income housing. 
(11)  A disclosure statement of the interests of all parties, including subsidiary companies, in the property project. 
(12)  The owners certification that the improvement as proposed meets the requirements of the redevelopment plan or Chapter 345, Zoning. 
(13)  The owner shall sign the application and certify as to the truth and accuracy of the contents thereof. 
(14)  Such other pertinent information as the Director of the Department of Housing, Economic Development and Commerce and Municipal Council may require on a case-by-case basis. 
C.  The owner of a project shall enter into a written agreement with the City to pay a tax on the improvements in an amount equal to a percentage of taxes otherwise due according to the following schedule: [ Amended 11-26-2013 by Ord. No. 13-129 ] 
(1)  In the first full tax year after completion, no payment in lieu of taxes otherwise due. 
(2)  In the second tax year, an amount not less than twenty percent (20%) of taxes otherwise due. 
(3)  In the third tax year, an amount not less than forty percent (40%) of taxes otherwise due. 
(4)  In the fourth tax year, an amount not less than sixty percent (60%) of taxes otherwise due. 
(5)  In the fifth tax year, an amount not less than eighty percent (80%) of taxes otherwise due. 
The agreement shall provide that the tax shall be billed and collected in the same manner as any conventional taxes, and any arrearages shall accrue that rate of interest charged for delinquent real estate taxes. 
D.  The Tax Collector shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of the tax agreement. In the event that a property owner subject to a tax agreement ceases to operate or disposes of the property or fails to meet the conditions for qualifying for the exemption, the local property taxes due for all the prior years subject to exemption and for the current year shall be payable as if no exemption had been granted. The Tax Collector shall notify the property owner and the Municipal Council within fifteen (15) days of the date of disqualification of the amount of taxes due. In the event that the subject property has been transferred to a new owner and it is determined that the new owner will continue to use the property pursuant to the qualifying conditions, no additional tax shall be due, the exemption shall continue and the agreement shall remain in effect. 
E.  The City Clerk shall forward a copy of all tax exemption agreements to the Director of the Division of Local Government Services in the Department of Community Affairs within thirty (30) days of the date of execution.  
§ 304-13. - General requirements. 
[Amended 4-24-02 by Ord. No. 02-048; 8-22-2007 by Ord. No. 07-148; 3-12-2014 by Ord. No. 14-027 ] 
A.  Every applicant for tax exemption shall file that form of application prescribed by the Director of the New Jersey Division of Taxation in the Department of Treasury with the Assessor. In addition, a tax exemption subject to a tax agreement requiring approval of the Municipal Council shall also file the application described in Section 304-12B. 
(1)  every application for a tax exemption subject to a tax agreement under Section 304-12B, must be filed and approved before proceeding with the project, that is, prior to construction commencing; 
(2)  all other applications for tax exemption must be filed up to thirty (30) days, including Saturdays and Sundays, following the Completion of the Improvement, Conversion or Construction. 
B.  Every application for tax exemption, including projects which must also be approved by the Municipal Council, shall be approved and allowed by the Assessor to the degree that the application is consistent with the provisions of this article; that is, the Improvement, Conversion Alteration or Construction for which the application is made must qualify pursuant to the provisions of the law and this article. The applicant shall submit data in support of the application as the Assessor or City shall require. 
C.  The granting of an exemption and, if appropriate, tax agreement, shall be recorded and made a permanent part of the official tax records of the taxing district, which record shall contain a notice of the termination date thereof. 
D.  As to applications which require approval by the Municipal Council, the Assessor shall forward the application to the Director of Housing, Economic Development and Commerce and the Municipal Council for action. 
E.  No application shall be filed unless it is accompanied by the fees as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges, to be paid as compensation for legal and related administrative review by the City. 
F.  No exemptions shall be granted for any property for which property taxes or any other Municipal Charges, including interest, are delinquent or remain unpaid or for which penalties for nonpayment are due. 
G.  All taxes and other Municipal Charges must be paid timely and in full during the term of the exemption. The failure to timely pay any tax or other Municipal Charge, including land tax, shall permit the Tax Collector to terminate the tax exemption and subject the property to fall taxation. 
H.  Any tax appeal filed for the exempt property during the term of the exemption shall immediately void the tax exemption.  
§ 304-14. - Additional improvements eligible for tax exemptions. 
[Amended 8-22-2007 by Ord. No. 07-148] 
An additional Improvement, Conversion or Construction completed to a property already granted an exemption during the period in which the exemption is in effect shall be eligible for an additional exemption, just as if such property had not received a previous exemption. The additional Improvement, Conversion or Construction shall be considered as separate for purposes of calculating the exemption, except that the assessed value of any previous Improvement, Conversion or Construction shall be added to the assessed valuation as it was prior to that Improvement, Conversion or Construction for the purpose of determining the assessed value of the property from which any additional exemption is to be subtracted.  
§ 304-15. - Notice to be mailed. 
[Amended 8-22-2007 by Ord. No. 07-148] 
The Tax Collector shall include an appropriate notice in the mailing of the annual property tax bills to property owners advising them of the availability of tax exemptions under this ordinance.  
§ 304-16. - Report of real property taxes. 
[Amended 8-22-2007 by Ord. No. 07-148] 
A.  The Assessor, on behalf of the Municipal Council, shall report, on or before October 1 of each year, to the Director of the Division of Local Government Services in the Department of Community Affairs and to the Director of the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury the total amount of real property taxes exempted within the city in the current tax year for each of the following: 
(1)  Improvements of Dwellings. 
(2)  Construction of Dwellings. 
(3)  Improvements and Conversions of Multiple Dwellings. 
(4)  Improvements of Commercial or Industrial Structures. 
(5)  Construction of Multiple Dwellings under tax agreements. 
(6)  Construction of Commercial or Industrial Structures under tax agreements. 
B.  In the case of Subsections A(5) and A(6) above, the report shall state instead the total amount of payments made in lieu of taxes according to each formula utilized by the municipality, and the difference between that total amount and the total amount of real property taxes which would have been paid on the project had the tax agreement not been in effect, for the current tax year.  
§ 304-17. - Expiration (Sunset Provision). 
[Amended 8-22-2007 by Ord. No. 07-146; 11-10-2015 by Ord. No. 15-146 ] 
No application for tax exemption shall be filed for an exemption to take initial effect for tax year 2026 or any tax year thereafter, unless this ordinance is readopted by the Municipal Council in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:21-4.  
ARTICLE IV - 2018 Payroll Tax[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18-133 , adopted November 20, 2018, amended the Code by repealing former Art. IV, §§ 304-18—304-24, and adding a new Art. IV. Former Art. IV pertained to the 1995 payroll tax, and derived from Ord. No. 95-117, adopted December 6, 1995; and Ord. No. 97-052, adopted August 13, 1997. 
 
§ 304-18. - Definitions. 
[Added 11-20-2018 by Ord. No. 18-133 ] 
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
AUDIT NOTICE — A letter issued by the Director to an employer or supposed employer requesting information regarding its potential payroll tax liability. 
CERTIFICATE OF INDEBTEDNESS — A certificate issued by the Director reflecting an unpaid assessment of payroll taxes by an employer. A certificate of indebtedness shall reflect the name and address of the taxpayer, the amount of the debt so certified as being owed and the periods for which such amounts are owed. 
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION — A corporation or association organized not for profit and operated exclusively for religious, educational, charitable or hospital purposes, subject to section 304-19.B of this Chapter. 
CITY — The City of Jersey City, in the County of Hudson, State of New Jersey. 
DIRECTOR — The Chief Financial Officer of the City, including his or her designee and/or agent. 
EMPLOYEE — Any individual in the service of an employer, under an appointment or contract of hire or apprenticeship, express or implied, oral or written, pursuant to which such employer controls or has the right to control the manner and performance of the employee's work. In addition, for purposes of this tax, and irrespective of the common law tests for determining the existence of an independent contractor relationship, an individual performing work or service for compensation shall be deemed to be an employee of the person for whom the work or service is performed unless: 
(1)  Such individual has been and will continue to be free from control or direction over the performance of such work or service under his/her appointment of contract of hire or apprenticeship; 
(2)  Such work or service is outside the usual course of the business of the person for which such service is performed; or, 
(3)  Such individual is customarily engaged in an independently established trade, occupation, business or profession. 
A licensed real estate salesperson is deemed an employee of the broker under whom he or she is licensed. 
EMPLOYER — Any individual, entity, corporation, company, association, society, firm, partnership, limited liability company or partnership, joint stock company, trust, estate, or foundation, whether or not such entity is for profit or nonprofit entity, and regardless of where such entity is formed or operated, standing in the position of employer in an employer-employee relationship, having one or more employees, and having a payroll in excess of $2,500.00 in any calendar quarter; other than: 
(1)  The government of the United States; 
(2)  The State of New Jersey, or a County, municipality, school district or special district of the State; 
(3)  An interstate agency; 
(4)  An agency or instrumentality of any entity enumerated in subsection (1), (2), or (3) above; 
(5)  Any insurance company formed by authority of another state or foreign country, subject to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 17:32-15; 
(6)  Charitable organization, as defined above. 
An entity which contracts with any of the entities identified in subsections (1)—(6) shall not be exempt from the definition of "employer." 
FINAL NOTICE — A notice of deficiency, which shall be issued by the Director prior to the commencement of legal proceedings to seek collection. 
INTERIM NOTICE — A notice of proposed assessment, which offers the taxpayer a hearing with the Director. The Director may combine an audit notice with an interim notice. 
INTERNAL REVENUE CODE — The Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. 
LEASED EMPLOYEE — Any person who is not an employee of the recipient employer and who provides services to the recipient employer in the City if (1) such services are provided pursuant to an agreement between the recipient employer and any other person, and (2) services are performed under primary direction or control of the recipient. 
A leased employee shall be considered an employee of the recipient employer for purposes of this chapter unless the recipient employer demonstrates to the Director that the leasing organization is including the payroll relating to such leased employee within its payroll tax return. The entire amount paid to the leasing company shall be treated as part of such employer's payroll, unless the recipient employer demonstrates to the Director that a lesser amount should be used. 
PAYROLL — An amount equal to the total renumeration paid by an employer to employers which is subject to federal income tax withholding by the employer for federal income tax purposes for services rendered, other than domestic services in a private residence, if: 
(1)  The services are performed within the City of Jersey City; or 
(2)  The services are performed outside of the City of Jersey City, but the place from which the services are supervised is in the City of Jersey City. 
Such amount shall generally be based on the amount reportable by the employer on its Federal Form 941 and shall include, but not be limited to, all wages, bonuses, commissions, tips, property, the right to receive property, taxable benefits and all other forms of compensation. 
SCHOOLS — All Jersey City public schools. 
SERVICES — For the purposes of this chapter, an individual shall be considered in the service of an employer if (1) he is subject to the authority of the employer to supervise and direct the manner of rendition of his service, or he is rendering professional or technical services and is integrated into the staff of the employer, or he is rendering, on the property used in the employer's operations, other personal services the rendition of which is integrated into the employer's operations, and (2) he renders such services for compensation. 
SUPERVISION — Services shall be considered to be supervised from the City if an individual who either works in or is based in the City has the right to control and direct the manner of rendition of the employee's service, has hiring and firing responsibility, and oversees the work of such employee. 
TAXPAYER — A person, partnership, association, corporation, or other entity required hereunder to file a payroll tax return, and to pay the payroll tax imposed by this Article. 
TRUST FUND — The trust fund established pursuant to paragraph A of Section 304-19.1 of this Article.  
§ 304-19. - Tax imposed. 
[Added 11-20-2018 by Ord. No. 18-133 ] 
Except as provided in subsection a below, there is hereby imposed on every employer a tax equal to one percent of the employers' payroll, on all payrolls related to services performed on or after the first day of the first month of the calendar quarter in which this article takes effect; provided, however, that no tax shall be imposed with respect to services performed in any calendar quarter prior to that in which this article was adopted. 
A.  An employer shall incur no payroll tax relative to its Jersey City-resident employees. In order for an employer to claim and pay a reduced payroll tax obligation, the employer must provide the Director, with written evidence and documentation, to the Director's satisfaction, of the relevant employees' Jersey City residency statuses. 
B.  A charitable organization, as defined above, shall calculate the tax that would otherwise be attributable to the City and file a return, but shall only pay the tax on that portion of its payroll expense attributable to business activity for which a tax may be imposed pursuant to Section 511 of the Internal Revenue Code. If the charitable organization has purchased or is operating branches, affiliates, subsidiaries or other business entities that do not independently meet the standards of a charity, the tax shall be paid on the payroll attributable to such for profit branches, affiliates or subsidiaries, whether or not the employees are leased or placed under the auspices of the charity's umbrella or parent organization.  
§ 304-19.1. - Trust fund and distribution of payroll tax proceeds. 
[Added 11-20-2018 by Ord. No. 18-133 ] 
A.  The Director shall create a trust fund to be used exclusively for school purposes. 
B.  All revenue collected by the City pursuant to Section 304-19 of this Article shall be deposited into the Trust Fund. 
C.  The City Business Administrator, including his or her designee and/or agent, shall monthly pay employer payroll tax revenues deposited in the trust fund over to the treasurer of school moneys of the school district coextensive with the municipality or of which the municipality comprises a part in an amount equal to 1/12 of the difference in State school aid provided to that school district, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 18A:7F-43 et al, and N.J.S.A. 18A:7F-67 et al, between the current State fiscal year and State fiscal year 2018. 
D.  All tax revenue distributed under this section shall be used in lieu of State adjustment aid and all other categories of State school aid. 
E.  Any monthly balance remaining in the trust fund shall be reserved for use toward making future payments pursuant to paragraph C of this section. 
F.  In the event that, when a monthly trust fund payment becomes due, the balance of the trust fund is insufficient to make a payment pursuant to paragraph (c) of this section, the City Business Administrator shall pay the remaining balance of the trust fund over to the treasurer of school moneys of the school district coextensive with the municipality, or of which the municipality comprises a part for that month only.  
§ 304-19.2. - Administration and enforcement. 
[Added 11-20-2018 by Ord. No. 18-133 ] 
A.  Powers and duties of Director. 
1.  The Director is charged with the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, and is empowered to prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this chapter, including provisions for the reexamination and corrections of declarations and returns, and of payment alleged or found to be incorrect, or as to which an overpayment is claimed or found to have occurred, and to prescribe forms necessary for the administration of this chapter. Should an employer fail or refuse to provide adequate information to the Director to determine the amount of payroll tax due, the Director may use prior year information of the employer and/or information provided to the Director from other sources (i.e., the New Jersey Departments of Labor and/or Revenue) to determine the amount of payroll tax liability. 
2.  It shall be the duty of the Director to collect and receive the taxes, fines, and penalties imposed by this chapter. It shall also be the duly of the Director to keep a record showing the date of such receipt. 
3.  The Director is authorized to enter into agreements with the State of New Jersey Department of Labor and/or Department of Revenue to obtain information regarding employers, their employees and their payroll to facilitate administration of the payroll tax. 
4.  The director is authorized to issue a ruling upon written request of a taxpayer or upon its own volition. 
B.  Examination of books and records of taxpayers and employers. 
1.  The Director is hereby authorized to examine the books, papers and records of any employer or supposed employer, or of any taxpayer or supposed taxpayer, in order to verify the accuracy of any declaration or return, or if no declaration or return was filed, to ascertain the tax due. Every employer or supposed employer, and every taxpayer or supposed taxpayer, is hereby directed and required to give to the Director, or to any agent designated by him/her, the means, facilities and opportunity for such examinations and investigations, as are hereby authorized, 
2.  If records are not available in the City to support the returns which were filed or which should have been filed, the taxpayer will be required to make them available to the Director either by producing them in a City location or by paying for the expenses incurred by the Director or his agent in traveling to the place where the records are regularly kept. 
C.  Records to be kept for the employer. Taxpayers and employers liable for the payroll tax are required to keep such records as will enable the filing of true and accurate returns or the tax and such records shall be preserved for a period of not less than seven years from the filing date or due date, whichever is later, in order to enable the Director or any agent designated by him to verify the correctness of the declarations or returns filed. 
D.  Audits. 
1.  The Director shall initiate an audit by means of an audit notice. If, as a result of an examination conducted by the Director, a return has not been filed by an employer or a return is found to be incorrect and payroll taxes are owed, the Director is authorized to assess and collect any payroll tax due. If no return has been filed and tax is found to be due, the tax-actually due may be assessed and collected with or without the formality of obtaining a return from the taxpayer. Deficiency assessments (i.e., where a taxpayer has filed a return but is found to owe additional tax) shall include taxes for up to three years to the date when the deficiency is assessed. Where no return was filed, there shall be no limit to the period of assessment. 
2.  Upon proposing an assessment,-the Director shall send the Employer an interim notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, which advises the taxpayer of additional payroll taxes that are due, along with penalties and interests. Should the taxpayer wish to dispute the assessment administratively by requesting a hearing with the Director, it must do so within 30 days of the date of such interim notice. 
3.  If, after the Director sends an interim notice, a taxpayer fails to timely request a hearing with the Director or requests a hearing and after conducting a hearing, the Director determines that payroll taxes are due, the Director shall send the employer by certified mail, return receipt requested, a final notice. Should the Taxpayer wish to dispute the assessment, he or she must do so in the manner described in Section 304-19.5 of this Chapter.  
§ 304-19.3. - Return requirement; registration. 
[Added 11-20-2018 by Ord. No. 18-133 ] 
A.  Filing a return; payment of tax. All employers are required to file a payroll tax return with the Director to report their payroll during each calendar quarter and the amount of payroll tax in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Returns shall be filed and payments of payroll tax imposed for the preceding calendar quarter shall be made on or before the last day of April, July, October, and January, respectively. An employer who conducts business in the City on a temporary, seasonal or itinerant basis shall file a return and pay the tax within ten days of the completion of the temporary, seasonal, or itinerant business, but not less frequently than quarterly. Should the amount reflected on an employer's Federal Form 941 be revised or amended at anytime after the payroll tax return for such period has been filed (by the employer or by the Internal Revenue Service), the employer is required to amend its payroll tax return to be consistent therewith within three months of the date of such revision or amendment. 
B.  Registration. Every employer must be registered with the City in accordance with any Jersey City Business Registration Ordinance and any existing business registration law. Should an employer cease doing business in the City or having payroll subject to the payroll tax, it shall notify the Director within three months of such date.  
§ 304-19.4. - Suits for tax collections, violations, fines, interest and penalties. 
[Added 11-20-2018 by Ord. No. 18-133 ] 
A.  Remedies not mutually exclusive. The remedies provided in this section are not mutually exclusive. The utilization by the Director of one remedy does not preclude utilization of the other. Moreover, any use of the remedies provided in these sections does not preclude the use by the City of any other legal or administrative procedure which can bring about compliance by the taxpayer with the provisions of this chapter, 
B.  Suits for recovery of unpaid taxes. The Director may sue in the name of the City in law or in equity, for the recovery of those payroll taxes due and unpaid under the provisions of the payroll tax, to compel the production of records or to enforce any other provisions of the law. 
C.  Limitations. 
1.  The following periods of limitations shall apply to suits for collection of payroll taxes: 
i.  When a return has been filed but no tax paid, any suit brought to recover the tax due and unpaid shall be filed within three years after the return was due or filed, whichever is later. Where no return was filed or a fraudulent return was filed, there shall be no limits to file suit for the collection of taxes. 
ii.  A return filed before the due date is deemed to be filed on the due date. 
iii.  Extension by agreement. Where, before the expiration of the time prescribed in this section for the filing a lawsuit against the taxpayer, both the Director and the taxpayer have consented in writing to its extension after such time, the suit may be filed at any time prior to the expiration of the period agreed upon. The period so agreed upon maybe extended by subsequent agreements in writing made before the expiration of the period previously agreed upon. 
D.  Penalty and interest. 
1.  If for any reason the payroll tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of eight percent per annum on the first $1,500.00 of the delinquency and 18 percent per annum on any amount in excess of $1,500.00 shall be added to the tax. 
2.  On any additional tax determined to be due as a result of a deficiency assessment, penalty and interest will be assessed from the date the tax should have been paid to the date of payment. Penalty and interest is calculated as described above in the applicable portion of subsection 1. 
3.  Where suit is brought for the recovery of such tax, the person liable therefore shall, in addition, be liable for the costs of collection and the interest and penalties herein imposed. Once due and owing, penalty and interest become part of the tax and shall be collected as such. A person's belief that no tax is due and owing, or the failure of any person to receive or obtain the forms required for making the returns required under this chapter is not a valid defense to the imposition of penalties herein for violation. Good faith shall not be a defense to the imposition of penalty. 
E.  Fines and penalties for violations. 
1.  Violations. No person shall: 
i.  Fail, neglect or refuse to make any return or provide any reports required by this chapter. 
ii.  Refuse to permit an officer or agent designated by the Director to examine the books, records, papers or accounts of any business taxable or otherwise to determine liability. 
iii.  Knowingly make any incomplete, false or fraudulent report or attempt to do anything whatever to avoid full disclosure of the amount of payroll tax due to avoid the payment in whole or in part of the payroll tax. 
2.  In addition to any other penalties or enforcement proceedings provided for the collection and enforcement of payroll taxes by applicable law, any person who commits a violation of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than $100.00 and not exceeding $2,000.00, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days and/or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days. Any person who is convicted of violating this chapter within one year of the date of a previous violation of this chapter and who was fined for such previous violation, shall be sentenced to an additional fine as a repeat offender, which fine shall not be less than the minimum and not more than the maximum fine fixed for a violation of this chapter. 
3.  The fines and terms of imprisonment imposed under this section shall be in addition to any other relief granted to the City of a monetary nature under the provisions of this chapter. 
F.  Certificate of indebtedness. Upon making an assessment of payroll tax or additional payroll tax, the Director may issue a certificate of indebtedness, which shall be filed with the Clerk of the Superior Court to record as a judgment against the Employer.  
§ 304-19.5. - Taxpayer remedies. 
[Added 11-20-2018 by Ord. No. 18-133 ] 
A.  Director hearings. 
1.  Any person who receives an interim notice from the Director may within 30 days after the date of an interim notice, request a hearing with the Director. 
2.  Any person who fails to request a Director's hearing within a timely manner waives the right to administratively contest any element of the assessment. 
B.  Payment Under Protest. The Director will accept payments of disputed tax amounts under protest pending appeals; however, any request for refund of such monies must be filed, in accordance with subsection D of this section, 
C.  Refunds. 
1.  A taxpayer who has overpaid the payroll tax, or who believes he is not liable for the payroll tax may file a written request on an amended tax return with the Director for a refund or a credit of the tax, A request for refund or a credit shall be made within three years of the due date for filing the report or one year after actual, payment of the tax, whichever is later. If no report is required, the request shall be made within three years after due date for payment of the tax or within one year after actual payment of the tax, whichever is later. 
2.  For amounts paid as a result of a notice asserting or informing a taxpayer of an underpayment, a written request for a refund shall be filed with the Director within one year of the date of the payment. 
3.  Erroneous refund recovery. The Director may sue for recovery of an erroneous refund provided such suit is begun two years after making such refund, except that the suit may be brought at any time if any part of the refund was induced by fraud or misrepresentation of material fact. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Director may file a law suit within the limitations period under Section 304-19.4.C of this chapter, if such period ends after the two-year period specified in the preceding sentence. 
D.  Appeals. Any aggrieved employer may, within 90 days after the mailing of any final notice regarding a decision, order, finding assessment or action of the Director, appeal to the tax court in accordance with the provisions of the State Tax Uniform Procedure Law, N.J.S.A. 54:48-1 et seq. by filing a petition of appeal and upon payment of the amount stated by the Director to be due. The appeal provided by this section shall be the exclusive remedy available to any employer for review of a final decision of the Director in respect to a determination of liability for the tax imposed by this chapter. If no such appeal is filed on a timely basis, the aggrieved party waives his right to contest any element of the Director's adjudication, and that party's failure to challenge the same will be construed as an admission by that party as to the propriety of the Director's decision. No hearing or appeal will operate to suspend the accrual of penalty and interest from the date the tax was due to the date it is actually paid.  
§ 304-20. - Information confidential. 
[Added 11-20-2018 by Ord. No. 18-133 ] 
Any information contained in an employer's report or received by the City of Jersey City or any of its officers or employees as a result of any investigation, hearing or verification of a report shall not be disclosed except for official purposes, and shall not be disclosed except in accordance with an order of a court or as otherwise provided by law.  
§ 304-21. - Prohibition against deduction or withholding. 
[Added 11-20-2018 by Ord. No. 18-133 ] 
No employer shall deduct or withhold any amount from the remuneration payable to an Employee because of the tax imposed by this article.  
§ 304-22. - Liability of employer to only one municipality. 
[Added 11-20-2018 by Ord. No. 18-133 ] 
No employer shall be obligated to report and pay Sn employer payroll tax, or any interest, penalty or costs with respect thereto, to more than one municipality with respect to remuneration paid to an employee for services performed. Where any dispute as to the liability for an employer payroll tax to more than one municipality for services performed by an employee is not resolved by agreement between the employer and the municipalities, all of said municipalities shall be joined in a proceeding in the tax court to collect the tax alleged to be due.  
§ 304-23. - Effective date. 
This Article shall take effect on January 1, 2019. 
[Added 11-20-2018 by Ord. No. 18-133 ]  
§ 304-24. - Division of local finance. 
[Added 11-20-2018 by Ord. No. 18-133 ] 
The City Clerk shall file a copy of this article with the Director of the Division of Local Finance in the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs. He shall likewise file any amendments to this article, including any regulations promulgated in accordance with Section 304-19.2 of this Article.  
ARTICLE V - Hotel Occupancy Tax and Hotel Labor Peace[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Adopted November 10, 1999 by Ord. No. 99-166, and amended in its entirety September 13, 2006 by Ord. No. 06-099; and March 14, 2007 by Ord. No. 07-032. The title of Article V was amended January 24, 2018, by Ord. No. 18-003 . 
 
§ 304-25. - Title. 
[Amended by 1-24-2018 by Ord. No. 18-003 ] 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Hotel Occupancy Tax and Hotel Labor Peace."  
§ 304-26. - Tax imposed. 
[Amended 4-8-2015 by Ord. No. 15-039 ] 
There is hereby imposed a six percent (6%) tax on charges for the use or occupancy of rooms in hotels as authorized by the "Hotel and Motel Occupancy Tax Act," N.J.S.A. 40:48E-1, et seq., as amended in 2006 by N.J.S.A. 40:48E-e. This tax shall be in addition to any and all real estate (ad valorem) taxes or services charges; the tax imposed by the "Sales and Use Tax Act," N.J.S.A. 54:32B-1 et seq.; or any other fee, charge or tax imposed by law.  
§ 304-27. - Tax exempted. 
No rooming or boarding house that is licensed and regulated pursuant to the Rooming and Boarding House Act of 1979, N.J.S.A. 55:13B-1 et seq., shall be subject to the tax imposed pursuant to the Hotel and Motel Occupancy Tax Act, N.J.S.A. 40:48E-l et seq., and this article.  
§ 304-27.1. - Payment of tax. 
All revenue collected under the Hotel and Motel Occupancy Tax Act shall be paid to the Chief Fiscal Officer of the City who shall be responsible for the collection of the tax, in quarterly installments, on or before those dates when real property tax payments are due to the municipality under State law. The hotel will not receive any credit or refund permitted against any other taxes due. It is the express intention of the City to collect in full both real estate taxes or services charges and the hotel and motel tax.  
§ 304-27.2. - Definitions. 
[Added 4-8-2015 by Ord. No. 15-039 ; amended by 1-24-2018 by Ord. No. 18-003 ] 
To effectuate the purposes of this article, these terms shall have the following meanings: 
CITY means the City of Jersey City and shall include the Mayor, the Municipal Council, the Corporation Counsel, and/or the Business Administrator of the City of Jersey City, or any of their designees. 
COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT (CBA) means an agreement entered into between the entity contracting or subcontracting to provide services and a Labor Organization lawfully serving as the exclusive collective bargaining representative for the employees who provide or will provide services pursuant to such a contract. 
CONTRACT as used herein means any contract to which 29 U.S.A. § 185(a) applies, as that provision has been interpreted by the United States Supreme Court. 
ENTITY means any natural person, sole proprietorship, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, joint venture or business organization of any kind. 
HOSPITALITY COMPANY means any entity seeking to develop and/or operate a Hotel as defined herein, including any developer who intends to lease or sublease property to another entity to operate a hotel. 
HOSPITALITY OPERATIONS means any operations at a hotel staffed by hospitality workers. 
HOSPITALITY WORKERS means all employees employed on the hotel premises, except supervisors, managers, confidential employees and guards. 
HOTEL shall mean a building or portion of it which is regularly used and kept open as such for the lodging of guests, whether or not meals are served, and also includes, but is not limited to an apartment hotel, bed and breakfast, motel, inn, boarding house, rooming house, condotel, a home, apartment, house, condo or dwelling irrespective of whether there is a permanent resident residing in the building, and any other sleeping accommodations that are available to the public on a transient basis, and any dining and food or beverage operations which are included in the hotel. 
LABOR ORGANIZATION means an organization of any kind, or an agency or employer representation committee or plan, in which employees participate and which exists for the purpose, in whole or in part, of dealing with employers concerning grievances, labor disputes, wages, rates of pay, hours of employment or conditions of work. 
NO-STRIKE PLEDGE AGREEMENT means an agreement prohibiting the labor organization and its members, and in the case of a collective bargaining agreement, all employees covered by the agreement, from engaging in picketing, work stoppages, boycotts or any other economic interference with the hospitality operations for the duration of the City's hospitality contract. 
REDEVELOPMENT AREA BOND means the bonds sold by the City pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-64 et seq. (the "RAB Law") in order to fund infrastructure improvements and other construction costs undertaken by a developer who has received a tax exemption pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq., or N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1 et seq.  
§ 304-27.3. - Compliance with other laws. 
[Added 4-8-2015 by Ord. No. 15-039 ] 
A.  This ordinance shall be administered in the same manner as the state occupancy fee including but not limited to the entitlement to any exemptions, all in accordance with N.J.S.A. 54:32D-1 et seq., N.J.S.A. 54:32B-1 et seq., and N.J.A.C. 18:24-3.1 et seq., as applicable. 
B.  The payment or collection of this occupancy fee does not in any way condone, exempt or supersede the property in use from compliance with all other building, zoning, insurance or any other governmental agency law or regulation.  
§ 304-27.4. - No-strike pledge requirement. 
[Added 1-24-2018 by Ord. No. 18-003 ] 
Any developer who seeks to obtain financial assistance from the City for a prospective hotel project in the form of a redevelopment area bond or any other form of assistance which renders the City a market participant pursuant to such proprietary interest, must execute a collective bargaining agreement or other contract enforceable under 29 U.S.C. § 185(a) containing a no-strike pledge with any labor organization seeking to represent the hospitality workers to be employed at the hotel premises.  
§ 304-27.5. - Term. 
[Added 1-24-2018 by Ord. No. 18-003 ] 
The obligations imposed by this article shall remain in effect so long as the redevelopment area bond is outstanding and expire no sooner than the date the redevelopment area bond or the City's financial assistance has been repaid in full.  
§ 304-27.6. - Limitations. 
[Added 1-24-2018 by Ord. No. 18-003 ] 
Nothing in this article requires any hospitality company to recognize a particular labor organization nor does this article require employees to be union members. This article is not intended to, and shall not be interpreted to enact or express any generally applicable policy regarding labor-management relations or to regulate those relations in any way. This article is not intended to favor any particular outcome in the determination of employee preference regarding union representation. Nothing in this article permits or requires the City or any hospitality company to enter into any agreement in violation of federal labor laws.  
§ 304-27.7. - Severability. 
[Added 1-24-2018 by Ord. No. 18-003 ] 
If any section or any portion of a section of this article is declared illegal, invalid or inoperative, in whole or in part by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining sections and all portions not declared illegal, invalid or inoperative shall remain in full force or effect, and no such determination shall invalidate the remaining sections or portions of the sections of this article.  
ARTICLE VI - Long Term and Five Year Tax Exemptions; Affordable Housing Trust Fund 
[Amended in its entirety 9-28-2005 by Ord. No. 05-130; 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-088 ] 
 
§ 304-28. - Affordable Housing Trust Fund Contribution: execution of a Project Labor & Contracting Agreement (PECA) required. 
[Amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-088 ; 11-26-2013 by Ord. No. 13-129 ; 3-12-2014 by Ord. No. 14-027 ; 9-24-2015 by Ord. No. 15-130 ; 1-9-2019 by Ord. No. 18-151 ] 
A.  No long term tax exemption permitted under N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq., or five year tax exemption permitted under N.J.S.A. 40A:21-8 and Section 304-12 of the Jersey City Municipal Code, for any market rate housing project or any commercial or industrial project, shall be approved unless the recipient makes a contribution to the Jersey City's Affordable Housing Trust Fund, in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-4.1 et seq., and this Chapter. 
B.  No contribution shall be required of a recipient that by a recorded deed or agreement, restricts (thereby setting aside) a minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the gross number of residential units within the project for low and moderate income affordable housing in accordance with the Fair Housing Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq. 
C.  Contributions to Jersey City's Affordable Housing Trust Fund shall be paid in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-4.1 et seq., for a term equal to the length of the tax abatement. 
D.  The standard PECA forms shall be in substantially the same format as those approved by the Corporation Counsel and on file in the Office of the City Clerk.  
§ 304-29. - Amount of prepayments. 
The amount of contributions shall be calculated based upon the classification of the improvements to be tax exempt in accordance with the following formulas: 

Market Rate Housing 	$1,500.00 per unit 
Commercial Space 	$    1.50 per sq. ft. 
Industrial Space 	$    0.10 per sq. ft. 
  
§ 304-30. - Time of contribution. 
A.  All contributions shall be due and payable as follows: [ Amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-088 ] 
1.  One third on or before the effective adoption date of the ordinance approving the tax exemption, that is the effective date of the executed Financial or Tax Agreement; 
2.  One third on or before the issuance of the first of any construction permit for the Project, but no later than six months after the date of the Financial or Tax Agreement; 
3.  One third on or before the date the first of any Certificate of Occupancy is issued for the Project, but no later than twenty-four (24) months after the date of the Financial or Tax Agreement. 
B.  Any payment that is late or unpaid in whole or in part, whether billed or not, shall bear the highest rate of interest allowed by law for unpaid conventional taxes until paid in full.  
§ 304-31. - Notices. 
[Amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-088 ] 
The recipient shall send a written Notice to the Business Administrator and the Director of the Office of Tax Exemption, immediately advising the City of the occurrence of each of the following events: 
A.  The submission of the executed financial or tax agreement to the City; 
B.  The filing of the application for the first construction permit for the Project; and 
C.  The issuance of the first Certificate of Occupancy by the Construction Code Official for any part of the Project.  
§ 304-32. - Guidelines for the expenditure of funds. 
[Amended 11-21-2006 by Ord. No. 06-144; Amended 11-26-2013 by Ord. No. 13-129 ] 
A.  Use of Funds: All contributions made to the Affordable Housing Trust Fund shall be expended solely for the rehabilitation or construction or preservation of existing low or moderate income affordable housing or the construction of new low or moderate income affordable housing, as those terms are defined in the Fair Housing Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27-301 et seq., and any regulations promulgated thereunder. 
B.  Awards: All funds shall be awarded by the City from the Affordable Housing Trust Fund as loans, on a reimbursement basis only, to supplement other private or public funds needed to complete the project. Awards shall be based upon responses to a Request for Qualifications, to be solicited biannually in January and August, subject to availability of trust funds. 
C.  Qualifications: No award will be approved unless the applicant at a minimum satisfies the following conditions: 
1.  Application. Every applicant must file a complete application form, which shall include an administrative questionnaire, financial disclosure statement and any other forms or supporting documents the City deems appropriate or necessary. The application will be in substantially the same form on file in the City Clerk's office. The application may be amended from time to time as the Business Administrator deems appropriate or necessary; 
2.  Entity. An applicant must provide proof that it is a for profit or a non profit entity, organized under State and Federal law for the purpose of constructing affordable housing or a public entity; 
3.  Experience. Every applicant must demonstrate that it has successfully completed the construction of at least one other significant housing project; 
4.  Funding. An applicant must provide proof that it is the recipient of funds from another public or private source that, together with the Trust Fund award, will constitute sufficient funds to complete the proposed project. However, for acquisition funds, the applicant must document that the proposed project is eligible for other public or private funds, and that an application for these funds will be filed within sixty (60) days of commitment of affordable housing trust fund funds; and 
5.  Commencement of Construction. The applicant must commence construction no later than one year from the date of the award of the Trust Fund money. Failure to commence construction within one year will result in cancellation of the award. 
D.  Evaluation: Applications shall be evaluated by an executive committee using the scoring matrix contained in the Application. The matrix may be amended from time to time as the Business Administrator deems necessary or appropriate. 
E.  Dedication ratios: Trust Funds calculated as of July 1st of each year, shall be dedicated as follows: 
Income Breakdown 
1.  A minimum of thirty (30) percent of the Trust Funds shall be dedicated for very low (fifty (50) percent or below area median income) or special needs housing including housing for senior citizens, the disabled or homeless or other special needs populations, with at least ten (10) percent reserved for housing designed to accommodate large families (three or more bedrooms); 
Activity Breakdown 
1.  Up to ten (10) percent of the Trust Funds will be dedicated to reasonable pre-development activities; 
2.  Ten (10) percent of the funds shall be retained by the City for its own administrative fees, and/or capacity building activities for local community development corporations; 
3.  Up to thirty (30) percent of the funds may be used to acquire property for the development/redevelopment of affordable housing; and 
4.  Balance of funds will be dedicated to hard construction costs. 
F.  Pre-Development Costs: Only non profit or public entities will be eligible to use funds for Pre-Development Costs. Pre-Development Costs may not exceed the lesser of ten (10) percent of the total project budget or one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for any one project. All Pre-Development Costs must be pre-approved and in the City's sole discretion, reasonable, and based upon the total project budget. Pre-Development Costs are limited to the following: 
1.  Financing fees; 
2.  Application fees; 
3.  Legal fees; 
4.  Environmental testing; 
5.  Engineering fees; 
6.  Costs related to securing local site plan approval; 
7.  Architectural fees; 
8.  Title report; 
9.  Survey costs; and 
10.  Project management fees. 
G.  Collateral: All loans shall be collateralized by a note and the recordation of a mortgage. The mortgage may only be subordinated to another permanent governmental loan or a private institutional lender used to finance initial project acquisition or construction. All loans, including self-amortizing loans, shall bear interest determined on a project-by-project basis at a rate not to exceed the interest rate imposed on the first mortgage as of the 1st day of the month immediately preceding the closing.  
ARTICLE VII - Construction Project Labor Agreements[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-104 , adopted August 16, 2017, amended the Code by repealing former Art. VII, §§ 304-33—304-38, and adding a new Art. VII. Former Art. VII pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 07-123, adopted June 27, 2007; Ord. No. 12-051 , adopted April 25, 2012; and Ord. No. 14-052 , adopted May 28, 2014. 
 
§ 304-33. - Definitions. 
[Added 8-16-2017 by Ord. No. 17-104 ] 
To effectuate the purposes of this article, these terms shall have the following meanings: 
1.  APPRENTICE means a worker who participates in a program registered by the Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training of the U.S. Department of Labor, ("DOL") or an apprenticeship equivalent program either approved and funded by the New Jersey Department of Labor as of January 1, 2003, who takes a construction apprenticeship test, and receives benefits and pay not less than those received by an apprentice. 
2.  AFFORDABLE HOUSING GRANT means a form of redevelopment area financing involving a disbursement of monies from the City's Affordable Housing Trust Fund to a developer, given in order to ensure the inclusion of on-site affordable housing at the developer's project, for the duration of the tax exemption. 
3.  APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAM means an apprenticeship program and registered by the Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training of the U.S. Department of Labor or an apprenticeship equivalent program as that term is used by the State of New Jersey in the Abbot Project Labor Agreement either approved and funded by the New Jersey Department of Labor as of January 1, 2003. 
4.  CITY OF JERSEY CITY means the Mayor, the Municipal Council, the Corporation Counsel, and/or the Business Administrator of the City of Jersey City, or any of their designees. 
5.  COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT BLOCK GRANT (CDBG) means a form of redevelopment area financing which provides monies that can be used to revitalize neighborhoods, expand affordable housing and economic opportunities, and/or improve community facilities. 
6.  CRAFT EMPLOYEE means a person employed in a trade as defined herein at either the apprentice or journeyman level. 
7.  DEVELOPER means an entity that is developing a project that has a total construction cost that is equal to, or in excess of, $25,000,000.00, exclusive of any land acquisition costs, and has received (1) a tax exemption pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. (the Long-Term Tax Exemption Statute) or a tax exemption pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1, et seq., (the Five-Year Tax Exemption Statute) and (2) is a recipient of some form of redevelopment area financing (RAF) such as, but not limited to, a redevelopment area bond ("RAB") pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-64, et seq. or any other form of municipal financing/funding such as an affordable housing trust fund grant, a community development block grant (CDBG), a direct payment to the developer by the City in the form of rent, or (3) if the entity is the recipient of a construction contract awarded by the City for a public construction project. 
8.  FINAL CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY means the certificate that is issued by the Office of the Construction Official from the Department of Housing, Economic Development & Commerce upon completion of the project indicting that the structure is ready for occupancy. 
9.  JOURNEYMAN means a skilled worker who is a member of a labor organization and who has successfully completed an official apprenticeship qualification in a building trade or craft. 
10.  LABOR ORGANIZATION means an organization which represents, for purposes of collective bargaining, employees trained in a particular trade, involved in the performance of public construction project or RAF project that has the present ability to refer, provide or represent sufficient numbers of qualified employees to perform the contracted work and has an apprenticeship program. 
11.  LABOR PERSON HOURS means the number of hours worked multiplied by the number of employees performing such work. 
12.  MINORITY means any person who is identified as Black, Asian, Hispanic, or American Indian as codified in N.J.A.C. 17:27-2.1. 
13.  MINORITY/WOMEN-OWNED BUSINESS ENTERPRISE (MWBE) means (1) a business in which the principal is a minority as defined herein, or a woman (2) a business in which at least 51 percent of the ownership interest is held by a minority as defined herein, or by a woman, and the management and daily business operations are controlled by one or more of the minorities or women who own it; or (3) a corporation or other business entity authorized under the laws of New Jersey whose management and daily business operations are controlled by one or more of the minorities or women who own it, and which at least 51 percent of the corporation is owned by one or more minorities or women, and if stock is issued, at least 51 percent of the stock is owned by one or more minorities or women. 
14.  PRINCIPAL means any officer, director, or individual who directly or indirectly holds any beneficial interest in or ownership of the securities of the business and/or any employee of the business who is empowered by title or by explicit assignment to authorize the procurement, purchase, or contracting of equipment, goods, services, or supplies whatsoever involving an expenditure of $1,000.00 or greater. 
15.  PROJECT COMPLETION means the determination by the City that the project, in whole or in part, is ready for the use intended, which ordinarily shall mean the date on which the project receives its final certificate of occupancy. 
16.  PROJECT LABOR AGREEMENT (PLA) means a contract between a labor organization and a developer for construction jobs that contains at a minimum the requirements set forth in this article. 
17.  PUBLIC CONSTRUCTION PROJECT means any construction contract entered into by the City using public funds, the total cost of which is equal to or exceeds $5,000,000.00, exclusive of any land acquisition costs. 
18.  REDEVELOPMENT AREA BOND means a form of redevelopment area financing whereby the City sells bonds pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-64, et seq. (the "RAB Law") in order to fund infrastructure improvements and other project costs. 
19.  REDEVELOPMENT AREA FINANCING ("RAF") PROJECT means a project that has a total construction cost that is equal to or exceeds $25,000,000.00, exclusive of any land acquisition costs, which receives (1) a tax exemption pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. or N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1, et seq., and (2) receives some form of redevelopment area financing such as an affordable housing trust fund grant, a community block development grant, or a redevelopment area bond. 
20.  RESIDENT means any person who currently lives in Jersey City and who has lived in Jersey City for the previous 12 months. 
21.  SUBSTANTIAL COMPLETION means any construction project that is not completed but is near completion by virtue of the project receiving a temporary certificate of occupancy from the office of the construction official of the Department of Housing, Economic Development & Commerce. 
22.  TEMPORARY CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY means a certificate that is issued by the Office of the Construction Official when a project has been substantially completed provided that such portion or portions may be occupied safely prior to full completion of the building or structure without endangering health or safety. 
23.  TOTAL CONSTRUCTION COST means all costs, including infrastructure, excluding only land acquisition costs, incurred to construct a project through the date of completion, that is, the date the final certificate of occupancy is issued. Total construction cost shall generally be determined in accordance with the industry standard of Marshall and Swift Valuation, but including the cost of piling and soil compaction. Total construction cost must include any construction cost constituting as an element of total project cost under N.J.S.A. 40A:20-3(h)(4). 
24.  TRADE means a skilled job, typically one requiring manual skills and special training, such as carpentry, masonry, and plastering, that are primarily concerned with the construction and finishing of buildings. 
25.  WOMAN or WOMEN means a female or females, regardless of race.  
§ 304-34. - Project labor agreements required; general terms. 
[Added 8-16-2017 by Ord. No. 17-104 ] 
All redevelopment area financing (RAF) projects as defined herein and all requests for proposals, specifications and final contracts for public construction projects, which exceed $5,000,000.00, exclusive of any land acquisition costs, shall require the execution of a project labor agreement that complies with the requirements of this article. The Business Administrator may, having taking into consideration the nature, size and complexity of the project, determine that a project labor agreement is not required. In all cases where a project labor agreement is utilized, it must advance the interests of the City, including cost, efficiency, quality, time lines, and need for a skilled labor force and safety. 
All project labor agreements shall contain the following terms: 
1.  A guarantee that there will be no strikes, lock-outs, or other similar actions; 
2.  Procedures to ensure the effective, immediate, and mutually binding resolutions of jurisdictional and labor disputes arising before the completion of the work; 
3.  A provision to bind all contractors and subcontractors on the project in all relevant documents; 
4.  Evidence that each contractor and subcontractor working on the project has a local federally-registered apprenticeship program; 
5.  Conformity with all statutes, regulations and City ordinances regarding the implementation of the City's goals for women and minority-owned businesses; 
6.  Conformity with all statutes, regulations and City ordinances regarding the implementation of the City's goals for women-owned and minority-owned businesses including a provision consistent with the holding of City of Richmond v. J.A. Croson Co., 488 U.S. 469 (1989) that there be appropriate goals for the hiring of minorities and women. Specifically, that 20 percent of the total labor-person hours performed by the labor organizations are performed by minorities or women who are also residents of Jersey City. Included in this 20 percent shall be craft employees of all skill levels including apprentices and journeymen. 
i.  A developer that contracts with a MWBE owned by a Jersey City resident(s) on a Jersey City PLA project is eligible to receive a credit of 50 percent of the total labor-person hours performed by that MWBE on the PLA project. This credit can be applied toward the total number of minority or woman labor person hours required on the project. 
A Developer that contracts with a MWBE not owned by a Jersey City resident(s) on a Jersey City PLA project is eligible to receive a credit of 25 percent of the total labor-person hours performed by that MWBE on the PLA project. This credit can be applied toward the total number of minority or woman labor person hours required on the project. 
ii.  The minority and/or women hour requirement can be satisfied if the developer partners with, shares profits with, or forms a corporation for the purposes of development with, a recognized MWBE, owned by a Jersey City resident(s) and that MWBE receives 20 percent or more of the ownership of the project. 
A developer is eligible to receive a credit of 75 percent if the developer partners with, shares profits with, or forms a corporation for the purposes of development with, a recognized MWBE not owned by a Jersey City resident(s) and that MWBE receives 20 percent or more of the ownership of the project. 
iii.  The minority and/or women hour requirement can be satisfied if the general contractor hired by the developer partners with, forms a joint venture with, shares profits with or subcontracts with a MWBE owned by a Jersey City resident(s) and that MWBE receives 20 percent of the total profits from the project. 
A developer is eligible to receive a credit of 75 percent if the general contractor hired by the developer partners with, forms a joint venture with, shares profits with or subcontracts with a MWBE not owned by a Jersey City resident(s) and that MWBE receives 20 percent of the total profits from the project. 
7.  A requirement that developers and labor organizations complete the following pre-construction actions: 
A.  INITIAL MEETING. Prior to a financial agreement being executed between the City and the developer, and prior to a project labor agreement being executed between the developer and the labor organizations, the developer, the general contractor, and a representative from the labor organizations must all meet with the Office of Tax Abatement & Compliance to (1) assess the general contractor's respective workforce needs, (2) discuss the general contractor's construction and procurement schedule, and (3) for the Office of Tax Abatement & Compliance to specify any and all procedures necessary and proper in carrying out the enlisted requirements within this article. 
B.  PRE-CONSTRUCTION MEETING. Prior to the commencement of construction, the developer, the general contractor, and a representative from the labor organizations must all meet with the Office of Tax Abatement & Compliance to present workforce needs, which will include the job description of the positions to be filled and the duration of the project. In addition, the developer and/or the general contractor must provide the Office of Tax Abatement & Compliance their construction and procurement schedules. The labor organizations must present the developer and the City with the names, addresses, and trades of all eligible apprentices who are available to work on the project. Additionally, the Office of Tax Abatement & Compliance shall specify any and all procedures necessary and proper in carrying out the enlisted requirements within this article. 
C.  ADVERTISEMENT. Not more than 60 days after the initial meeting, each labor organization must advertise for prospective apprentices within their respective trade. These advertisements from each labor organization must do the following: (1) solicit apprenticeship applications for their respective apprenticeship program, (2) describe the basic requirements for admission into their respective apprenticeship program, (3) describe the job training associated with their apprenticeship program, (4) state the date or dates for their respective apprenticeship tests, and (5) set forth the range of salaries. All apprenticeship applications and advertisements must meet the following requirements: 
Application requirements: 
1.  All apprenticeship applications shall include a provision that the names and contact information of all applicants shall be listed in a job-seekers database maintained by the Office of Diversity and Inclusion; 
2.  Applications must be made available online and must be able to be filled out and submitted digitally via a mobile browser and via a personal computer/laptop browser; 
3.  Applications must be able to be downloaded and printed and applications must be made available to be picked up and submitted in person at a physical location during reasonable business hours (9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Mondays through Fridays). 
Advertising requirements: 
1.  Advertisements must be posted both online and in all newspapers regularly distributed and/or circulated within Jersey City; 
2.  Online advertisements, when clicked, must either direct the user to a web address to learn more or link directly to the online application form; 
3.  Advertisements must provide both a physical location and a web address to learn more; 
4.  All online advertisements must include relevant keywords (e.g. electrician, plumbing, etc.) to ensure that the targeted audience sees the advertisement; 
5.  Advertisements must be posted directly on LinkedIn, Indeed and GlassDoor, via sites such as ZipRecruiter or WorkConnect; 
6.  Advertisements posted through Google search ads and Google display ads or on any advertising network with similar reach, and any advertisements posted on Facebook, Twitter and Pandora, must be targeted to Jersey City zip codes; 
7.  All advertisements must run at least fourteen (14) days prior to the apprenticeship application deadline; 
8.  All proposed advertisements, regardless of whether they are in digital or in print format, must be approved by the Office of Tax Abatement & Compliance 14 days in advance of publication. 
At the conclusion of the application period, the results of the labor organization's advertising campaign (including, but not limited to, the total number of page views, clicks, number of application submissions, etc.) must be submitted to the Director of Tax Abatement & Compliance on forms issued by the Office of Tax Abatement & Compliance. 
D.  JOB FAIRS. The Labor Organizations must conduct job fairs once every three months, thus four times annually. The job fairs are to be held at a location to be provided by the City in order for the labor organizations to explain the apprenticeship programs and solicit applications from attendees.  
§ 304-35. - Exemptions. 
[Added 8-16-2017 by Ord. No. 17-104 ] 
Any residential project which shall maintain more than 50 percent of the entire project's gross square footage as affordable housing shall be exempt from the requirement of a project labor agreement. 
In the event an application for a RAF financing project contains an estimate of total project cost that is less than $25,000,000.00, but upon project completion is determined to have a total construction cost equal to or exceeding $25,000,000.00, then the project service charge shall be increased as follows: 
A.  LONG TERM TAX EXEMPTION. By an additional two percent of total project cost, or five percent of annual gross revenue, as applicable; or 
B.  FIVE YEAR TAX EXEMPTION. The phase-in for each year shall be increased by an additional ten percent or, if applicable, the improvement assessment increased by five percent. 
The above increases shall be retroactive to the date of substantial completion and shall apply for each and every year of the entire term of the RAF financing project.  
§ 304-36. - Reports and records. 
[Added 8-16-2017 by Ord. No. 17-104 ] 
A.  All developers of RAF projects, whether subject to a project labor agreement or not, shall submit a detailed certification of the estimated total construction cost with its application for any tax exemption, which shall be made available to the public. 
B.  In the event construction permits are issued more than 12 months have expired from the date of the adoption of the ordinance approving the RAF construction costs to ensure that the total construction costs do not exceed $25,000,000.00 or a project labor agreement shall be required. 
C.  No later than 90 days following project completion, the developer shall submit a certification of actual total construction cost certified to the City by the project's architect and engineer. Total construction cost is subject to review by the City at the time of application and audit by the City, upon project completion. 
D.  The project labor agreement shall require the submission of the following reports to the Office of Tax Abatement & Compliance on the fifteenth day of each month for the previous month in a format provided by the Office of Tax Abatement & Compliance, for each year of construction until project completion: 
1.  MANNING REPORT. This report which is provided by the developer's general contractor must accurately reflect the total work hours in each construction trade or craft and the number of hours worked by minorities and or women, in each trade or craft, and will list separately the work hours performed by such employees of the general contractor whom are actually performing work on the site and each of its subcontractors during the previous quarter. 
2.  CERTIFIED PAYROLL REPORT. This certified report which is provided by the developer's general contractor must specify the residence, gender and ethnic/racial origin of each worker, broken down by trade, along with their respective work hours, and the rate of pay and benefits provided. 
3.  EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY REPORTS. The labor organizations must provide to the Office of Tax Abatement & Compliance copies of each of their local union reports (EEO-3) and each of their apprenticeship information reports (EEO-2), which are required to be filed with the United States Commission of Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. 
4.  APPRENTICESHIP REPORT. This report from all of the labor organizations, which must be provided to the Office of Tax Abatement & Compliance each month, shall list all of the names, addresses, and contact information of all persons who were accepted into each labor organization's apprenticeship program. The report shall also list the names, addresses, and contact information of all City residents who were rejected for admission into each labor organization's apprenticeship program with the reasons for their rejection. For those City residents who failed to finish the program, the report must provide the reasons why they failed to complete the program. 
5.  MEMBERSHIP REPORT. Every month, each labor organization shall provide to the Office of Tax Abatement & Compliance an accurate up-to-date number of its current membership throughout the State and a list of all of their current members, journeymen and apprentices who live in Jersey City, along with each member/journeymen/apprentice's name, address, and contact information. 
6.  OTHER REPORTS. The developer and/or labor organizations shall furnish to the City and/or the Office of Tax Abatement & Compliance any and all reports or other documents to the City as the City may reasonably request from time to time in order to carry out the purposes of this article. 
7.  RECORDS. Records to support the work hours stated in the above reports must be maintained for a period of three years after project completion. All records shall be made available to the City upon ten days' prior written notice. 
8.  SITE ACCESS. Representatives of the City shall be permitted to have appropriate access to all work sites in order to monitor compliance.  
§ 304-37. - Pre-apprenticeship training program. 
[Added 8-16-2017 by Ord. No. 17-104 ] 
1.  INTERAGENCY COOPERATION. The City will solicit the support of the Jersey City Board of Education, the Hudson County Community College, the Hudson County Vo-Tech School, the Jersey City Employment and Training Program, Inc., the Jersey City Housing Authority, and other community-based organizations, including, but not limited to, Puertorriqueños Asociados for Community Organization, Inc., (P.A.C.O.), the Jersey City Chapter of the N.A.A.C.P, and the Urban League of Hudson County, in order to maximize participation in the apprenticeship program among eligible City residents. 
2.  PREPARATORY SERVICES. The City shall be responsible for the development of a program to provide all necessary preparatory services for enrolled pre-apprentices, including assistance with GED preparation, obtaining drivers license, mentoring and other supportive services for pre-apprentices. The pre-apprenticeship program shall be operated in such a manner that its successful graduates will be equipped and eligible for entry into the apprenticeship programs of a labor organization. 
3.  MONITORING. The City shall be responsible for the selection, operation and supervision of pre-apprenticeship programs that may be operated by private entities, such as the Jersey City Employment and Training Program, Inc., and shall retain authority to review and approve the curriculum and procedures used to recruit and select participants.  
§ 304-38. - Enforcement. 
[Added 8-16-2017 by Ord. No. 17-104 ] 
1.  The Office of Tax Abatement & Compliance shall be the primary office authorized to implement and enforce this article, under the supervision of the Department of Business Administration, including (1) documentation and recordkeeping requirements, (2) monitoring and compliance activities, (3) project and/or contract coverage determinations, (4) designated referral sources, (5) bid and contract documents implementing the article, and (6) other matters related to implementation of this article. 
2.  The Office of Tax Abatement & Compliance assesses compliance monthly during construction and for all ongoing obligations post-construction. 
3.  If the Office of Tax Abatement & Compliance determines that a project is not compliant, then the Office will issue a recommendation for appropriate corrective action. 
4.  The developer and all labor organizations affiliated with the project shall demonstrate to the City compliance with this article. It shall not be a defense to any enforcement action taken by the City that the developer or the labor organization could not obtain any item or information from any other party to the PLA. This article does not limit the developer or the labor organization's ability to assess qualifications of prospective workers, to make final hiring and retention decisions. No provision of this article shall be interpreted so as to require a developer, a labor organization, a general contractor or a subcontractor to hire or retain a worker who lacks the necessary qualifications for the position in question, or to employ any particular worker regardless of qualifications.  
§ 304-38.1. - Remedies. 
[Added 8-16-2017 by Ord. No. 17-104 ] 
In the event that either the developer and/or the labor organization should violate this article, the City may seek any and all remedies available to it at law or equity. Such remedies include, but are not limited to, compelling the developer and/or the labor organization to complete a remedial employment action plan, pay liquidated damages or the City may elect to terminate the RAF and/or the tax exemption.  
§ 304-38.2. - Severability. 
[Added 8-16-2017 by Ord. No. 17-104 ] 
If any provision of this article or application thereof to any person or circumstance is judged unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, the invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this article that can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this Chapter are declared severable.  
ARTICLE VIII. - Open Space Recreation and Historic Preservation Trust Fund Tax Levy 
 
§ 304-39. - Imposition of tax for recreation, conservation and historic preservation. 
The City hereby imposes an annual levy not to exceed two cents ($0.02) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of total municipal assessed real property. 
[Added 3-22-2017 by Ord. No. 17-026 ]  
§ 304-40. - Purpose of levy; allocation of funds among each purpose. 
A.  Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:12-15.7, the annual levy shall be used for the following purposes: 
(1)  Acquisition of lands for recreation and conservation; 
(2)  Development of lands acquired for recreation and conservation; 
(3)  Maintenance of lands acquired for recreation and conservation; 
(4)  Preservation of historic properties, structures, facilities, sites, areas, or objects, and the acquisition of such properties, structures, facilities, sites, areas, or objects; 
(5)  Blue Acres Projects; and/or 
(6)  Providing funding for the payment of debt service incurred or issued for any of the purposes set forth in subsections (1) through (5) above. 
B.  The Council shall determine the appropriate amount to be allocated to each purpose after holding one or more hearings thereon. 
[Added 3-22-2017 by Ord. No. 17-026 ]  
§ 304-41. - Municipal Open Space, Recreation and Historic Preservation Trust Fund. 
The City hereby establishes an Open Space Recreation and Historic Preservation Trust Fund (the "Trust Fund") to administer all proceeds derived from imposition of the annual open space lew pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:12-15.7(c). The Trust Fund shall be permitted to accept donations, testamentary bequests and other funds where appropriate and permitted by law. 
[Added 3-22-2017 by Ord. No. 17-026 ]  
Chapter 307 - TAXICABS, LIMOUSINES AND TRANSPORTATION NETWORK COMPANY VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
History— Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City as indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable. Subsequently, 19-036 , adopted April 24, 2019, amended the title of Ch. 307. 
Cross reference— Fees and charges, Ch. 160; vehicles and traffic, Ch. 332. 
 
ARTICLE I - Taxicabs 
[Adopted 7-17-1979 by Ord. No. S-223] 
 
§ 307-1. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
CALL BOX — A telephone or call box for the taking of calls and the dispatching of taxicabs by the authorized holder or holders of a certificate of public convenience and necessity. 
[Amended 4-10-1996 by Ord. No. 96-003] 
CERTIFICATE — A certificate of public convenience and necessity issued by the Division of Commerce, authorizing the holder thereof to conduct a taxicab business in the City of Jersey City. 
[Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
CRUISING — [Repealed 4-10-1996 by Ord. No. 96-003] 
DESIGNATED TAXI STAND — A stand for the exclusive use of those taxicabs specifically assigned such stand and issued an emblem stating the name of such stand by the Division of Commerce. 
[Added 4-10-1996 by Ord. No. 96-003; 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
DISABLED PERSON — Disabled person means a physical impairment which confines a person to a wheelchair, cause a person to work with difficulty or insecurity, affects sight or hearing to the extent that a person functioning in public areas is insecure or exposed to danger, causes faulty coordination or reduces mobility, flexibility, coordination and perceptiveness. 
[Added 4-10-1996 by Ord. No. 96-003] 
DRIVER'S LICENSE — The permission granted by the Division of Commerce to a person to drive a taxicab upon the streets of the city. 
[Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
HOLDER — A person to whom a certificate of public convenience and necessity has been issued. 
MANIFEST — A daily record prepared by a taxi driver of all trips made by the driver showing time and place of origin, destination, number of passengers and the amount of fare of each trip. The manifest shall also contain the driver's name, time reporting on and off duty, the starting and finishing mileage and the number of the vehicle. 
OPEN TAXI STAND — A stand which is not reserved for the exclusive use of specific taxicabs but authorized for use by any taxicab licensed pursuant to this article. 
[Added 4-10-1996 by Ord. No. 96-003] 
RATE CARD — A card issued by the Division of Commerce for display in each taxicab which contains the rate of fare in force. 
[Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
Editor's note— The definition of "transportation supervisor," which followed this definition, was deleted 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050. 
STARTER — A person in charge of queuing taxicabs and waiting patrons and otherwise maintaining order at a taxi stand. 
[Added 4-10-1996 by Ord. No. 96-003] 
TAXICAB or TAXI — A motor vehicle equipped with a taximeter, regularly engaged in the business of carrying passengers for hire, and not operated over a fixed route, and so designed as to comfortably seat not fewer than four passengers, exclusive of the driver. 
TAXIMETER — A meter, instrument or device attached to a taxicab which measures mechanically the distance driven and the waiting time upon which the fare is based. 
TAXI STAND and TEMPORARY TAXI STAND — A place alongside the curb of a street or elsewhere in the city reserved exclusively for the use of taxicabs and distinctly marked by a metal sign or stanchion, or by painted markings on the surface of the street or curb. 
[Amended 4-10-1996 by Ord. No. 96-003] 
WAITING TIME — The time when a taxicab is not in motion from the time of acceptance of a passenger or passengers to the time of discharge and payment of fare by the passenger.  
§ 307-2. - Certificate of public convenience and necessity required. [Amended 9-20-1979 by Ord. No. S-290; 9-23-1984 by Ord. No. S-484; 4-10-1996 by Ord. No. 96-003; 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052; 11-28-01 by Ord. No. 01-126; ] 
A.  No private vehicle or limousine shall be used as a taxicab. No person shall operate or permit a taxicab owned or controlled by him or her to be operated as a vehicle for hire without having first obtained a certificate of public convenience and necessity from the Division of Commerce. The number of outstanding certificates shall be limited to a total of one hundred twenty-four (124) taxis. Any additional licenses authorized by this section shall be issued to the highest qualified bidder at auction in accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:16-2.1, et seq., as amended and no more, unless adequate service to the public shall require more and such additions are approved by the Municipal Council. 
B.  The Municipal Clerk is authorized to advertise for sale the additional twenty (20) licenses in accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:16-2.1, et seq. Such licenses shall be offered for sale at public auction, after advertising thereof in the Jersey Journal and the Hudson Reporter. 
C.  Such licenses shall be offered for sale at public auction, after advertising thereof in the Jersey Journal and the Hudson Reporter. 
D.  The minimum bid price shall be as follows for the following designated taxi stand locations: 
1.  Journal Square taxi stand an additional three (3) license minimum bid price, one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). 
2.  Grove Street taxi stand an additional two (2) licenses minimum bid price, eighty thousand dollars ($80,000.00). 
3.  Town Square Place (FKA Pavonia Avenue) an additional four (4) licenses minimum bid price, eighty thousand dollars ($80,000.00). 
4.  Exchange Place taxi stand an additional two (2) licenses minimum bid price, fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). 
E.  The minimum bid price for the additional nine (9) licenses that are not designated to a closed taxi stand location shall be fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) each. 
F.  Ten (10) percent of the minimum bid price shall be paid to the Municipal Clerk by teller's or certified check at the conclusion of the bidding. The balance shall be paid within seventy-two (72) hours of the later of (1) council resolution accepting a bid and (2) issuance of an owner's license pursuant to this chapter. The Municipal Council reserves the right to reject all bids where the highest bid is not accepted. 
G.  Any new license issued pursuant to subsection (B) of this section may not be transferred within two (2) years after issuance unless such transfer is approved on the basis of death, disability, serious illness or severe financial hardship by resolution of the Municipal Council.  
§ 307-3. - Application for certificate. [Amended 4-10-1996 by Ord. No. 96-003; 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
An application for a certificate of public convenience and necessity shall be filed with the Division of Commerce upon forms provided by the Division, and the application shall be verified under oath and shall furnish the following information: 
A.  Name, address, date of birth, telephone, social security and motor vehicle operator license numbers of the applicant. 
B.  Experience of the applicant in the transportation of passengers. 
C.  Any facts which the applicant believes tend to prove that public convenience and necessity require the granting of a certificate. 
D.  Number of vehicles to be operated or controlled by the applicant and the location of proposed depots and terminals. 
E.  Four photographs (minimum size of 3 1/2 inches by 3 1/2 inches) of each taxi (full frontal, full rear and bumper-to-bumper left and night side views). (This requirement shall not apply to renewal applications, but to initial applications under this amended ordinance and replacement vehicles only.) 
F.  Complete a Scofflaw Violations Check Form supplied by the Division of Commerce. 
G.  Such other information as the Division may require.  
§ 307-4. - Issuance or denial of certificate. 
A.  Subject to the limit fixed by this article, if the Division of Commerce finds that further taxicab service in the city is required by the public convenience and necessity and that the applicant is fit, willing and able to perform such public transportation and to conform to the provisions of this article and the rules thereto promulgated by the Division, then the Division shall issue a certificate stating the name and address of the applicant, the number of vehicles authorized under said certificate and the date of issuance; otherwise the application shall be denied. 
[Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
B.  In making the above findings, the Division shall take into consideration the number of taxicabs already in operation, whether existing transportation is adequate to meet the public need, the probable effect of increased service on local traffic conditions, and the character, experience and responsibility of the applicant. 
C.  If the application is denied, written reasons for such denial shall be given the applicant. The applicant may appeal such denial to the Business Administrator in writing and within 20 days of his or her receipt of the written reasons for denial. A hearing shall be scheduled upon at least 10 days' notice to the applicant. 
[Added 4-10-1996 by Ord. No. 96-003; amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
D.  Every holder of a certificate of public convenience and necessity shall be responsible for the operation of any taxi for which the certificate has been granted. 
[Added 4-10-1996 by Ord. No. 96-003]  
§ 307-5. - Operation of noncertified taxicabs within city limits. 
[Amended 4-26-1984 by Ord. No. MC-489; 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050] 
A.  It shall be unlawful for a noncertified taxicab to pick up or accept a passenger within the city for a destination to a place within the city. 
B.  Noncertified taxicabs may discharge a passenger at a destination within the city, provided that said passenger has been picked up by said taxicab outside the city. 
C.  Noncertified taxicabs may only pick up a passenger within the city to be taken to a place of destination outside the city, provided that the passenger had personally or through an agent previously arranged by telephone or other means of communication with the owner or driver of the noncertified taxicab for such a trip to the destination outside the city. 
D.  Noncertified taxicabs may not pick up passengers unless the pickup is prearranged as described above. 
[Added 4-10-1996 by Ord. No. 96-003]  
§ 307-6. - Emergent removal of taxi from service; out-of-service sticker. 
[Amended 4-26-1984 by Ord. No. MC-489; 4-10-1996 by Ord. No. 96-003; 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
A.  A taxi may be removed from service on an emergent basis by the Director of the Division of Commerce when: 
(1)  The taxi is being operated without insurance in violation of § 307-7; 
(2)  The taxi is found to be unsafe or otherwise in violation of the provisions of § 307-21; or 
(3)  The taximeter is not working or inaccurate or otherwise in violation of § 307-23. 
B.  The holder may appeal the removal from service in writing to the Business Administrator within 20 days of the removal. A hearing shall be scheduled upon at least 10 days' notice to the holder. 
C.  When the Division of Commerce removes a taxi from service, the Division shall place an out-of-service sticker on the left side of the taxi's front windshield. The taxi shall remain out-of-service until the deficiencies are corrected and the sticker is removed by the Division. 
D.  It shall be a violation of this article for anyone other than the Director of the Division of Commerce or an inspector of the Division to remove an out-of-service sticker placed on a taxi by the Division. 
E.  If a taxi is in operation after an out-of-service sticker is removed by anyone other than the Director of the Division of Commerce or an inspector of the Division and prior to the correction of the deficiencies which caused the sticker to be placed on the taxi, the Director of the Division may cause that taxi to be impounded until the deficiencies which caused the sticker to be placed on the taxi are corrected. In such a case, the impoundment shall be at the taxi owner's expense. 
F.  If within 40 days of the removal from service, the taxi is not returned to service in full compliance with this article, the Director of the Division of Commerce shall revoke such certificate of public convenience and necessity in accordance with the procedures set forth in § 307-11.  
§ 307-7. - Insurance required. 
[Amended 9-13-1984 by Ord. No. MC-674; 4-10-1996 by Ord. No. 96-003; 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
A.  In order to insure the safety of the public, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause or permit a taxicab to be operated, nor shall be certificate of public convenience and necessity be issued, until an insurance policy in compliance with N.J.S.A. 48:16-3 to 48:16-12 is obtained and copies filed with the Clerk of the City of Jersey City and with the Division of Commerce. 
B.  Any certificate issued hereunder shall only be effective for as long as the insurance policy remains in force and in accordance with the statutory amounts. In the event that the insurance is canceled, the certificate shall terminate on the effective date of the cancellation, unless the insurance has been reinstated and a withdrawal of the cancellation or a new policy of insurance has been submitted to the Clerk of the City of Jersey City and to the Division of Commerce prior thereto for the remainder of the license term. 
C.  Said insurance policy must provide therein that it shall not be canceled except upon 20 days' prior written notice to the Director of the Division of Commerce.  
§ 307-8. - Annual license fee; expiration date. 
[Amended 5-27-1980 by Ord. No. S-401; 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050; 4-10-1996 by Ord. No. 96-003; 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052; 2-11-1998 by Ord. No. 98-004; 2-14-01 by Ord. No. 01-013] 
No certificate shall be issued or continued in operation unless the holder thereof has paid an annual license fee as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges, for each vehicle operated under a certificate of public convenience and necessity and, upon renewal, has completed a renewal application, together with applicable documentation, as required by the Division of Commerce. The certificate shall expire on March 31 of each year. The initial license fee following the change in expiration date will be subject to proration by the Division of Commerce. The fee shall be in addition to any other license fees or charges established by proper authority and applicable to said holder of the vehicle or vehicles under his or her operation and control.  
§ 307-9. - Transfer of certificate. 
[Amended 3-11-1980 by Ord. No. S-356; 5-27-1980 by Ord. No. S-401; 4-26-1984 by Ord. No. MC-489; 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050; 4-10-1996 by Ord. No. 96-003; 1-9-02 by Ord. No. 01-139] 
A.  No certificate of public convenience and necessity may be sold, leased or otherwise transferred to a taxicab driver or any other person for the use of transporting passengers without the approval of the Director of the Division of Licenses and Fees. The purchaser, lessee or transferee shall qualify for a certificate in accordance with § 307-3 et seq. Any denial of sale, lease, or transfer shall be in writing and based upon the failure of the transferee to qualify for a certificate pursuant to § 307-3 et seq. An applicant wishing to appeal a denial of transfer shall follow the procedure as set forth in § 307-4C. 
B.  The holder of a certificate may sell, lease or transfer the certificate as described in § 307-9A above, or may lease, rent or hire out a taxicab or taxicab driver to any other person for the use of transporting passengers, subject to the approval of the Director of the Division of Licenses and Fees. Whenever a holder of a certificate leases, rents or hires out a taxicab as described above, the details of the transaction shall be recorded promptly by the holder in the Division of Licenses and Fees. 
C.  The transfer fee shall be as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges.  
§ 307-10. - Revocation or suspension of certificate. 
[Amended 4-26-1984 by Ord. No. MC-489; 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
A certificate issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked or suspended by the Division of Commerce if the holder thereof has: 
A.  Violated any of the provisions of this article. 
B.  Discontinued operations for more than 30 days. 
C.  Violated any provision of this Code or the laws of the United States or the State of New Jersey, the violations of which reflect unfavorably on the fitness of the holder to offer public transportation.  
§ 307-11. - Notice prior to suspension or revocation; hearing. 
[Amended 4-10-1996 by Ord. No. 96-003] 
A.  Prior to suspension or revocation, the holder shall be given notice and a copy of the charges and shall have an opportunity to present evidence in his or her behalf to the Division Director. 
B.  An adverse ruling by the Division Director may be appealed to the Business Administrator. The request for appeal shall be in writing and submitted within 20 days of the adverse ruling. A hearing shall be scheduled upon at least 10 days' notice to the holder. 
[Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052]  
§ 307-12. - Taxicab driver's license. 
No person shall operate a taxicab for hire upon the streets and no person who owns or controls a taxicab shall permit it to be so driven and no taxicab licensed by the City shall be so driven at any time for hire unless the driver of the taxicab shall have first obtained and shall have then in force a taxicab driver's license issued under the provisions of this article.  
§ 307-13. - Application for taxicab driver's license; contents; expiration date. 
[Amended 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050; 4-10-1996 by Ord. No. 96-003] 
A.  An application for a taxicab driver's license and yearly renewal thereof shall be filed with the Division of Commerce on forms provided by the Division, and such application shall be verified under oath and shall contain the following materials or information: 
(1)  Name, address, date of birth, telephone, social security and motor vehicle operator license numbers. 
(2)  The experience of the applicant in the transportation of passengers. 
(3)  A three-year history of his or her employment. 
(4)  Proof of residence in the State of New Jersey for a period of at least 90 days. 
(5)  The applicant shall be 21 years of age or older and have at least three years of driving experience. 
(6)  The applicant is able to speak, read and write the English language and has a basic knowledge of Hudson County roadways and landmarks. 
(7)  The applicant is a citizen of the United States. If the applicant is not a citizen, he or she must present valid documentation of authorization to work from the federal government. 
(8)  The applicant has in his or her possession a valid New Jersey State driver's license. 
(9)  Two photographs of the applicant one and one-half by one and one-half (1 ½ × 1 ½) inches front view of the applicant's face and shoulders without head covering. 
[Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
(10)  Fingerprint impressions taken by the Department of Public Safety. The applicant shall bear any and all costs for fingerprinting. [ Amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] 
(11)  Each application must be accompanied by a certificate from a licensed and practicing physician of the State of New Jersey, certifying that the applicant was examined on a certain date, within 60 days before the filing of the application; and that, in the physician's opinion, the applicant is of sound physique, with good eyesight, not subject to epilepsy, vertigo, heart trouble or any other infirmity of body or mind which might make the applicant unfit to safely operate a taxi. Upon renewal application, a certificate shall only be required every other year. 
B.  At the time the application is filed, the applicant shall pay to the Division the sum as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges. The license shall expire on December 31 of each year. The initial license fee following the change in expiration date will be subject to proration by the Division of Licenses and Fees. 
[Amended 2-11-1998 by Ord. No. 98-004]  
§ 307-14. - Investigation of taxicab driver's license applicants. [Amended 4-10-1996 by Ord. No. 96-003; 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052; ] 
A.  Upon the filing of an application for a taxi driver's license, the Department of Public Safety shall conduct an investigation of each applicant. The applicant's photo and fingerprints shall be forwarded to the Department of Public Safety's Bureau of Records and Identification. A report of the investigation and a copy of the traffic and police record of the applicant, if any, shall be attached to the application and returned for the consideration of the Division of Commerce. 
B.  The Director of the Division of Commerce shall consider the application, the police investigation report, the physician's certificate and any other documentation required to be attached thereto, the character, driving experience and responsibility of the applicant and any other relevant facts whatsoever and shall approve or reject the application. However, no taxi driver's license shall be issued until a written police investigation report is received from the Department of Public Safety's Bureau of Records and Identification, showing the result of the investigation of the applicant's prior history, if any, through an examination of the fingerprints. If a delay of more than 30 days is encountered between the date of fingerprinting and the receipt of the results of a Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) or a New Jersey State Police fingerprint check (the applicant shall bear the cost of any such investigation and check), the Director of the Division of Commerce may issue the applicant a temporary license for a period not to exceed six months based on a check through the fingerprints on file with the Department of Public Safety. If, when received by the Division of Commerce, all results of the fingerprint checks by the FBI and the New Jersey State Police show that the applicant is unfit to obtain a license, the Division may immediately revoke the applicant's license.  
§ 307-15. - Approval or rejection of application for taxicab driver's license. [Amended 4-10-1996 by Ord. No. 96-003; 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
The Division of Commerce shall, upon consideration of the application and the reports and certificates required to be attached thereto, approve or reject the application. If the application is rejected, written reasons for such rejection shall be given to the applicant. The applicant may appeal such rejection to the Business Administrator, in writing, and within 20 days of his or her receipt of written reasons for rejection. A hearing shall be scheduled upon at least 10 days' notice to the applicant.  
§ 307-16. - Issuance of taxicab driver's license; fee. [Amended 5-27-1980 by Ord. No. S-401; 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050] 
A license for each calendar year shall be issued upon payment of a fee as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges, unless the license for the previous year has been revoked or suspended.  
§ 307-17. - Display of taxicab driver's license. 
Every driver licensed under this article shall post his or her driver's license and a rate card in a bracket folder above the rear front seat at the eye level of the passenger. Said license and rate card shall be enclosed in plastic or glass.  
§ 307-18. - Suspension or revocation of taxicab driver's license. [Amended 4-10-1996 by Ord. No. 96-003; 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
The Division of Commerce is hereby given the authority to suspend any taxicab driver's license issued under this article, such suspension to last for a period of not more than 30 days. The Division is also given authority to revoke any driver's license. A license may be suspended or revoked for failure to comply with the provisions of this article. However, a license may not be suspended or revoked unless the driver has received notice and a copy of the charges and has had an opportunity to present evidence in his or her behalf to the Division Director. An adverse ruling by the Division Director may be appealed to the Business Administrator. The request for appeal shall be in writing and submitted within 20 days of the adverse ruling. A hearing shall be scheduled upon at least 10 days' notice to the driver.  
§ 307-19. - Licensed drivers to comply with other laws. [Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
Every taxicab driver licensed under this article shall comply with all city, state and federal laws relating to the use and occupancy of motor vehicles and taxicabs. Failure to do so will justify the Director of the Division of Commerce in suspending or revoking a license.  
§ 307-20. - Taxicab equipment and maintenance; inspections. [Amended 4-26-1984 by Ord. No. MC-489; 7-10-1986 by Ord. No. C-249; 12-22-1986 by Ord. No. C-357; 2-11-1987 by Ord. No. C-395; 2-26-1987 by Ord. No. C-381; 5-28-1987 by Ord. No. C-462; 9-25-1991 by Ord. No. McC-361; 3-9-2005 by Ord. 05-017] 
A.  Prior to the use and operation of any vehicle as a taxicab under this article, the vehicle shall be thoroughly examined and inspected by the Division of Commerce and shall be found to comply with such reasonable rules and regulations as may be prescribed by the Division. These rules and regulations shall be promulgated to provide safe transportation and shall specify such safety equipment and regulatory devices as the Division deems necessary therefor. 
B.  When the Division of Commerce finds that a vehicle has met the standards established by the Division of Commerce, it shall issue a license to that effect. The license shall be conspicuously displayed in each taxicab, so as to be readily seen by the passenger. 
C.  Every vehicle operating under this article shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition according to rules and regulations promulgated by the Division. 
D.  All seat belts and shoulder harnesses shall be maintained and/or replaced as required to keep them in safe working order. The number of such seat belts and harnesses maintained and/or replaced shall be the same number originally installed by the manufacturor of the vehicle. All upholstery covering on seats and cushions in a licensed taxicab shall be made of leather or similar nonabsorbent material of a washable nature and shall be easily removable. 
E.  Every taxicab shall be equipped with an interior white light of sufficient candlepower to illuminate its interior after sundown and in no case shall the bulb be less than six candlepower. 
F.  Taxicabs shall be equipped with roof lights and said lights shall be in operation whenever the taxicabs are in operation. The roof lights shall be lighted when the taxicabs are vacant and extinguished during the daytime hours. There shall be no switches to allow the operator to control the roof lights. 
G.  Vehicles used as taxicabs shall pass inspection by the New Jersey State Motor Vehicle Department and also shall pass inspection by the Division of Commerce of the city. 
H.  Taxicabs, whether initial or replacement vehicles, shall not be more than sixty (60) months of age when first put into taxicab service and shall be removed from taxicab service when such vehicle attains the age of eighty-four (84) months; provided, however, that those taxicabs in service prior to the effective date of this amended article and which are 60 or more months of age prior to the effective date of this amended article shall not be required to be removed from taxicab service earlier than twenty-four (24) months after the effective date of this amended article, except that when a taxicab attains the age of eighty-four (84) months, the holder may, on a yearly basis, seek the written approval of the Director of the Division of Commerce to keep the taxicab in service. The holder shall have the burden of proving to the Director of Commerce that the taxicab is in superior condition. 
I.  Replacement vehicles used as taxicabs shall have a minimum of four doors and shall not be station wagons. 
J.  Bulletproof shields shall be installed on all vehicles, whether new or used. Such shields shall be installed full length behind the driver's seat from the floor to the roof of the taxicab. The partition shall be made of lexan, margard, or other polycarbonate material not less than 0.375 inches thick extending upward from the back of the front seat to the ceiling of the vehicle. There shall be a provision for communication with passengers and for a money slot while the partition is closed. Such partition may be able to be partially opened by the driver, so long as the driver can fully close the partition at any time. A vehicle owner shall also equip the vehicle with a 0.085-inch thick plate of ballistic steel or its equivalent, installed inside the back rest of the front seat. The plate shall cover the complete back rest area which is exposed to the rear seat compartment. 
K.  Security locks, which permit operation of both rear door locks by the operator of the taxicab, may be installed in any vehicle; however, the passenger shall never be prevented from manually unlocking his or her door. 
L.  Taxicabs shall be equipped with trouble lights that can be engaged by the driver, which will reveal a light on the outside of the vehicle, on the back of the taxi and just to the left of the trunk lock, and which is used to send out a silent distress call to notify other vehicles and pedestrians that the driver is in a dangerous situation. 
M.  Cameras and radios shall be required in all taxicabs. The required cameras shall be designed to enhance driver safety by acting as a deterrent to crime and as an effective tool in identifying those who commit crime, and shall be in-vehicle security camera systems capable of taking digital photo images of the entire passenger area of the vehicle. The system shall consist of a small camera with integrated infrared lighting that is installed above the vehicle's rear-view mirror. The infrared lighting shall enable the capture of digital images during the day or night, which shall be time and date-stamped along with the vehicle identification number, and are stored in a small controller unit securely installed elsewhere in the vehicle. The data shall be encrypted to prevent tampering and may only be accessed by authorized individuals. The required radios shall be FCC-licensed commercial two-way radios with an emergency button capable of notifying the Department of Public Safety or the Division of Commerce that a driver is in trouble. [ Amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ]  
§ 307-21. - Taxicab identification; color regulation. [Amended 4-10-1996 by Ord. No. 96-003] 
A.  For identification purposes, the color scheme, insignia or monogram of a taxicab shall be assigned by the Division of Commerce. Each taxicab shall bear, either upon each rear door or upon each side of the vehicle next to the rear door, the rates of fare, as set forth on the rate card, in black letters not less than one inch or more than two inches in height. Trade names shall appear in black letters no less than six inches in height on both sides and rear of each vehicle. The assigned number of each taxicab shall appear on each side and rear in black numerals not less than two inches in height. No vehicle covered by this article shall be licensed whose color scheme, identifying design, monogram or insignia shall, in the opinion of the Division, conflict with or imitate any color scheme, identifying design, monogram or insignia used on a vehicle or vehicles already operating under the article, in such a manner as to be misleading or tend to deceive or defraud the public. If, after a license has been issued for a taxicab hereunder, the color scheme, identifying design, monogram or insignia thereof is changed without authorization from the Director of the Division of Commerce, the certificate covering such taxicab or taxicabs shall be suspended or revoked in accordance with the procedures set forth in § 307-11. 
[Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
B.  All taxicabs licensed to operate within the City of Jersey City shall be painted one uniform color substantially consistent with the following examples: 
(1)  Ford Chrome Yellow Paint - Code No. 6S. 
(2)  Dupont Centari Acrylic Paint - Code No. 4357. 
(3)  Dupont Deluxe Enamel Paint - Code No. 95923. 
C.  All taxicabs in service prior to the effective date of this amended article shall be exempt from this requirement; provided, however, that all new and replacement taxicabs which come into service after the effective date of this amended article shall be in compliance with the above color requirement immediately upon their operation within the City of Jersey City. Also exempt from this requirement, upon review and approval of the Director of the Division of Commerce, shall be radio-dispatched taxis which can demonstrate that their color scheme had been established and recognized by the public for a significant length of time prior to the effective date of this amended article. 
[Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
D.  Any taxicab being painted in compliance with this amended article shall be inspected by the Division of Commerce within 30 days of said painting. 
[Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052]  
§ 307-22. - Taximeters. 
[Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
A.  All taxicabs operated under the authority of this article shall be equipped with a taximeter of a size and design approved by the Division of Commerce, and be so affixed that the face of the meter is visible to passengers. After sundown, each taximeter shall be illuminated by a suitable light not less than three candlepower and shielded or so arranged as to throw a continuous light thereon. No driver, while carrying passengers, shall display the signal affixed to any taximeter in such a position as to denote that the vehicle is not employed. 
B.  The Division of Commerce shall examine any taximeter attached to any taxicab, at any time, to see that it is accurate according to the rate schedule and to affix to the meter a seal of the Division. The seal shall be of a type and design set forth by the Division and attached in such manner that will ensure its remaining intact and prevent the tampering with the inner portion of the meter. In the event that a taximeter requires repairs, it shall not be returned to service until such time as it has been inspected again as required above and the proper seal again affixed. No person shall use or permit to be used, or drive for hire, a taxicab with a taximeter the case of which is unsealed or the covers and gears of which are not intact. 
[Amended 4-10-1996 by Ord. No. 96-003]  
§ 307-23. - Fare rates; discounts. 
[Amended 3-11-1980 by Ord. No. S-356; 4-28-1981 by Ord. No. S-608; 2-26-1987 by Ord. No. C-381; 4-10-1996 by Ord. No. 96-003] 
No owner or driver of a taxicab shall charge a greater sum for the use of a taxicab than in accordance with the following rates: 
A.  Mileage rates shall be two dollars and fifty cents ($2.50)for the first one-ninth ( 1/9 ) mile or each fraction thereof and twenty-five cents ($0.25)for each additional one-ninth ( 1/9 ) mile. [9-28-2005 by Ord. No. 05-118] 
B.  Waiting time shall be charged at the rate of twenty cents ($0.20) for each minute per waiting time or fraction thereof at a rate of twelve dollars ($12.00) per hour. 
C.  Every taxicab operated under this article shall have a rate card setting forth the authorized rates of fare displayed as described in § 307-17. Rates of fare shall apply on one to five passengers to a single destination. 
D.  Taximeters shall be maintained so as to remain accurate and, except in the case of flat-fare rates authorized under this article, shall be in use whenever the taxicabs are in operation. When a taximeter is required to be in use, and it is not in use, whatever the reason, the passenger shall not be charged a fare for that particular ride. A notice approved by the Division containing this provision shall be conspicuously posted in each taxicab. 
E.  Taxicabs shall carry passengers to other municipalities within the state at a flat rate. If a trip or call extends beyond the boundary of the city, the driver and passenger or passengers shall agree on a flat rate of fare, prior to the start of the trip. A proper notation shall be made on the driver's manifest showing such charge. 
F.  The Division of Commerce shall have prepared the notices in large print to be displayed in the passenger compartment of each taxicab advising the passenger that if the meter is not in operation (except in the case of flat-fare rates authorized under this article) or if there is any question regarding the fare, that the passenger shall notify the Division of Commerce of such matter. In addition to the above, said notice shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name of the taxicab owner and the name of the driver. 
(2)  The number of the taxicab. 
G.  Senior citizens and disabled persons. 
(1)  No person of the age of sixty-two (62) years and over, upon presentation of proper identification showing proof of such person's age to the driver of such taxicab, and no disabled person, as defined in § 307-1, shall pay more than the following discount rate; provided, however, that no discount rate shall be in effect between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m., and between the hours of 4:00 p.m. to 7:00 p.m., Monday through Friday: 
Fare Appearing on Meter 	Discount Rate to be Paid 
If $4.00 or less 	$2.00 
If over $4.00 	One-half fare 
 
(2)  The discount rate shall not apply where two or more adult passengers engage a taxi and all such passengers are not senior citizens and/or disabled persons. 
(3)  No owner or operator of a taxicab shall refuse to provide transportation for any such senior citizen or disabled person. 
H.  The Director of the Division of Commerce shall issue adequate signs to be placed in each taxicab operating in the city indicating the availability of reduced fares for senior citizens and disabled persons.  
§ 307-24. - Receipt to be supplied upon demand. 
The driver of a taxicab shall, upon demand by the passenger, render to the passenger a receipt for the amount charged, either by a mechanically printed receipt or by a specially prepared receipt on which shall be the name of the owner, driver's name, license number of taxicab, date and amount of the fare.  
§ 307-25. - Refusal of passenger to pay legal fare. 
[Amended 4-10-1996 by Ord. No. 96-003] 
No person shall refuse to pay the legal fare of any taxicab or vehicle mentioned in this article after having hired the same, and no person shall hire any such taxicab or vehicle with intent to defraud the person from whom it was hired of the value of such service. Any dispute as to rate of fare shall, upon request of the driver or passenger, be determined by the police officer in charge of the nearest police station.  
§ 307-26. - Solicitation of passengers; acceptance and discharge of passengers; cruising. 
A.  No driver shall, whether at a taxi stand or otherwise, solicit passengers for a taxicab, except when sitting in the driver's compartment of such taxicab or while standing immediately adjacent to the curb side thereof. No driver shall use words other than "taxi," "cab" or "taxicab" when so soliciting. This subsection shall not be construed to allow any solicitation or conduct otherwise prohibited by this Chapter. The driver of any taxicab shall remain in the driver's compartment or immediately adjacent to the vehicle at all times when such vehicle is upon the public street. No driver shall, whether at a taxi stand or otherwise, seek to ascertain the destination of a passenger before the passenger is seated in the taxicab. 
[Amended 8-20-2008 by Ord. No. 08-110] 
B.  No driver shall threaten, harass or abuse any passenger, governmental officer, representative of the Division of Commerce, public servant or any other person while performing his duties as a driver. No driver shall use or attempt to use any physical force against a passenger, governmental officer, representative of the Division of Commerce, public servant or any other person while performing his duties as a driver. No driver shall solicit patronage in a loud or annoying tone of voice or by sign or in any manner annoy any person or obstruct the movement of any person or follow any person for the purpose of soliciting patronage. No driver or starter shall induce any prospective passenger as to the location of any hotel, public place or private residence within the city or as to the distance between any two points, nor shall any driver or starter deceive any prospective passenger or make any false or misleading representations to him or her or convey any passenger to any place or over any other route than that to which such passenger may have instructed the driver to go. No driver shall deceive a passenger by taking a route known to be less direct for the purpose of increasing a fare. 
[Amended 4-10-1996 by Ord. No. 96-003; 8-20-2008 by Ord. No. 08-110] 
C.  Drivers of taxicabs shall not receive or discharge passengers in the roadways, but shall pull up to the right-hand sidewalk as nearly as possible or, in the absence of a sidewalk, to the extreme right-hand side of the road and there receive or discharge passengers, except upon one-way streets, where passengers may be discharged at either the right- or left-hand sidewalk or side of the roadway in the absence of a sidewalk. 
D.  Drivers may, upon being hailed, pick up passengers except in such areas and at such times prohibited by directive issued by the Director of the Division of Commerce with the approval of the Business Administrator. Such directive and any amendments thereto shall be mailed to the last known business address of each holder of a certificate. A driver shall not, however, pick up a passenger within four hundred (400) feet of a taxi stand. 
[Amended 4-10-1996 by Ord. No. 96-003; 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
E.  No person, other than the licensed driver or a person with a disability, shall ride or sit in the front seat unless the rear seat is fully occupied by passengers. 
[Amended 4-10-1996 by Ord. No. 96-003; 8-20-2008 by Ord. No. 08-110] 
F.  No driver shall permit more persons to be carried in a taxicab as passengers than the number of manufacturer installed seat belts originally existing in the taxicab. 
[Amended 4-10-1996 by Ord. No. 96-003] 
G.  No driver shall refuse or neglect to convey any orderly person or persons upon request, unless previously engaged or unable or forbidden by the provisions of this article to do so. 
H.  It shall be a violation of this article for any driver of a taxicab to solicit business for any hotel or to divert patronage from one hotel to another. Drivers shall not partake of any alcoholic beverage while on duty. Drivers shall not engage in selling intoxicating liquors or solicit business for any illicit purpose or use vehicles for any purpose other than the transportation of passengers. 
[Amended 4-10-1996 by Ord. No. 96-003] 
I.  No taxicab shall remain parked at any place within the city except at a taxi stand assigned to it or unless it is waiting for a scheduled passenger. No taxicab shall be parked at any place other than its taxi stand awaiting a call from its dispatcher or other person for a new assignment. A driver may, however, park a taxicab for short periods of time solely to do errands or business of a personal nature, i.e., food breaks. 
[Amended 4-10-1996 by Ord. No. 96-003]  
§ 307-27. - Taxi stands; establishment; designated stand; open stand; use. 
[Amended 4-10-1996 by Ord. No. 96-003] 
A.  The Division of Traffic and Street Maintenance, with the approval of the Division of Commerce, shall recommend to the governing body the establishment of designated and open taxi stands and temporary taxi stands in such place or places upon the streets of the city as it deems necessary. The governing body shall establish taxi stands by resolution. A taxi stand or temporary taxi stand may also be located on private property with approval of the property owner. The Division of Traffic and Street Maintenance, with the Division of Commerce, shall make such recommendation to the governing body. Any taxi stand established shall further be in compliance with all applicable state laws. The Division of Commerce, with the approval of the Business Administrator, shall prescribe the number of cabs that shall occupy such taxi stands and temporary taxi stands, and such number shall be indicated on the curbside taxi stand sign. No stand shall be established without taking into consideration the need for such stands by the companies and the convenience to the general public. Nor shall a stand be established in front of any place of business where the abutting property owners object to same or where such stand would create a traffic hazard. For stands located on private property, the owners of such property may impose additional requirements upon occupants with regard to their use of such private property stands. 
[Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
B.  In the event that relocation of public highways or other development or improvement makes it necessary to close and discontinue a taxi stand or temporary taxi stand, the Division of Traffic and Street Maintenance, with the approval of the Division of Commerce, shall have the right to close and discontinue the stand or to change its location. In the event a designated stand is closed, the occupant(s) of the closed stand shall be reassigned to the new designated stand established to replace the closed stand. If no replacement designated stand is established, then occupant(s) may request assignment to an existing designated stand; provided, however, that the occupant(s) show evidence of the need for additional occupant(s) at the existing stand. Occupants of a designated stand closed without replacement shall have preference when requesting assignment to an existing stand. 
[Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
C.  Any newly created designated taxi stand or any assigned space at an existing designated taxi stand which becomes available through retirement, revocation or other means shall be offered for sale at public auction, after advertising thereof in the Jersey Journal and the Hudson Reporter. The procedures, rules and regulations for such an auction shall be announced by directive issued by the Director of the Division of Commerce with the approval of the Business. Administrator and may be amended as deemed necessary to ensure the fair and equitable disposition of designated taxi stand assignments. The auction shall be conducted by the City Clerk. A holder aggrieved by any decision made pursuant to § 307-27(b) or § 307-27(c) herein may appeal in writing to the Business Administrator within twenty (20) days of such decision. A hearing shall be scheduled upon at least ten (10) days' notice to such holder. 
[Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052; 10-9-2013 by Ord. No. 13-101 ] 
D.  All taxicabs assigned to a designated taxi stand shall be issued an emblem stating the name of the designated stand, and such emblem shall be adhered at the lower left side of the stand, and such emblem shall be adhered at the lower left side of the taxicab's rear windshield so as to be clearly visible by a person standing outside the taxicab. No taxicab shall use a designated taxi stand unless specifically assigned such designated stand and issued the appropriate emblem by the Director of the Division of Commerce. 
[Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
E.  Any taxicab may use an open taxi stand as authorized under this article. 
F.  Stands shall be used by drivers on a first-come, first-served basis, this means that the first taxi in line shall accept the first passenger in line. A driver shall not pick or accept a passenger that is not first in line, nor shall he pick or accept more than one fare. A driver entering the stand with his or her taxicab shall join any waiting taxicabs from the rear and advance forward as the preceding taxicabs depart. A driver may not use another person, other than a dispatcher as authorized in this chapter, to solicit a passenger. No driver shall overcrowd, back into a front position, or otherwise cut in line at a taxi stand. The driver of each of the first two taxicabs at a taxi stand shall remain in the driver's seat ready to accept passengers. Any other driver shall be no more than fifteen (15) feet from his taxicab. No driver shall threaten, harass or abuse any passenger, governmental officer, representative of the Division of Commerce, public servant or any other person while performing his duties as a driver. No driver shall use or attempt to use any physical force against a passenger, governmental officer, representative of the Division of Commerce, public servant or any other person while performing his duties as a driver. Drivers shall not engage in loud or boisterous talk while waiting at a stand, nor shall any driver perform or cause to be performed any maintenance or repairs on his or her taxicab while waiting at a stand. Subject to rules and regulations of the director, no person shall park or stand a taxicab in any prohibited area, or in any area controlled by curb parking meters, or at the curb within fifteen (15) feet of the entrance to any railroad station, theater, hotel, restaurant or similar place of public accommodation or public resort. 
[Amended 8-20-2008 by Ord. No. 08-110] 
G.  The rules regarding taxi stands shall also apply to feed lines at air, rail, bus and ship terminals. 
[Added 8-20-2008 by Ord. No. 08-110]  
§ 307-28. - Call boxes; establishment; use. 
[Amended 4-10-1996 by Ord. No. 96-003; 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
The Director of the Division of Commerce, with the approval of the City Traffic Engineer, shall establish call boxes upon the streets of the city in such places as in its discretion it deems proper. Any holder or holders desiring to establish a call box shall make a written application to the Division. The applicant(s) shall attach to the application the written approval of the abutting property owner. The Division either shall grant or refuse the application. If and when a call box has been established, as herein provided, it shall be used solely by the holder or holders to whom it was granted and his or her or their agents and servants, and no other holder or holders shall be permitted to use it. Any holder or holders of existing call boxes shall be given six months from the effective date of this article to comply with this section.  
§ 307-29. - Taxi stands not to be used by other vehicles. 
[Amended 4-10-1996 by Ord. No. 96-003] 
Private vehicles or other vehicles for hire shall not at any time occupy the space upon the streets which has been established as either a taxi stand, temporary taxi stand or call box stand.  
§ 307-30. - Standard of service; safety requirements; personal appearance. 
[Amended 4-10-1996 by Ord. No. 96-003] 
A.  All persons engaged in the taxicab business in the city operating under the provisions of this article, whether holder or driver, shall at all times cooperate with all law enforcement officers and authorized representatives of the Division of Commerce and shall comply with all reasonable requests, including but not limited to, providing his name, certificate or license number, trip record, or any other documentation required to be in his possession. A holder or driver shall promptly answer and comply with all questions, communications, directives, and summonses from law enforcement officers or authorized representatives of the Division of Commerce. A law enforcement officer or authorized representative of the Division of Commerce shall always have the authority to monitor circumstances at a taxi stand or other place of fare and take whatever action is deemed necessary and proper to effectuate the clear and express purposes of this chapter. All persons engaged in the taxicab business in the city operating under the provisions of this article, whether holder or driver, shall at all times render an overall acceptable service to the public desiring to use taxicabs. Holders of certificates of public convenience and necessity shall maintain a central place of business in Jersey City. They shall answer all calls received by them for service inside the city as soon as they can do so and, if the service cannot be rendered within a reasonable time, they shall notify the prospective passengers how long it will be before the call can be answered and give the reason therefor. Any holder who shall refuse to accept a call anywhere in the city at any time when such holder has available taxicabs or who shall fail or refuse to give overall acceptable service shall be deemed a violator of this article, and the certificate granted to such holder shall be suspended or revoked at the discretion of the Director of the Division of Commerce in accordance with the procedures set forth in § 307-11. 
[Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052; 8-20-2008 by Ord. No. 08-110] 
B.  Notwithstanding any provision of this article to the contrary, no person may operate an autocab in contravention of federal and state laws and regulations. 
C.  All taxicab drivers, when operating their taxicabs, must obey the following rules regarding their appearance and behavior: 
(1)  Drivers must be neat and clean in their personal appearance and must have their hair, beards, mustaches, etc., well trimmed and kept; 
(2)  Drivers shall wear the following items of dress: 
(a)  A long- or short-sleeved shirt or blouse with a collar. 
(b)  A pair of zippered trousers or skirt. 
(c)  Other items of clothing, e.g., headgear, jackets, sweaters or shoes, as well as jewelry, shall be appropriate and tasteful. Drivers shall not wear excessive cologne, perfume or aftershave. 
(3)  No smoking shall be permitted while carrying passengers.  
§ 307-31. - Drivers to maintain daily manifest; contents. 
[Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
A.  Every taxicab driver shall maintain a daily manifest upon which are recorded all trips made each day, showing time and place of origin and destination of each trip and amount of fare, and all such completed manifests shall be returned to the owner of the taxicab by the driver at the conclusion of the tour of duty. The form for each manifest shall be furnished to the driver by the owner and shall be of a character approved by the Division of Commerce. 
B.  Every holder of a certificate of public convenience and necessity shall retain and preserve all driver's manifests in a safe place for at least one year, and the manifests shall be made available to the Division of Commerce immediately upon request. 
[Amended 4-10-1996 by Ord. No. 96-003]  
§ 307-32. - Required records and reports. 
[Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
A.  Every certificate holder shall keep accurate records of receipts from operations, operating and other expenses, capital expenditures and such other operating information as may be required by the Division of Commerce. Every holder shall maintain the records containing such information accessible for examination by the Division. 
B.  All accidents arising from or in connection with the operation of taxicabs which result in death or injury to any person or in damage to any vehicle, or to any property in an amount exceeding the sum of $100 shall be reported within 24 hours from the time of occurrence to the Division of Commerce in a form of report to be furnished by the Division. The reports shall be for the use of the Division in developing useful information in the prevention of accidents. 
C.  All certificate holders shall file with the Division of Commerce copies of all contracts, agreements, arrangements, memorandum or other writings relating to the furnishing of taxicab service to any hotel, theater, hall, public resort, railway station or other place of public gathering, whether such arrangement is made with the holder of any corporation, firm or association with which the holder may be interested or connected. Failure to file such copies within seven days shall be sufficient cause for the suspension or revocation of a certificate of any offending holder in accordance with the procedures set forth in § 307-11. 
[Amended 4-10-1996 by Ord. No. 96-003]  
§ 307-33. - Advertising. 
A.  Subject to the provisions of this article and the rules and regulations of the Division, taxicabs may display advertising on or above the rear bumper of the cab only when such advertising is properly framed and does not obstruct rear vision. 
B.  Out-of-town taxicab companies shall not display any type of advertising in public telephone booths, taverns, restaurants or other public places in the city.  
§ 307-34. - Enforcement. 
[Amended 4-10-1996 by Ord. No. 96-003; 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
The Division of Commerce is hereby given the authority and is instructed to watch and observe the conduct of holders and drivers operating under this article. Upon discovering a violation of this article, the Division shall order or take appropriate action.  
§ 307-35. - Use of radios. 
[Amended 9-25-1991 by Ord. No. McC-361; 4-10-1996 by Ord. No. 96-003] 
A.  Subject to required licensing and approval by the appropriate authorities, including the Division of Commerce of the city, owners may use radios to dispatch taxicabs; provided, however, that no holder of a certificate of public convenience under this article may use or maintain any radio, scanner or any other device set to the frequency of any other radio-dispatched cab or any other autobus, livery or limousine service licensed by the City of Jersey City; nor may any taxicab be equipped with any radio, scanner or device capable of receiving the dispatch calls of any other taxi or any other autobus, livery or limousine service licensed to operate in Jersey City. Any certificate holder or driver found guilty of a violation of this subsection shall have his or her certificate or license suspended for a period of up to 30 days according to the procedures set forth in § 307-11. Any owner or driver found guilty of a second violation shall have his or her certificate or license revoked in accordance with the procedures set forth in § 307-11. 
[Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
B.  Taxicabs may be equipped with citizens band radios, provided that the installation is approved by the Director. Citizens band radios in taxicabs or at dispatch offices shall be limited to use in an emergency or to report crimes in progress to other cabs equipped with similar radios so that the police can be summoned. No owner or driver may use a citizens band radio for any commercial purpose. The use of a citizens band radio for any commercial purpose such as soliciting fares may result in a fine or suspension of the certificate or license and referral to the Federal Communications Commission (FCC). All citizens band radios installed in taxicabs shall comply with regulations of the FCC.  
§ 307-36. - Variance. 
[Added 4-10-1996 by Ord. No. 96-003; 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
An applicant may request a variance from the strict compliance with a specific requirement of this article by requesting same in writing to the Business Administrator. The application should contain all pertinent details, together with documentation, which the applicant wishes considered. The approval or denial of the application for variance shall be at the discretion of the Business Administrator and shall not be approved absent a showing that strict compliance with the specific requirement would create a practical hardship for the applicant and that the proposed alternative will in no way jeopardize the health, welfare and safety of passengers or the public in general.  
§ 307-36.1. - Violations and penalties. 
[Added 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050; amended 4-10-1996 by Ord. No. 96-003] 
In addition to any and all penalties described above, any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25.  
ARTICLE II - Limousines and Transportation Network Company Vehicles[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-156, adopted January 11, 2012, amended the Code by repealing former Arts. II and III, §§ 307-37—307-42, and adding a new Art. II. Former Art. II pertained to autobuses, livery and limousine services, and derived from Ord. No. J-682, adopted February 3, 1976; Ord. No. S-128, adopted September 19, 1978; and Ord. No. 97-052, adopted August 13, 1997. Subsequently, 19-036 , adopted April 24, 2019, amended the title of Art. II. 
State Law reference— Motor vehicles - registration and licensing, N.J.S.A. 39:3-3 et seq.; power to license; license fees, N.J.S.A. 40:52-1 and -2; limousines, N.J.S.A. 48:6-13 et seq. 
 
§ 307-37. - Definitions. 
[Added 1-11-2012 by Ord. No. 11-156; 4-24-2019 by Ord. No. 19-036 ] 
The following words and phrases when used in this chapter have the meanings as set forth herein: 
CITY - The City of Jersey City. 
CRUISING - The driving of limousine vehicles on the streets, alleyways or other public places of the. City in search or solicitation of prospective passengers. 
DIRECTOR - The Director of the Division of Commerce in the City of Jersey City's Department of Housing, Economic Development and Commerce. 
DIVISION - The Division of Commerce of the City of Jersey City's Department of Housing, Economic Development and Commerce. 
HEARING - A public hearing at which the licensee shall be given an opportunity to appear personally and be represented by his/her chosen counsel and be heard and to present evidence on his/her behalf or otherwise answer the charges against him/her. 
HEARING OFFICER - Shall be the Business Administrator or his/her designee. 
HOLDER - A person or entity to whom a limousine license has been issued. 
LICENSE INSPECTOR - An inspector acting on behalf of the Division. 
LICENSING YEAR - April 1 of any given year through March 31 of the following year. 
LIMOUSINE OPERATOR - Any person holding a valid current New Jersey or New York driver's license with a passenger endorsement or possessing any other such license or class of license as required by the State of New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission for a limousine driver/operator. 
LIMOUSINE VEHICLE (or LIMOUSINE) - Any automobile or motor car, issued special registration plates bearing the word "limousine" pursuant to Section 12 of P.L. 1979, c.224 (C.39:3-19.5), which is engaged in the business of carrying passengers on a pre-arranged charter basis, which is not conducted on a regular route or at a regular time, with a seating capacity of no more than fourteen (14) passengers, not including the driver, provided that such a vehicle is certified by the manufacturer of the original vehicle (and the second-stage manufacturer, if applicable) to conform to Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards promulgated by the United States Department of Transportation pursuant to 49 CFR 567.1 et seq. and 49 CFR 567.1 et seq. In addition, a "Vehicle Emission Control Information" label, which contains the name and trademark of the manufacturer and an unconditional statement of compliance with the emission requirements of the Environmental Protection Agency, shall be present on the vehicle. Nothing herein shall be construed to include taxicabs, hotel buses, buses employed solely in transporting school children or teachers, or vehicles operated by businesses engaged in the practice of mortuary science when those vehicles are used exclusively for providing transportation related to the provision of funeral services. 
MVC - The New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission. 
TRADE DRESS BEACON or BEACON - The illuminated signage featuring the proprietary trademark or logo that identifies the Transportation Network Company and which can be installed on a vehicle's dashboard or attached to its windshield. 
TRANSFER - To sell, transfer or in any other manner dispose of, a limousine license. Where the license is in the name of a corporation or other legal entity, any change in ownership or control of the corporate entity holding the license shall constitute a "transfer" of the license held in the name of said corporation or other legal entity. The Division shall determine what constitutes a change in control. 
TRANSPORTATION NETWORK COMPANY or RIDESHARE COMPANY or COMPANY - A corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship. or other entity that is registered as a business in the State or operates in this State, and uses a digital network to connect a transportation network company rider to a transportation network company driver to provide a prearranged ride. A transportation network company shall not include an individual, corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship, or other entity arranging non-emergency medical transportation for individuals qualifying for Medicaid under P.L. 1968, c.413 (C.30:4D-1 et seq.) or Medicare under 42 U.S.C. § 1395 et seq., pursuant to a contract with the State or a managed care organization, whereby Medicaid or Medicare funding is used to pay for the non-emergency medical transportation services.  
§ 307-38. - Limousine service license(s). 
[Added 1-11-2012 by Ord. No. 11-156] 
A.  Limousine license required; fees. 
(1)  All limousine owners whose principal place of business is within the City of Jersey City shall, prior to operating any limousine service, first obtain a limousine license from the Division in accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:16-13—22.7. Licenses shall be for the year beginning on April 1 and ending March 31 of the following year and be renewable every year. 
(2)  No limousine license for limousine services with principal places of business within the City of Jersey City, shall be issued or renewed unless the applicant has paid the annual license fee of $50.00 for each limousine service business and $10.00 for each limousine. Limousine license fees shall be in addition to any other fees or charges established by the proper authorities and applicable to the holder of the license(s) for the vehicle or vehicles under his operation and control. 
(3)  Limousine services with a place of business within, and licensed by, the City of Jersey City shall be required to pay an annual administrative fee of $500.00 to cover administrative costs including, but not limited to, vehicle inspections, preparation of reports and documents by Division personnel and the enforcement by the Division of the provisions of this chapter. 
(4)  Notwithstanding any other provision herein to the contrary, the Director may require a limousine corporate license in accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:16-18.1. 
B.  Obtaining a limousine license; procedure; renewal of license. 
(1)  All applications for a license shall be filed with the Division, and a duplicate with the MVC, on forms provided by the Division, and shall be notarized, furnishing the following information: 
(a)  The name and address of the applicant and a description of all transportation businesses that the applicant and/or its operators have had an ownership interest in, or employment at, within the past five years. 
(b)  Proof that the applicant is registered to do business in New Jersey. 
(c)  The applicant's Corpcode, which is the 15-digit corporation code, issued by the State of New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission. 
(d)  The year, type, model, color, insurance carried for, and VIN number of, each vehicle for which the license is desired and the number of persons the limousine is capable of carrying. 
(e)  Copies of all of the licenses and passenger endorsements of the operators who drive for the applicant. 
(f)  Such further information as the director shall require to determine the eligibility of the applicant. 
(2)  The original limousine license, or a copy thereof, shall be retained within each limousine. 
(3)  The holder shall make annual application for renewal of his/her limousine license and limousine operator's licenses not later than 30 days prior to the expiration date, and pay the annual fee of $50.00 for the limousine license and $10.00 for each limousine. Late filing of applications shall be subject to an additional $50.00 late filing fee. 
C.  Power of attorney; insurance requirement. 
(1)  The applicant shall execute and deliver to the MVC a power of attorney whereby the holder shall appoint the MVC as his true and lawful attorney for the purpose of acknowledging service of process of any complaint(s) against the holder in compliance with N.J.S.A. 48:61-16. 
(2)  The applicant prior to becoming a holder or renewing his license must purchase, for each limousine in his/her service, an insurance policy from a company duly licensed to transact business under the insurance laws of this State in the sum of $1,500,000.00 as required by N.J.S.A. 48:16-14. The City of Jersey City must be named as an additional insured and an insurance card for the applicant must be placed in each limousine. 
(3)  In the event that the holder's insurance is canceled, the holder's license shall terminate on the date of the cancellation, unless the insurance is reinstated and proof of the withdrawal of the cancellation or a new insurance policy is submitted to the Division within 24 hours. As a condition of obtaining a City of Jersey City limousine license, the limousine license holder agrees to provide the Director of the Division, or his/her designee, with the authority to communicate directly with the limousine license holder's insurance companies. 
D.  Issuance of limousine license. The Director is responsible for issuing limousine licenses. The license will state the name and address of the applicant, the date of issuance and the year, type and model of the vehicle; otherwise, the application shall be denied. Upon issuance, the license for each limousine shall be retained within the limousine and available for inspection by Division personnel and any law enforcement officer. 
E.  Requirements for maintaining limousine license. Once a year, each holder of a limousine license shall, as condition for the continuation of the license(s) submit his limousine vehicle(s) for full mechanical and vehicle inspections during the period of validity of the license according to a schedule established by the Division. Such inspection shall be preceded by an inspection at an MVC Commercial Inspection Station and then by the Division. The City of Jersey City requires all limousines licensed by the Division to, at all times, be in a safe and operable condition, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  The air-conditioning, heating and defrost systems must work. 
(2)  A two-way communications system and a removable first aid kit must be in the limousine. 
(3)  An operable fire extinguisher must be in an accessible place within the limousine. The trunk of the vehicle shall not be considered an accessible place. 
(4)  When the height of the vehicle floor is ten inches or more above ground level, there must be sideboards attached to the permanent body of the limousine. 
(5)  The horn must function properly so as to produce a sound audible for 200 feet. 
(6)  All doors and door lock poles must be fully operational. 
(7)  Each seat must have sufficient leg room to meet any applicable ADA (the "Americans With Disabilities Act") requirement. 
(8)  The limousine vehicle must be a painted with glossy paint, a fully integrated body and meet such further structural requirements as the Director determines will render the limousine at all times safe, functional and the premium vehicle which the public expects when paying for a limousine. 
F.  Transfer of limousine license. 
(1)  No limousine license may be sold, assigned or otherwise transferred without the prior consent of the Division. No limousine license shall be mortgaged, pledged or otherwise rendered to secure a debt, loan, advance or other financial transaction. 
(2)  If the holder voluntarily permits any other person other than an operator, licensed under this chapter, to drive or operate a limousine, it shall be considered a transfer and a violation of this chapter. 
G.  Suspension and revocation of limousine license; notice and hearing. 
(1)  The Director may suspend a limousine service license for 30 days or less, or after a notice and hearing, revoke the license, if the holder has: 
(a)  Violated any of the provisions of this chapter; 
(b)  Violated any ordinance of the City of Jersey City or the laws of New Jersey, the violation of which reflects unfavorably on the fitness of the holder to offer public transportation. 
(c)  Discontinued operation of a limousine service for more than 60 days. 
(2)  Suspension and revocation of a limousine license must be preceded with notice to the holder by means of providing him or her with a written copy of the charges followed by an opportunity to present evidence on his or her behalf to the Director at a hearing, with counsel representation if he or she so elects. 
(3)  A ruling adverse to the holder may be appealed to the Business Administrator. The request for an appeal shall be in writing and submitted within 20 days of the adverse ruling. A hearing shall thereupon be shall be scheduled with at least ten days' notice to the holder.  
§ 307-39. - Limousine operator's license. 
[Added 1-11-2012 by Ord. No. 11-156] 
A.  Limousine operator's license requited; fees for issuance and renewal. 
(1)  Every person who operates a limousine for hire upon the streets of the City of Jersey City and every person who owns or controls a limousine permitting it to be so driven, shall first obtain and have in force, at all times, a limousine operator's license. Every operator shall be a holder or an employee of a holder. 
(2)  Each applicant for a limousine operator's license must: 
(a)  Be of the age of 21 years or over and be a resident of the State of New Jersey, or the State of New York for one year or more. 
(b)  Present evidence satisfactory to the Division that he/she meets all governmental statutory and regulatory requirements for a limousine operator's license. 
(c)  Be able to read, write and speak the English language, and have a basic knowledge of Hudson County roadways and landmarks. 
(3)  No operator's license shall be issued or renewed unless the applicant has paid an initial license fee of $75.00 and, on or before March 31 of each year, and $50.00 as the annual renewal fee. 
B.  Obtaining a limousine operator's license; procedure. 
(1)  An applicant for a limousine operator's license shall file an application for such license with the Division on forms provided by the Division and pay the prescribed fee. All documentation submitted in support of an application shall be original documents or legible certified copies of same. The application shall contain the following information: 
(a)  The full name and address of the applicant. 
(b)  Places of residence for the preceding three years. 
(c)  Age, place of birth, height, color of eyes and hair. 
(d)  The experience of the applicant in the transportation of passengers. 
(e)  A valid driver's license with passenger endorsement 
(f)  The successful completion of a drug and alcohol test for controlled dangerous substances as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:35-2. The cost of this test shall be at the applicant's, expense. 
(g)  Permission for release of the applicant's criminal background check to the Division. 
(h)  MVC-issued record abstract indicating the applicant's driving history from at least the preceding five (5) years, from all States in which the applicant has lived, which shall be no more that thirty (30) days old. 
(i)  The applicant's citizenship status with evidence of same, such as passport, naturalization papers, alien registration and work authorization from the United States Department of Homeland Security, if not a United States citizen. A United States passport shall satisfy United States' citizenship. 
(2)  The applicant shall furnish four passport-type photographs of himself taken within 30 days of the application, front view, two inches by two inches in size. 
(3)  Each application must be accompanied by a certificate from a licensed and practicing physician of the State of New Jersey, certifying that the applicant has been examined on a certain date and that, in his opinion, the applicant is of sound physique, with good eyesight, not subject to epilepsy, vertigo, heart trouble or any other infirmity or body or mind which might make him unfit for the safe operation of a limousine vehicle. The examination shall be within 30 days prior to the filing of the application. 
(4)  Convictions of those crimes set forth in N.J.S.A. 48:16-22.3a(d) shall disqualify an applicant, which includes, but shall not be limited to assault, arson, burglary, escape, extortion, homicide, kidnapping, robbery or endangering the welfare of a child, as shall any conviction for driving under the influence of drugs or alcohol or unlawful use, possession or sale of a controlled dangerous substance (as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:35-2), within the preceding five years, absent a certificate of rehabilitation as described in N.J.S.A. 48:16-22.3a(g). 
(5)  Prior to issuing a limousine operator's license, the Director shall consider the application, the police investigative report^ criminal background check, driving history, any other documentation the Director requires to be attached thereto, and any relevant facts whatsoever and shall approve or reject the application. If the application is rejected, the applicant may request a hearing, in accordance with this chapter, in order to offer evidence as to why his application should be reconsidered. 
C.  Issuance of limousine operator's license; form of license. Upon the Director's approval of an application for a limousine operator's license, the Division shall issue a license to the applicant which shall bear the name, signature and photograph of the applicant. The license shall also contain the City license number and a notice that, in case of any complaint, the Division shall be notified of the license number of the operator. The license shall bear the signature of the Director. It must be carried by the operator in the limousine and be available for inspection by any law enforcement officer and Division inspector at any time. The license shall be in effect for the remainder of the licensing year ending the following March 31. 
D.  Suspension and revocation of limousine operator's license. 
(1)  The Director may suspend a limousine operator's license for 30 days or less, or after a notice and hearing, revoke the license, if the operator has: 
(a)  Violated any of the provisions of this chapter; 
(b)  Violated any ordinance of the City of Jersey City or the laws of New Jersey, the violation of which reflects unfavorably on the fitness of the operator to offer public transportation. 
(2)  Suspension and revocation of an operator's license must be preceded with notice to the operator by means of providing him or her with a written copy of the charges followed by an opportunity to present evidence on his or her behalf to the Director at a hearing, with counsel representation if he or she so elects. 
(3)  A ruling adverse to the operator may be appealed to the Business Administrator. The request for an appeal shall be in writing and submitted within 20 days of the adverse ruling. A hearing shall thereupon be shall be scheduled with at least ten days' notice to the operator. 
E.  Compliance with other laws. Every limousine operator shall comply with all city, state and federal laws. Violation of any laws which reflects unfavorably on the fitness of such operator to engage in public transportation; failure to do so will justify the Division in suspending and/or, after a hearing, revoking the violator's license. If, at any time within the license year, an operator has been found guilty of a crime or misdemeanor or has permitted his vehicle to be used for any illegal purpose, the Division may immediately suspend or, after a hearing, revoke the operator's license.  
§ 307-40. - Limousine vehicles' condition and appearance; checklist; reports; operation of limousine while in City of Jersey City. 
[Added 1-11-2012 by Ord. No. 11-156] 
A.  Limousine condition and appearance; checklist. 
(1)  No limousine license shall be issued until the limousine vehicle has been thoroughly inspected and found to be in a safe, clean and sanitary condition for the transportation of passengers. 
(2)  Every vehicle operating under this chapter shall be inspected in accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:16-22.2, which requires the operator to conduct a general examination of the condition of the vehicle prior to any operation of the limousine on the streets of Jersey City or the highways of this State for the purpose of picking up passengers. The inspection shall be conducted according to a check list maintained in the limousine for the day in which the limousine is driven and then filed with the holder employing the operator. The checklist shall contain, at a minimum, an examination of the tires, windshield wipers, horn, condition of front and rear windshield and side windows, front and rear lights, fluid levels and brakes, as well as the condition of the two-way communications system, as required by N.J.S.A. 48:16-22.2. 
(3)  Any limousine vehicle on the streets of the City of Jersey City in violation of this section may be removed from the street by the Department of Public Safety. If the limousine vehicle is not returned to service in compliance with this section within 30 days, the Division may suspend or, after a hearing, revoke the limousine license. 
[Amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] 
B.  Reporting of accidents; other reports required. 
(1)  All accidents arising from or in connection with the operation of a limousine which result in death or injury to any person or in damage to any vehicle or to any property in an amount exceeding $100.00 shall be reported to the Division within 48 hours of the occurrence. Copies of the police report prepared as a result of the accident must also be provided to the Division within five business days. Failure to report said accidents shall be grounds for suspension and/or revocation of the limousine operator's and/or holder's license. 
(2)  Whenever the registration and/or license plates for a limousine licensed by the City of Jersey City shall change, the limousine license holder shall provide the Division with written verification from the MVC, indicating the change of the license plate and/or change of registration prior to use. 
(3)  Whenever a holder decommissions a limousine and surrenders the license in accordance with state law, he/she shall report this fact to the Division and provide the Division with a MVC-issued letter of surrender. 
C.  Passengers - no solicitation; receipt and discharge. 
(1)  No operator shall solicit passengers on any City street, parking lot, taxi stand or other location where vehicles may enter or stand, nor shall any driver engage in "cruising" as defined in this chapter. Furthermore, no driver shall pick up any passenger in response to a signal, hail or gesture. 
(2)  Receipt and discharge of passengers on a sidewalk. Drivers shall not receive or discharge passengers in the roadway but shall pull up to the right-hand side of the roadway as nearly as possible or, in the absence of a sidewalk, to the extreme right-hand side of the road and there receive or discharge passengers, except upon one way streets, where passengers may be discharged at either the right- or left-hand sidewalk or side of the roadway, in the absence of a sidewalk. 
D.  Standing in certain locations prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any limousine to stand in any restricted area, including a taxi stand. 
E.  Return to base of operation. All limousines must be returned to their regular bases of operation after the discharging of passengers.  
§ 307-41. - Transportation Network Company vehicles: display of Trade Dress Beacon mandatory. 
[Added 4-24-2019 by Ord. No. 19-036 ] 
A.  Every transportation network company with drivers operating out of the City must provide those drivers with a consistent and distinctive trade dress beacon for use in the vehicles operated by those drivers when they are active on the Company's digital platform or when providing transportation network company service within the borders of the City. The trade dress beacon used by the transportation network company must be approved by the Division of Commerce before its use. 
All trade dress beacons must be: 
(1)  Readable during daylight hours at a distance of 50 feet; 
(2)  No larger than eight inches wide by eight inches tall; and 
(3)  Illuminated in such a way that it is patently visible so as to be seen in darkness; and 
Additionally, every transportation network company shall forward to the Division of Commerce, the name, contact information, license plate number(s) and physical address of each driver operating out of the City who has been issued a trade dress beacon. 
B.  Every transportation network company vehicle driver, both those operating out of the City, and those operating within the City, must affix an approved trade dress beacon to the vehicle's dashboard or windshield at all times when the transportation network company driver is active on the transportation network company digital platform or providing transportation network company service within the borders of the City. The beacon shall at all times be illuminated. 
C.  Every transportation network company shall immediately notify the Division of Commerce when a driver, operating out of the City, ceases to be employed by or work for the Company. All trade dress beacons must be surrendered to the transportation network company immediately after separation from company. Should the company not receive back the beacon furnished to a particular driver, it shall report in writing to the Division of Commerce, the driver's name, license plate number(s) and last known physical address. If a driver cannot return the beacon at the end of his or her employment with a transportation network company, the driver must provide to the Division of Commerce a signed and witnessed affidavit explaining why the beacon could not be returned.  
§ 307-42. - Enforceability. 
[Added 1-11-2012 by Ord. No. 11-156; amended 4-24-2019 by Ord. No. 19-036 ] 
The provisions of this article may be enforced by State and local Police and by officers and agents of the Division of Commerce. 
Editor's note— Former § 307-41. Renumbered by Ord. No. 19-036 .  
§ 307-43. - Violation and penalties. 
[Added 1-11-2012 by Ord. No. 11-156; amended 4-24-2019 by Ord. No. 19-036 ] 
Except as set forth in N.J.S.A. 48:16-22.a, providing a penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00) against an owner of a limousine service who hires an unqualified driver, and any other penalty which may be adopted by N.J.S.A. 48:16-13—22.7 or by N.J.S.A. 39:5H-1 et seq., any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided for in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25. 
Editor's note— Former § 307-42. Renumbered by Ord. No. 19-036 .  
§ 307-44. - Severability. 
[Added 1-11-2012 by Ord. No. 11-156; amended 4-24-2019 by Ord. No. 19-036 ] 
The provisions of this article are declared to be severable and if any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase thereof, is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining sections, subsections, sentences, clauses and phrases of this article, but shall remain in effect; it being the legislative intent that this article shall stand notwithstanding the invalidity of any part. 
Editor's note— Former § 307-43. Renumbered by Ord. No. 19-036 .  
Chapter 310 - THEATERS 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City 11-12-1980 by Ord. No. S-523. Amendments noted where applicable.] 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Public assemblages — See Ch. 122. 	Fees and charges — See Ch. 160. 
Dance halls — See Ch. 142. 	Zoning — See Ch. 345. 
 
 
§ 310-1. - License required. 
A.  Every owner or operator of a theater in the city shall obtain a license from the city to operate said theater. Each such license shall be for a term of one (1) month. 
B.  In the event that a building contains more than one (1) theater, a separate license shall be required for each separate theater in said building and a separate license fee shall be paid for each such theater.  
§ 310-2. - License fee; expiration. [Amended 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050; 2-11-1998 by Ord. No. 98-004] 
The annual license fee for each license shall be as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges. The license shall expire on December 31 of each year. The initial license fee following the change in expiration date will be subject to proration by the Division of Licenses and Fees.  
§ 310-3. - Violation and penalties. [Amended 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050] 
Any person operating a theater without a license shall upon conviction, be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25.  
Chapter 313 - TIRES, SALE OF 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City 5-27-1982 by Ord. No. MC-189. Amendments noted where applicable.] 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Solid waste — See Ch. 287. 
 
§ 313-1. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
PERSON - Any person, partnership, corporation, association or organization of any kind. 
USED MOTOR VEHICLE TIRE - Any used tire previously used or designed for use on an automobile, truck, motorcycle, bicycle or any other trackless vehicle used to transport persons or property.  
§ 313-2. - Permit required. 
A.  No person may conduct within the City of Jersey City a business of selling or otherwise disposing of used motor vehicle tires without first obtaining a permit from the license issuing authority; nor may any person dispose of used motor vehicle tires incidental to any business conducted within the City of Jersey City without first obtaining a permit. 
B.  Persons subject to this Article include but are not limited to persons conducting the following businesses: 
(1)  Dealers in new and used motor vehicle tires, whether at wholesale or retail. 
(2)  Service stations and motor vehicle repair shops which buy, sell or repair new and used tires [1] 
(3)  Junkyards and junk dealers. [2] 
(4)  Persons engaged in the business of repairing motor vehicles incidental to any other business. 
(5)  Persons engaged in the business of buying and selling used motor vehicles [3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's Note: See also Ch. 215, Motor Vehicle Repair Shops. 

--- (2) --- 
Editor's Note: See also Ch. 202, Junkyards. 

--- (3) --- 
Editor's Note: See also Ch. 324, Used Car Dealers. 
 
§ 313-3. - Fee; plan of disposal; records. 
A.  The annual fee for the permit required by this article shall be as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges. All permits shall expire on October 31 of each year. The initial license fee following the change in expiration date will be subject to proration by the Division of Licenses and Fees. 
[Amended 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050; 2-11-1998 by Ord. No. 98-004] 
B.  Applications for a permit for the disposal of motor vehicle tires shall be filed with the license issuing authority. Applications shall be accompanied by a plan of disposal on a form furnished by the license issuing authority. The plan of disposal shall furnish the following information reasonably necessary to the enforcement of this Article; 
(1)  The name, address and owner of each location to be used for the disposal of used motor vehicle tires. 
(2)  A sworn and notarized statement that the applicant is engaged in the business of selling used motor vehicle tires and does not intend to dispose of used tires other than by sale. 
C.  No person may dispose of any used motor vehicle tires, other than in accordance with the plan of disposal filed with the license issuing authority, without first having filed an amendment to his or her application specifying the name, address and owner of each new or additional place of disposal. To the extent applicable, any such disposal shall be in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 287, Solid Waste. Each tire shall be marked with an identification number or other means of identifying the person disposing of the tire. The means of identification shall be furnished by the license issuing authority. The records of the license issuing authority shall be available for public inspection during regular business hours.  
§ 313-4. - Time limit for compliance. 
Persons conducting any business subject to this article shall have 90 days from the effective date of this article to obtain the required permit.  
§ 313-5. - Violations and penalties. [Added 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050] 
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25.  
Chapter 316 - TOBACCO 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City: Art. I, 7-17-1991 as Ord. No. McC-339. Amendments noted where applicable.] 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Cigarette vending machines — See Ch. 329, Art. II.  
ARTICLE I - Sale Restrictions 
[Adopted 7-17-1991 as Ord. No. McC-339] 
 
§ 316-1. - Unlawful acts. 
No person shall: 
A.  Sell or offer to sell any cigarette or tobacco product other than in the sealed, original packaging provided by the manufacture. 
B.  Distribute cigarettes or products containing tobacco or non-tobacco cigarette products for any commercial purpose other than at full retail price.  
§ 316-2. - Violations and penalties.[1] 
The penalty for violating this Article shall be as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. 
 
Chapter 319 - TOWERS AND TOWING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
History— Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City May 13, 1981 by Ord. No. S-610; amended in its entirety September 13, 2000 by Ord. No. 00-117. Subsequent amendments noted where applicable. 
Cross reference— Fees and charges, Ch. 160; motor vehicle repair shops, Ch. 215; parking lots and public garages, Ch. 236; vehicles and traffic, Ch. 332. 
 
§ 319-1. - Definitions. 
[Amended 3-14-2012 by Ord. No. 12-017; 4-25-2018 by Ord. No. 18-030 ; 6-13-2018 by Ord. No. 18-059 ; 8-15-2018 by Ord. No. 18-082 ] 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
AUTHORIZED AGENT OF THE OWNER - The driver of a vehicle if such driver is not the owner or the agent of the owner or the next-of-kin of the owner. 
CLASS A TOWER'S LICENSE (HEAVY DUTY) - Required to be on police rotation list for Class I, Class II, and Class III vehicles and/or to pick up vehicles abandoned on private property within the City of Jersey City and/or to operate a vehicle towing business within the City of Jersey City. 
CLASS A TOWER'S LICENSE (LIGHT DUTY) - Required to be on police rotation list for Class I and Class II vehicles and/or to pick up vehicles abandoned on private property within the City of Jersey City and/or to operate a vehicle towing business within the City of Jersey City. 
CLASS B TOWER'S LICENSE (INCIDENTAL) - Required to operate a vehicle towing business within the City of Jersey City for towing operations that are incidental to another business which is located within the City of Jersey City, e.g., junkyard, car dealership and auto repair shop. This license does not permit a tower to be on the rotation list. 
CLASS I VEHICLE - Any motor vehicle not exceeding 6,000 pounds' gross weight. Examples in this weight class include passenger cars, pickup trucks, vans, motorcycles and some sport utility vehicles. 
CLASS II VEHICLE - Any motor vehicle having a gross weight exceeding 6,000 pounds up to a maximum of 14,000 pounds. 
CLASS III VEHICLE - Any motor vehicle having a gross weight over 14,000 pounds. 
CRUISING - Operating a tower to and from a public highway at a slow rate of speed or in any other fashion calculated for the obvious purpose of soliciting business along the highway. 
DIRECTOR - The Director of the Department of Housing, Economic Development and Commerce. 
DISABLED VEHICLE - Any vehicle disabled as a result of an accident or mechanical failure which must be towed away for safety or traffic reason; or a vehicle parked illegally or abandoned; or a vehicle parked or left unattended on private property without the consent of the owner or other person in control or possession of the property or parked or left unattended for a period in excess of that for which consent was given, except in the case of emergency or disablement of the vehicle where the owner or operator has arranged for the expeditious removal of the vehicle. 
DISTRICT - A section of the City designated by geographic area and shown on the Vehicle Impound District Map on file in the Office of City Clerk. 
DIVISION DIRECTOR - The Director of the Division of Commerce. 
IMPOUND FACILITY - A facility operated by an impound operator to receive any vehicle towed to the facility by a tower at the request of the Division of Police or the Division of Parking Enforcement. 
IMPOUND OPERATOR - A person, corporation, or other legal entity that operates an impound facility. 
IMPOUND OPERATOR LICENSE - Required to operate an impound facility to receive any impound vehicle towed to it by any Class A licensees. 
IMPOUND VEHICLE - A vehicle that the Division of Police or the Division of Parking Enforcement has directed a tower to remove from the public right-of-way and towed to the impound facility. 
LICENSEE - A person who has been issued a tower license by this City and its employees or agents. 
OPERATING A VEHICLE TOWING BUSINESS WITHIN THE CITY OF JERSEY CITY - Towing, transporting, conveying or moving a motor vehicle from one location within the City of Jersey City to another location within the City of Jersey City. 
OWNER - The owner of a motor vehicle. 
PRINCIPAL LICENSE - The initial tower license issued to any person. 
SEIZED VEHICLES - Any vehicle impounded by the Department of Public Safety or Hudson County Prosecutor's office as contraband or evidence in a criminal proceeding. 
[Amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] 
SHORTWAVE RECEIVER - A radio receiver which is capable of operating on a frequency assigned by the Federal Communications Commission for fire, police, municipal or other governmental uses. 
SOLICITING - Requesting or attempting to persuade an owner or someone on his or her behalf to give permission to a tower to remove, repair or store a motor vehicle, for a consideration, without a previous request from the owner or someone on his or her behalf. 
SUPPLEMENTAL LICENSE - All additional licenses for additional towers issued to a person to whom a principal license was issued. 
TOWER - A mechanically propelled light- and heavy-duty vehicle used to tow, transport, convey or move a motor vehicle from one place to another place.  
§ 319-2. - License required; issuance; application. 
[Amended 3-14-2012 by Ord. No. 12-017] 
A.  Towing Licensees. No person shall operate a vehicle towing business within the city unless such person has obtained a Class A or Class B Tower's license issued by the Division of Commerce except with permission of the Office of Emergency Management in the event of an emergency. [Amended 2-23-11 by Ord. No. 11-025] 
B.  Impound Operator License. No person shall operate a pound or storage area for use by any Class A Licensee unless such person has obtained an Impound Operator License issued by the Division of Commerce. 
C.  No such license shall be issued except on the approval of the Division Director or designee. 
D.  Each license issued shall be assigned a license number, and the same number shall be assigned to every subsequent renewal of that particular license. 
E.  Application for all licenses shall be made to the Division Director on a form to be supplied by the Division Director for that purpose.  
§ 319-3. - Storage requirements for Class A licensees. 
[Amended 3-14-2012 by Ord. No. 12-017] 
A.  Off-street storage spaces. No Class A towing license or renewal thereof shall be issued unless the licensee or prospective licensee shall have the following indoor or outdoor off-street vehicle storage spaces within the City of Jersey City: 
(1)  If Class I vehicles are to be stored therein, there shall be a minimum of 10 storage spaces for such Class I vehicles. 
(2)  If Class II or Class III vehicles are to be stored therein, there shall be a minimum of 15 spaces, 10 for Class I vehicles and five for Class II and III vehicles. 
B.  The storage area, if outdoors, shall consist of a lot with an eight-foot fence securing the storage area. 
C.  Upon the fence or building, as the case may be, there shall be displayed a sign containing the name, address and telephone number or numbers of the licensee. The telephone number or numbers of the licensee shall be a telephone number which the licensee can be contacted at all times. 
D.  Storage facilities shall conform to any and all provisions of this Code and all zoning and municipal land use regulations. 
E.  The licensee shall provide a person in attendance at such storage facility Monday through Saturday between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Such person must be authorized by the licensee to complete whatever transactions are necessary to release a vehicle to the owner or owner's representative in accordance with this chapter. 
F.  The provisions of this section shall apply to existing licensees as well as new licensees. 
G.  No licensee who stores vehicles on or in his or her own storage facilities shall store or park a vehicle on any street or location other than the storage facility set forth in the application of the licensee. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to a licensee who does not store vehicles on or in his or her own storage facilities. However, in the case of a licensee who does not store vehicles on or in his or her own storage facility, it shall be a violation of this chapter for such a licensee to store a vehicle on any street or location other than the intended destination of the vehicle unless it is demonstrably impossible for the licensee to do otherwise. In such a situation, however, the licensee shall bring the vehicle to its intended destination as soon as possible thereafter. 
H.  No impounded vehicle shall be released unless authorized by the Director of Public Safety. 
[Amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ]  
§ 319-4. - Contents of all license application. 
[Amended 3-14-2012 by Ord. No. 12-017] 
The application for any license hereunder shall be made out in triplicate and shall be verified under oath and shall be filed with the Division of Commerce and shall contain the following: 
A.  Name and address of the applicant and, if a natural person, the date of birth. 
B.  If a corporation, the state under which incorporated and date of incorporation; the address of the principal office; the names and addresses of its officers and registered agent. 
C.  If any other type of organization, the name of same and, if the organization or its name is recorded, in what office and when; the names and addresses of the principal officers and directors. 
D.  The place from which the tower will operate and the address and telephone number of such place. There shall also be set forth the telephone number by which the licensee can be contacted at all times. 
E.  A description of the tower's equipment, giving the serial and motor number of all such equipment. 
F.  Prior convictions of crime, if any, by the owner or by an officer or director of the applicant, giving the date and place of such conviction and the nature of the crime. 
G.  Any other information which the Division Director, with the approval of the Department Director, shall deem necessary and proper for the full protection of the public's interest. 
H.  Acknowledgment by Class A Towers that they will only tow a Disabled Vehicle to a licensed facility and seized vehicles to a City lot. 
I.  All information and data pertaining to the particular towing vehicles to be licensed as a commercial vehicle as is required by the New Jersey Division of Motor Vehicles in an application for the registration of that particular towing vehicle. 
J.  Names of all persons who will be driving the tow vehicles and copies of their driver's licenses, including commercial driver's license (CDL), if applicable.  
§ 319-5. - Investigation of applicant; prohibition against owners who are members of Department of Public Safety. 
[Amended 3-14-2012 by Ord. No. 12-017; 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 
A.  The Division Director shall cause an investigation to be made to ascertain if the applicant is a person of good moral character. As to Class A applicants, the Division will determine whether the applicants' vehicles are in such condition that they can be operated in a safe manner. As to Class B or Impound Operator applicants, the Division will determine whether the off-street storage complies with this chapter. 
B.  No sworn member of the Department of Public Safety shall be permitted to own or be a principal in any Jersey City business or operation licensed under this chapter.  
§ 319-6. - Class A principal licenses; supplemental licenses. 
[Amended 3-14-2012 by Ord. No. 12-017] 
A.  Principal Class A license. 
(1)  Only one principal license shall be issued to a person as defined herein. 
(2)  The principal license shall pertain to the initial towing vehicle of the licensee. 
(3)  The principal license shall bear a serial number which will be assigned to that licensee. Said serial number shall be issued on all subsequent renewals of that principal license by that particular licensee and shall not be assigned to any other licensee. 
(4)  The principal license shall contain on the face thereof all the information and data required by the New Jersey Division of Motor Vehicles on an application for a registration certificate issued by said state agency. 
B.  Supplemental Class A license. 
(1)  If the holder of a principal license intends to operate more than one tower, said licensee shall apply for a supplemental license for each additional tower which the licensee intends to operate. 
(2)  The fee for a supplemental license shall be the same as the fee for the principal license. 
(3)  The supplemental license shall bear on the face thereof the same serial number as the principal license followed by a dash and the number 1 for the first additional tower and the number 2 for the second additional tower, etc. 
(4)  The information to be placed on the supplemental license shall be the same information required on the principal license, except that the information shall pertain to the particular additional towing vehicle for which the supplemental license is issued. 
C.  The business of a Class A licensee shall have no connection, directly or indirectly, in any way, with the business of any other Class A licensee. 
D.  No Class A licensee shall share storage facilities, office space, telephone or any other business facility or equipment with any other Class A licensee. 
E.  No Class A licensee shall rent or lease any of the above facilities or equipment to any Class A licensee. 
F.  No Class A licensee shall utilize the storage, office space or telephone or other business facilities and equipment of any other licensee, nor shall a licensee permit or allow any other Class A licensee to utilize such facilities and equipment of the licensee. 
G.  For the purposes of the rotation system hereinafter provided, a licensee shall be entitled to only one place on the rotation list, no matter how many licensed towing vehicles the licensee shall operate. 
H.  Any violation of the requirements of this section shall be grounds for the suspension or revocation of the principal license and all supplemental licenses issued to the license.  
§ 319-7. - Payment accepted. 
[Added 3-14-2012 by Ord. No. 12-017] 
As a condition of receiving any and all licenses under this chapter, a licensee shall at minimum arrange to accept payment by Visa, MasterCard, American Express, cash and money order from the owner or driver of a vehicle for any towing, impoundment and storage fees. Personal check or other methods of payment will be at the option of the licensee. If payment is made by personal check, the licensee may require identification in the form of a valid major credit card in the name of the owner or driver of the vehicle. In appropriate cases and for good cause shown, the Division Director may waive the requirement of payment acceptance by credit card as to any tower who provides evidence of an unsuccessful but good faith attempt to make such arrangement. The licensee must provide an itemized receipt, including the licensee's name, address and telephone number, listing all fees charged. The payment options available shall be posted in a conspicuous place near the place of payment and shall be on the rate schedule required to be given to the owner or driver of vehicles. The wording and placement of the payment options shall be approved by the Director.  
§ 319-7.1. - License fees; renewals. 
[Amended 3-14-2012 by Ord. No. 12-017] 
A.  The fee for a Class A, Class B and Impound Operator Licenses shall be as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges, for each license and all renewals of such license. This fee shall apply regardless of when during the year the license is applied for and/or approved. 
B.  All licenses shall expire on February 28 of each year and may be renewed upon submission of applications therefor and payment of the fees for each license. 
Editor's note— Former § 319-7. Renumbered by Ord. No. 12-017, adopted March 14, 2012.  
§ 319-8. - License transferability. 
[Amended 3-14-2012 by Ord. No. 12-017] 
No license shall be transferred from one licensee to another licensee, except that in the case of a death of any individual licensee the Division Director, upon proper application therefor, shall transfer the license to the authorized beneficiary of the deceased licensee; provided, further, that a licensee may transfer the license of one towing vehicle to another towing vehicle owned by the licensee upon written request to the Division Director on forms provided for such purpose.  
§ 319-9. - Suspension or revocation of license. 
A.  In addition to any penalties set forth in this chapter and this Code for the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, the Division Director, with the approval of the Department Director, may, after conducting a hearing on 10 days' notice to the licensee, suspend a license for a period of not more than one year or revoke same for the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or of a violation of any other provisions of this Code. 
[Amended 3-14-2012 by Ord. No. 12-017] 
B.  It shall be sufficient reason to suspend or revoke a license pursuant to Subsection A above for the following reasons (Note: These reasons are offered as examples only and are not to be considered as all-inclusive): 
[Amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] 
(1)  Refusal to render towing and storage services when summoned by the police pursuant to this chapter. 
(2)  Charging more than the prices established in this chapter. 
(3)  Arriving at the scene of a disabled vehicle or a vehicle to be impounded without first having been summoned by the police in accordance with the authorized procedure of the Director of Public Safety. 
(4)  Using a shortwave radio receiver adjusted to receive police calls. It shall be prima facie proof of the use of such equipment if the licensee arrives at the scene of a disabled vehicle or a vehicle to be impounded without having been summoned by the police. 
(5)  For the violation of any other provision of this chapter or of any other provision of this Code. 
(6)  For any violation of rotation list guidelines as promulgated by the Director of Public Safety.  
§ 319-10. - Information to be shown on equipment. 
On each side of the tower, the following shall be legibly printed in letters not less than three inches in height: 
A.  Name, address and telephone number of the licensee. 
B.  The phrase "licensed tower of Jersey City." 
C.  The phrase "request schedule of maximum prices which can be charged for towing and storage."  
§ 319-11. - Schedule of maximum prices; disclosure. 
[Amended 3-14-2012 by Ord. No. 12-017; 4-25-2018 by Ord. No. 18-030 ; 6-13-2018 by Ord. No. 18-059 ; 8-15-2018 by Ord. No. 18-082 ] 
A.  Maximum fees to tow, transport, convey or move vehicles (Class A licensee). 
(1)  No licensee shall charge more than the following maximum fees to tow, transport, convey or otherwise move a vehicle from one location within the City to another location within the City: 
(a)  Class I vehicle: $150.00, inclusive of a $40.00 administrative fee. 
(b)  Class II vehicles: $200.00, inclusive of a $40.00 administrative fee. 
(c)  Class III vehicles: $225.00 per hour (minimum two hours), inclusive of a $40.00 administrative fee. 
(2)  In addition to the above charges, recovery of an overturned vehicle, uprighting it or removing it from a hill, ditch or other similar precarious position will be charged no more than the rate of $50.00, $125.00, and $225.00 per hour for vehicle Classes I, II and III, respectively. If an issue arises as to these charges, it shall be the burden of the tower to provide documentation in the form of photographs as to the particular circumstances requiring the additional charges, i.e., position of the vehicle. 
(3)  No charge shall be imposed on a rotation list tow for waiting time, clean-up, yard fee or any other service not specifically authorized under this chapter. 
(4)  The above fees are chargeable once a vehicle is hooked up by the tower. 
B.  Maximum fees for vehicle storage (impound storage licensee). 
(1)  No licensee shall charge more than the following maximum fees per day, or portion thereof, for storage of a disabled vehicle towed away pursuant to this chapter: 
(a)  Class I vehicles: $30.00 per day. 
(b)  Class II vehicles: $60.00 per day. 
(c)  Class III vehicles: $100.00 per day. 
(2)  No vehicle shall be released from storage by a licensee unless proper owner and vehicle identification are shown. 
C.  Maximum fees for vehicle storage of vehicles impounded at the City's request. 
(1)  At such time as the City awards and executes a contract for impound services pursuant to a request for proposals (RFP), no impound operator shall charge more than the following maximum fees per day, or portion thereof, for storage of a vehicle towed from the public right-of-way pursuant to the request of the City's Division of Police or the City's Division of Parking Enforcement: 
(a)  Class I, II, and III vehicles: $3.00 per day for the first 30 days of storage per vehicle. 
(b)  Class I, II, and III vehicles: $2.00 per day for the thirty-first day of storage and any day thereafter. 
(c)  Class I, II, and III vehicles: A limit of $400.00 per vehicle stored regardless of the duration of the storage, except that a waiver may be granted for good cause upon the request of the City by the Division of Local Government Services in the Department of Community Affairs. 
(2)  No vehicle shall be released from storage by an impound operator unless proper owner and vehicle identification are shown. 
D.  Each driver of a Class A licensee shall have a schedule of the maximum prices when responding to the scene of a disabled, abandoned or other vehicle. 
E.  Before performing any service pursuant to this chapter, the licensee shall furnish the owner or driver of the vehicle with a copy of the schedule of prices. In the event that the owner or driver is incapacitated, the licensee shall furnish such schedule to the owner's authorized agent as defined herein before such person pays for the services rendered. 
F.  Neither a towing nor a storage fee shall he charged to an owner of an impounded vehicle under the following conditions provided the owner reclaims the vehicle within seven days after receiving notice of the impoundment: 
(1)  The vehicle is impounded as the result of a civil emergency such as fire, a utility malfunction or emergency construction work: 
(2)  The vehicle is impounded as evidence in a criminal proceeding by a law enforcement agency and subsequently released from impoundment by the agency; or 
(3)  The vehicle is impounded by order of a law enforcement officer in support of an investigation by a law enforcement agency. 
(4)  The vehicle is impounded in error. 
G.  A motor vehicle, impounded for any of the offenses listed in paragraph a. of N.J.S.A. 39:3-40.3 and reclaimed by a lessor or the holder of a lien, shall be released without payment pursuant to paragraph b. of N.J.S.A. 39:3-40.3. The violator shall be liable for all outstanding costs, fines and penalties. The City shall have a lien against the property and income of the violator for the total amount of the outstanding costs, fines and penalties. 
H.  In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.54, the Business Administrator shall establish a procedure for the receipt, investigation and disposition of complaints by motorists whose vehicle have been subject to non-consensual towing and/or impoundment. Such procedure shall provide for a written decision within 30 days after receiving the complaint and shall inform the complainant of the action, if any, to be taken by the City in response to the complaint.  
§ 319-12. - Pad of bills; receipts; required information. 
A.  All licensees when operating a tower, shall keep in their possession a pad of bills containing the owner's name and the address of his or her place of business and, before towing a vehicle, shall prepare a bill on their billhead form, in duplicate, the original of which shall be furnished to the owner of the disabled vehicle or such owner's authorized representative. 
B.  The bill shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The full name, address and business telephone number of the licensee. 
(2)  Full name and address of the person engaging the towing car. 
(3)  State registration number of the vehicle. 
(4)  The maximum rates which may be charged for towing and storage. 
(5)  Full name and address of the operator of tower. 
(6)  State registration number of tower. 
(7)  Tower's license number. 
(8)  Address of the place to where the vehicle will be towed and stored. 
C.  In the event the licensee is requested by the owner to furnish an estimate of the cost of repairs of damages sustained by the vehicle, said estimate shall be in writing, a copy of which is to be given to the owner of the vehicle, and such written estimate shall contain the following: 
(1)  An itemization of all the repairs in detail, with the cost of each item set forth therein. 
(2)  A statement that the items of repair are necessary and that the prices for said items are reasonable. 
(3)  The estimate shall be signed by the licensee and by the owner of the vehicle. 
(4)  No oral estimate shall be given. 
(5)  A statement as to who will make the repairs. 
D.  No licensee shall make any repairs or cause any other repairer to make such repairs to the vehicle without a written contract for same executed by the licensee and the owner of the vehicle or such owner's authorized agent, who shall be given a copy thereof. The contract shall contain the same certificate signed by the licensee as is required for estimates furnished pursuant to Subsection C above. The date and time when the contract is executed shall be set forth on the contract. 
E.  Rescinding contract for repairs. 
(1)  The owner of a vehicle or such owner's authorized agent may rescind the contract for repairs within 48 hours after signing it by giving written notice of the rescission to the person authorized to make the repairs. The notice may be made by telegram or other written communication. Each contract shall clearly state on the face of the contract the right and procedure to rescind the contract in accordance with this subsection. However, this option to rescind shall apply only in the case of a vehicle towed from the rotation list. 
(2)  The option to rescind may be waived by the owner of the vehicle. However, the waiver shall be in writing on a separate form provided therefor and shall be executed by the owner. The waiver, when executed, shall thereafter be attached to the aforesaid contract for repairs. 
F.  All bills for services, estimates and contracts shall be in writing and shall conform to the provisions of this chapter. No bills, estimates or contracts shall be oral. 
G.  The licensee shall keep an accurate record of all rotation and private property towing. The record shall contain, at minimum, an itemized list of charges, as well as pickup and drop-off locations. The record shall be kept and maintained for at least 12 months and available for review by the Division of Commerce and the Department of Public Safety. 
[Amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ]  
§ 319-13. - Liability insurance requirements. 
[Amended 3-14-2012 by Ord. No. 12-017] 
A.  All applicants for a Class A Tower's license must first obtain a policy of insurance from a B plus rated company approved by the Department of Banking and Insurance and authorized to do business in the State of New Jersey, or a bond of indemnity, acceptable to the Division Director, with limits for bodily injury and property damage liability of at least $1,000,000 for each person and for each accident. 
B.  In addition to the liability insurance set forth in Subsection A above, the Impound Operator Licensee shall provide garagekeepers' liability insurance to insure against the loss or damage to any stored vehicle in the sum of at least $50,000. 
C.  All the insurance required in Subsections A and B above shall contain the following provisions in these exact words: "The City of Jersey City and its officers, agents and employees are additional insureds and are fully covered by the provisions of this policy of insurance." The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to any licensee who is not in the rotation system. 
D.  All insurance policies shall be approved by the Risk Manager for the City of Jersey City before any license shall be issued. Any change in the wording of the additional insureds' clause in Subsection C above may be approved by the Risk Manager, provided that any such changes shall not result in any less protection of the city than is afforded to the licensee.  
§ 319-14. - Inspections; unlawful acts. 
[Amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] 
A.  Vehicles shall be kept in a safe condition and conform to requirements which may be promulgated by the Division Director with the approval of the Department Director. 
B.  The Division Director shall have the power to cause an examination and inspection to be made of the vehicle for which the license is sought, and no license shall be issued unless the vehicle is in a thoroughly safe condition. 
C.  No licensee shall turn or reverse the vehicle, except at intersections where such turns are permissible. 
D.  No licensee shall engage in cruising. 
E.  No licensee shall invite or permit loitering within or near his or her tower. 
F.  No licensee shall seek employment by repeatedly and persistently driving the tower to and fro in a short space on any highway or otherwise interfering with the proper and orderly progress of traffic along the highways. 
G.  No licensee shall solicit or attempt to divert prospective patrons of another tower. 
H.  No licensee shall solicit or divert prospective patrons of a given garage in the city to any other garage. 
I.  No licensee shall tow away a Disabled Vehicle to a place other than one designated by the owner or driver of the vehicle or to a licensed Impound Operator facility. In the event that such owner or driver of the vehicle is incapacitated by reason of injuries or otherwise, and the owner's authorized agent is not immediately available, the licensee shall tow the vehicle to a licensed facility designated on the licensee's application for a tower's license. 
J.  No operator of a tower shall solicit, demand or receive from any person any pay, commission or emolument whatever, except the proper fee for towing and storage of the vehicle in accordance with the schedule of maximum charges provided herein. 
K.  Licensees shall promptly report all changes of address to the Division Director. 
L.  No licensee shall respond to the scene of a disabled vehicle unless duly summoned by the police in accordance with the procedure established by the Director of Public Safety. 
M.  No licensee shall remove a motor vehicle involved in an accident in which a person has been killed or seriously injured unless such vehicle has been released by a duly authorized member of the Department of Public Safety. 
N.  No licensee shall refuse to render towing and storage services to a vehicle when duly summoned by the police, pursuant to the procedure established by the Director of Public Safety, and no licensee shall refuse to remove residual debris from the scene of an accident pursuant to a police directive made in the interest of public safety. 
O.  No licensee on the rotation system shall not refuse to render towing services if the owner of a disabled motor vehicle is able to pay the fee prescribed in the schedule of prices filed by the tower. 
P.  No person holding a license issued pursuant to this chapter shall use a shortwave radio receiver capable of operating on a frequency assigned by the Federal Communications Commission for fire, police, municipal or other government use. 
Q.  Upon payment to the licensee of the towing charges and the storage charges, if any, the licensee shall forthwith release the vehicle to the owner or the owner's authorized agent or next of kin as the case may be. 
R.  No licensee may open, remove, damage or tamper with any locking device placed on any unlawfully parked motor vehicle. 
S.  Any violation of this section shall be grounds for suspension or revocation after hearing pursuant to the procedures set forth in this chapter.  
§ 319-15. - Rotating system of summoning towers. 
[Amended 3-14-2012 by Ord. No. 12-017; 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] 
A.  The Director of Public Safety is hereby authorized and directed to establish a just and equitable rotating system of licensees to be summoned: 1) to tow away and store a disabled vehicle, and 2) if there is more than one Impound Operator license issued, Impound Operator licensees. The rotating system shall be established so as to give as nearly as is practicable an equal share of the towing business to each licensee and to furnish protection to the owners of disabled vehicles. There shall be a separate list for Class I and II Vehicles and Class III vehicles with specific equipment requirements for each list to be promulgated by the Director of Public Safety; however, at minimum, a tower on the light-duty list shall have two tow trucks and a flatbed, and a tower on the heavy-duty list shall have two heavy-duty tow trucks. The Director of Public Safety shall be guided by the following minimum requirements for the rotating system: 
(1)  Only a Class A licensee may be in the rotation system and shall not have more than one position on the rotating list regardless of how many supplemental licenses the licensee shall hold. 
(2)  A licensee tower on the rotating list shall not be removed therefrom before he or she is accorded an opportunity to be heard after receiving written charges preferred against the licensee. No licensee shall lose his or her turn in the rotating system until the licensee is accorded this opportunity to be heard; provided, however, that the Director of Public Safety may immediately suspend any licensee if it is determined to be in the best interests of the citizens or the rotation system. A licensee may request in writing to be removed from the rotating list. When so removed, the licensee shall not be eligible to be placed on the rotating list for a period of one year from the date removed. 
(3)  Each licensee in the rotating system shall be given equal time and opportunity as all other licensees in the rotating system, and there shall be no discrimination for any reason whatsoever. 
(4)  No police officer or other official of the city shall have any authority to remove or skip over any licensee in the rotating system. If any licensee commits any violation of the motor vehicle laws of the State of New Jersey, the proper action taken against such licensee shall be by way of summons for the motor vehicle violation. If the infraction involves a violation of this chapter or any provision of the Jersey City Code, charges specifying the offense shall be presented to the Director of Public Safety, who shall thereupon cause a hearing to be held in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(5)  Licensees shall respond to the scene within twenty (20) minutes of a request for service by the Department of Public Safety. If a tower does not respond within the allowed time and another tower is called to respond, the first tower may be suspended for up to three (3) days or for repeat offenders removed from the list for up to a year at the discretion of the Director of Public Safety, upon notice and an opportunity to be heard. 
B.  Whenever it is necessary to have a disabled vehicle towed away, the police who arrive at the scene shall forthwith notify police headquarters to summon a licensed tower from the rotating list in accordance with the procedure established by the Director of the Department of Public Safety, except when an emergency has been declared by the Office of Emergency Management. 
[Amended 2-23-2011 by Ord. No. 11-025] 
C.  The owner or driver of a disabled vehicle shall use the services of the licensed tower summoned by the police unless the owner is a member of an organization which supplies towing services for its members and the owner or driver requests the use of such organization's tower. If the request is made to the police at the scene, the police shall forthwith notify police headquarters to call the organization and relay the request and all necessary information supplied by the owner's membership card to the organization. 
D.  In the event that the tower summoned by the police is delayed and it is necessary to remove the disabled vehicle out of the line of traffic or for other safety reasons, then the police emergency tower may remove the vehicle to the nearest point out of the way of the free flow of traffic allowing the vehicle to remain there until towed away by the tower summoned by the police. 
E.  In the event that a disabled vehicle is towed away and stored by a licensee pursuant to this chapter and the owner of the vehicle or such owner's agent or next of kin does not authorize a further disposition of the vehicle within three days after it is towed to the storage place, the licensee may, upon giving written notice by certified mail to the owner or the owner's authorized agent, pursue any and all remedies he or she may have in law for the disposition of the vehicle and the collection of the fees. 
F.  In the event that the owner or driver of the disabled vehicle is incapacitated by reason of injuries or otherwise and is unable to authorize the further disposition of the vehicle after it is towed away by the licensee, then the licensee shall forthwith ascertain from the police the name and address of the owner's agent or next of kin and contact him or her to ascertain the further disposition of the vehicle. The licensee shall also send to said agent or next of kin the bill for services and a copy of the schedule of prices as is required by this chapter.  
§ 319-16. - Violations and penalties. 
[Amended 3-14-2012 by Ord. No. 12-017] 
In addition to any license suspensions or terminations, any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, also be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25, of this Code.  
§ 319-17. - Removal of vehicles parked or abandoned on private property; fees. 
[Amended 3-14-2012 by Ord. No. 12-017] 
A.  Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-56.6, the owner or other person in control or possession of the private property on which a vehicle is parked or left unattended as described in the definition of "Disabled Vehicle" may remove and store or hire another person to remove and store the vehicle. It shall be the obligation of the owner of the vehicle to pay the costs for the removal and storage before he shall be entitled to recover the possession of the vehicle. If the owner of the vehicle refuses to pay such costs or fails to make a claim for the return of the vehicle within 90 days after such removal, the vehicle may be sold at public auction in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 2A:44-20 et seq. 
B.  Whenever a licensee, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-56.6, removes a vehicle parked or left unattended on private property as described within the definition of "Disabled Vehicle", he shall, within one hour, report to the police district from within which the vehicle was removed the following information: 
(1)  License plate number and description of vehicle removed. 
(2)  Location where the vehicle is stored. 
(3)  Location from which the vehicle was removed. 
(4)  Identity of the person claiming to own, control or be in possession of the private property from which the vehicle was removed. 
C.  The maximum charges for towing and storage of vehicles so removed from private property shall be the same as set forth herein for vehicles towed or stored from within the City under § 319-11.  
§ 319-18. - Seized vehicles; impound operator requirements; disposition of unclaimed vehicles; fees for storage; release of vehicles. 
[Added 3-14-2012 by Ord. No. 12-017; Amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ; 4-25-2018 by Ord. No. 18-030 ; 6-13-2018 by Ord. No. 18-059 ; 8-15-2018 by Ord. No. 18-082 ] 
A.  Licensed impound operators must maintain, either within a District or no farther than three miles from the boundary lines of a District, a single site or location with a minimum of 75 storage spaces for Class I vehicles, five spaces for Class II vehicles, and five spaces for Class III vehicles. Impound operators shall use the auto impound tracking computer software program prescribed by the City and be governed by the City's usage policies and procedures for such software. 
B.  Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:10A-1, vehicles left unclaimed may be sold at public auction after 30 business days but shall be sold by the City no later than 90 business days, provided that the Director of Public Safety may withhold from public auction up to three vehicles a month for police purposes. 
C.  All impound operator licensees shall maintain (and provide access or copies to the City) adequate records relating to the processing of tows, impounds, releases (including storage fees and other receipts). Impound operators shall also provide quarterly financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles summarizing fees and income collected. When possible, all viable personal property from the impounded vehicles must be removed from the vehicle by the owner prior to being towed to the tow pound. Operators will provide access for release of vehicles to the public between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. 
D.  Upon receipt of an impounded vehicle, the impound operator shall pay the tower $90.00 for a Class I vehicle and $140.00 for a Class II vehicle, and for a Class III vehicle, a minimum of $390.00 no later than 30 days of receipt of the vehicle. The tower shall not receive any additional payment. Upon payment of the fees, as set forth herein and in Section 319-11.B of this Chapter by the owner or person entitled to claim the vehicle, the City shall receive an administrative fee of $40.00 and the impound operator a fee of $20.00; provided, however, that no administrative fee shall be payable to the City or to the Impound Operator unless the impoundment is the result of a motor vehicle accident and the Impound Operator was required to make more than three trips to the vehicle. For a vehicle that is not claimed by the owner or person entitled to claim the vehicle, the City shall sell the vehicle at public auction pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:10A-1 et seq. The sale proceeds shall be used to reimburse the impound operator for the paving the tower and to pay the impound operator's storage fee. The storage fee shall be calculated using the rates set forth in Section 319-11.C of this Chapter. If the auction proceeds are not sufficient to pay these fees, the City shall transfer the vehicle to the Impound Operator. 
E.  Seized Vehicles shall be towed to a City-owned facility or as determined by the Director of Public Safety. Upon release of such vehicles by the appropriate authority, the City shall sell any unclaimed vehicles at public auction pursuant to N.J.S.A 39:10A-1.  
§ 319-19. - Surrender of unclaimed vehicles; violation for failure to remove vehicle. 
[Added 3-14-2012 by Ord. No. 12-017] 
Vehicle owners who wish not to claim and or remove their vehicle from an impound storage area must sign a certificate of ownership, which transfers ownership to the City of Jersey City. Failure to do so may result in the owner being cited with a summons for abandonment of motor vehicle pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-56.5 which will subject the owner, for the first offense, to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), and his license or driving privilege may be suspended of revoked for not more than two (2) years. For any subsequent violation, the owner will be subject to a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), and his license or driving privilege may be suspended or revoked for not more than five (5) years.  
Chapter 321 - TREES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-169 , amended the Code by repealing former ch. 321, §§ 321-1—321-8, and adding a new ch. 321. Former ch. 321 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. Mc-14, adopted September 8, 1981; Ord. No. McC-98, adopted January 24, 1990; Ord. No. 01-036, adopted April 14, 2001, and Ord. No. 01-082, adopted June 27, 2001. 
Cross reference— Shade Tree Commission, Ch. 10; Posting of Advertising Materials, Ch. 81; Trees in Parks and Recreation Areas, Ch. 239; Property Maintenance, Ch. 254; Streets and Sidewalks, Ch. 296. 
 
§ 321-1. - Definitions. 
[Added 12-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-169 ] 
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning given herein: 
CANOPY means the extent of the outer layer of leaves of an individual tree formed by the leader together with the scaffold and lateral branches (Figure 1). 
 
Figure 1 
CITY TREE means (a) any living, self-supporting woody perennial plant that has a trunk diameter of at least two inches or more when measured at a point six inches above ground level and which normally attains an overall height of at least ten feet at maturity, usually with one main stem or trunk and several branches; and (b) planted in a public right-of-way, in a City park or on property owned by the City. The term "City tree" does not include trees on private property. 
CROWN means the top part of the canopy (Figure 1). 
DIVISION means the Division of Parks and Forestry. 
DRIP LINE means the area defined by the outermost circumference of a tree canopy. 
JERSEY CITY FORESTRY STANDARDS means the document promulgated by the Division of Parks and Forestry detailing the City's standards for the planting, maintenance and removal of City trees as defined herein. 
LATERAL BRANCHES means the secondary branches that emerge from scaffold branches (Figure 1). 
LEADER means the vertical stem at the top of the trunk (Figure 1). 
MUNICIPAL FORESTER means the employee of the Division of Parks and Forestry responsible for overseeing the planting, maintenance and removal of all City trees and who is responsible for promulgating the Jersey City Forestry Standards as well as the list of City tree valuations published annually. 
PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY means all land in the City of Jersey City dedicated or expressly reserved for the use of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and/or utilities. 
PRUNE means cutting or removing less than 20 percent of the branching structure of a tree in the crown, trunk or root areas. 
SCAFFOLD BRANCHES means the primary limbs that form a tree's canopy (Figure 1). 
TOPPING means cutting or removing the leader in such a way as to disfigure the canopy resulting in stunted or abnormal growth. 
TRUNK means the stem and main wooden axis of a tree (Figure 1).  
§ 321-2. - Purpose. 
[Added 12-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-169 ] 
The Municipal Council finds that the preservation of existing City trees and the planting of new City trees promote the health and welfare of the public in the following ways: 
1.  Conserving energy by providing shade, lowering urban air temperatures, and acting as a windbreak in winter; 
2.  Protecting pedestrians from rain, wind, sun and heat; 
3.  Improving air quality by producing oxygen, absorbing carbon dioxide and particulate matter; 
4.  Reducing noise pollution; 
5.  Providing habitat for birds and other wildlife; 
6.  Reducing storm runoff and the potential for soil erosion; 
7.  Increasing real estate property values; and 
8.  Enhancing the City's aesthetic qualities and thus making it more attractive to residents, visitors and businesses.  
§ 321-3. - Prohibited activities. 
[Added 12-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-169 ] 
No person shall do or cause to be done any of the following to a City tree as defined herein: 
1.  Hitch or fasten any animal, bicycle or vehicle to any guard or support attached to the City tree; 
2.  Permit any injurious substance, whether gaseous, liquid or solid, to come into contact with the stump or roots of any to any City tree; 
3.  Cover or obstruct any open space provided around the base of a City tree in such a way to prevent water or fertilizer from reaching the roots of the tree; 
4.  Pile any building material or make any mortar or cement within six feet of a City tree; 
5.  Affix a sign to a City tree through use of nails, staples, ropes, cables, wires, or other material that may cause punctures or girdling; 
6.  Cut or remove more than 20 percent of a City tree's canopy.  
§ 321-4. - Acts requiring a permit. 
[Added 12-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-169 ] 
A.  No person shall do or cause to be done any of the following without a permit from the Division of Parks and Forestry: 
1.  Plant a tree in the public rights-of-way; 
2.  Remove a City tree; 
3.  Prune, cut or saw a City tree; 
4.  Spray a City tree with chemicals; 
5.  Climb a City tree with spikes; 
6.  Cut, trim, break or disturb the roots of any City tree; 
7.  Change the size or depth of a City tree bed or place any guard or structure around a City tree bed; 
8.  Fasten any rope, guy wire, electric attachments, sign or any other device to a City tree or to any guard about the City tree; 
9.  Remove any structure or device installed by the City to support or protect a City tree; 
10.  Change the grade of the soil within the limits of the canopy of any City tree; 
11.  Install an electrified wire above or through any City tree; 
12.  Conduct any activity within 15 feet of a City tree such as construction, demolition, replacement of a sidewalk or driveway, erecting scaffolding, repairing underground utilities or services, and installation of infrastructure such as a street light. 
B.  A separate permit shall be required for each tree affected by any of the foregoing acts. 
[Added 12-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-169 ]  
§ 321-5. - Planting trees. 
[Added 12-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-169 ] 
A property owner may plant a tree in the public rights-of-way abutting his or her property by obtaining a permit from the Division of Parks and Forestry subject to the following conditions: 
1.  The species shall be selected from the list of recommended trees in the Jersey City Forestry Standards and be planted according to the Forestry Standards; 
2.  The owner shall carry liability insurance for any damage to property or injury to person by the planting of such City trees; 
3.  The owner shall maintain the sidewalk in accordance with Chapter 254 (Property Maintenance) and the tree-bed surrounding the tree in accordance with the Jersey City Forestry Standards; 
4.  A property owner to whom a permit is issued under this section may engage a private landscaper to plant a City tree or request that the Division plant the tree on behalf of, and as an agent for, the owner,  
§ 321-6. - Removal of City trees. 
[Added 12-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-169 ] 
A.  An adjoining property owner may be granted a permit for the removal of a City tree abutting his or her property under the following conditions: 
1.  The City tree poses a danger to persons or property which cannot be remedied except by removal; or 
2.  The removal of the City tree is required for the development of the property or the improvement of the sidewalk. 
B.  An owner granted a permit to remove a City tree under subsection A.2 shall make a payment to the City equivalent to the value of the tree, as determined annually by the Division of Parks and Forestry. 
C.  If the Municipal Forrester determines that a tree requires removal, the Division of Parks and Forestry shall replace it with a tree from the list of recommended trees. 
D.  Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the power of the Division to move or require the removal of any City tree or part thereof for any purpose consistent with Section 321-2.  
§ 321-7. - Permit application fee. 
[Added 12-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-169 ] 
Application for the permit required under Section 321-4 shall be made in writing to the Division of Parks and Forestry, on forms to be supplied by the Division, accompanied by the fee provided in Chapter 160 (Fees and Charges).  
§ 321-8. - Protection from wires, cables and electrical current. 
[Added 12-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-169 ] 
Every person or entity having control over any wire for the transmission of an electric current along a public rights-of-way shall at all times guard all City trees through which or near which such wire passes against any injury from the wire or cable or from the electric current carried by it. The device or means used shall in every case by subject to approval by the Division of Parks and Forestry.  
§ 321-9. - Violations and penalties. 
[Added 12-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-169 ] 
The penalties provided under Section 1-25 shall apply to violations of this Chapter; provided, however, that the minimum penalty for a violation of this Chapter shall be $100.00.  
§ 321-10. - Forestry standards adopted. 
[Added 3-28-2018 by Ord. No. 18-019 ] 
The document entitled Jersey City Forestry Standards 2018 is hereby adopted and all the provisions contained therein are hereby incorporated into the Municipal Code by reference and also are on file in the Office of the City Clerk.  
Chapter 323 - URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONE 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City 12-23-1985 as Ord. No. C-133. Amendments noted where applicable.] 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Municipal authorities — See Ch. 12. 	Special improvement districts — See Ch. 69. 
Redevelopment agency — See Ch. 66. 	Zoning — See Ch. 345 
 
 
§ 323-1. - Zone established. 
The governing body of the City of Jersey City does hereby accept the designation of the Urban Enterprise Zone Authority of the area described in its zone application and the designation of the zone development plan formulated and approved in the aforesaid resolution.  
§ 323-2. - Additions to zone area. [Added 7-14-1987 by Ord. No. C-525] 
The governing body of the City of Jersey City does hereby accept the revised plans of October 1, 1986, and June 15, 1987, of the New Jersey Zone Authority designating the area described in the application and Appendix A, a copy of which is on file in the office of the City Clerk, as part of the Jersey City Urban Enterprise Zone.  
Chapter 324 - USED CAR DEALERS 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City 5-4-1971 as Ch. 8, Art. XVII, of the 1971 Jersey City Code, as readopted 9-19-1978 by Ord. No. S-128. Amendments noted where applicable.] 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Fees and charges — See Ch. 160. 	Zoning — See Ch. 345. 
Sale of tires — See Ch. 313. 	
 
 
§ 324-1. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
USED MOTOR VEHICLE - Every motor vehicle, Title to or possession of which has been transferred from the person who first acquired it from the manufacturer or dealer and so used as to become what is commonly known as "secondhand" within the ordinary meaning thereof. 
USED MOTOR VEHICLE DEALER - A person engaged in the business of selling, buying or dealing in used motor vehicles and who has an established place of business. 
USED CAR LOT - Any indoor or outdoor space used or occupied for the business of selling, buying or dealing in used motor vehicles.  
§ 324-2. - License required. 
No person shall deal in or conduct or engage in the business, sale, purchase or exchange of secondhand or used motor vehicles without first having obtained a used motor vehicle sales license.  
§ 324-3. - License application. 
Applications for used motor vehicle sales licenses shall be made upon forms provided by the license issuing authority, shall be signed and verified under oath by the applicant, if an individual, and by a duly authorized agent if a partnership or corporation, and shall set forth the following: 
A.  If a person, the name and address of the applicant. 
B.  If a partnership, the name, residence and business address of each partner. 
C.  If a corporation, the name, date and state under whose laws such corporation was organized, the name and address of the registered agent and, if a foreign corporation, whether authorized to do business in the State of New Jersey, the names of the principal officers, directors and local representatives, their residences and business addresses. 
D.  The location and description of the premises for which the license is requested, stating also the block and lot number as shown on the Official Tax Assessment Map of the city.  
§ 324-4. - License fee.[1] 
Each licensee shall pay an annual used motor vehicle sales license fee as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges, whether he or she engages in business for a full year or part thereof. The license year shall be from April 1 to March 31, inclusive, of the following year. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. 
 
§ 324-5. - License issuance. [ ] 
If, after an investigation by the Department of Public Safety, the license issuing authority is reasonably satisfied that the applicant has a good reputation and that the statements set forth in the application are correct, and if the proper fee has been paid, the license issuing authority shall then issue to the applicant a license which shall be effective from the date of the issue to March 31 thereafter following.  
§ 324-6. - Transferability of license. 
All used motor vehicle sales licenses may be transferred for their unexpired term with the consent of the license issuing authority.  
§ 324-7. - Parking on sidewalks. 
No licensee hereunder shall park, store or display motor vehicles or other articles or permit motor vehicles or other articles to be parked, stored or displayed upon sidewalks or walks adjoining, abutting or surrounding the licensed premises. [2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's Note: See also Ch. 296, Streets and Sidewalks, Art. IV, Obstructions and Encumbrances. 
 
§ 324-8. - Proximity of vehicles to residences. 
No used motor vehicle shall be exhibited, stored or located for sale or exchange in any outdoor area with five (5) feet of any building occupied as a residence.  
§ 324-9. - Compliance with other regulations. 
All licensees shall at all times conform fully and completely with all New Jersey statutes, the rules and regulations of the Director of the Division of Motor Vehicles of the State of New Jersey and all other governmental laws, rules and regulations, including the obtaining of proper licenses and permits.  
§ 324-10. - Suspension or revocation of license. 
A.  Any license issued hereunder may be suspended or revoked by the license issuing authority for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  The licensee has knowingly made any false or materially incorrect statement in the application. 
(2)  The licensee knowingly violates or knowingly permits or countenances the violation of any provision of this chapter. 
(3)  The licensee knowingly violates or knowingly permits or countenances the violation of any provision of penal law or ordinance regarding theft, larceny or conversion of a motor vehicle. 
B.  No suspension or revocation of any used motor vehicle license shall be made until a ten-day written notice of the charges preferred against the licensee have been given to him or her personally or by mailing them by certified mail addressed to him or her at the licensed premises, and until a reasonable opportunity to be heard thereon has been afforded. The hearing shall be held before and conducted by the license issuing authority. All suspensions or revocations of licenses shall be effected by notice in writing of such suspension or revocation, designating the effective date thereon and, in case of suspension, the term of such suspension, which notice may be served upon the licensee personally or by mailing it by registered mail addressed to him or her at the licensed premises. Such suspension or revocation shall apply to the licensee and to the licensed premises. Any revocation shall render the licensee ineligible to receive any other license under this chapter for a period of one (1) year from the effective date of the revocation, and may, in the discretion of the license issuing authority render the licensed premises ineligible for any future license under this chapter. [3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. 
 
§ 324-11. - Maintenance of premises. 
Every used motor vehicle licensee shall keep the sidewalk surrounding the business premises free from dirt, ice, sleet and snow and shall keep the sidewalk and driveways in a safe condition for the travel of pedestrians. [4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's Note: See also Ch. 296, Streets and Sidewalks, Art. I, Snow and Ice Removal, and Art. II, Sidewalk Cleaning. 
 
§ 324-12. - Violations and penalties.[5] 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions § 1-25. 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. 
 
Chapter 329 - VENDING MACHINES 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City: Art. I, 5-4-1971 as Ch. 8, Art. XVIII, of the 1971 Jersey City Code, as readopted 9-19-1978 by Ord. No. S-128; Art. II, 2-24-1993 as Ord. No. 93-019. Amendments noted where applicable.] 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 84. 	Food-handling establishments — See Ch. 175. 
Fees and charges — See Ch. 160. 	Zoning — See Ch. 345. 
  
ARTICLE I - General Provisions 
[Adopted 5-4-1971 as Ch. 8, Art. XVIII, of the 1971 Jersey City Code, as readopted 9-19-1978 by Ord. No. S-128] 
 
§ 329-1. - Definitions. 
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
CLASS A MACHINE - A vending machine dispensing readily perishable foods or heated or refrigerated foods. 
[Amended 4-28-1988 by Ord. No. C-730] 
CLASS B MACHINE - A vending machine dispensing nonperishable foods which do not require heating or refrigeration. 
[Amended 4-28-1988 by Ord. No. C-730] 
CLASS C MACHINE - A vending machine dispensing drugs, cosmetics and items other than food products. 
[Amended 4-28-1988 by Ord. No. C-730] 
CLASS D MACHINE - A vending machine dispensing gumballs, toys, jewelry and novelties. 
[Added 3-23-1989 by Ord. No. C-910; 8-16-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068] 
COMMISSARY - Restaurant, commissary, caterer or any other place in or from which food, beverages or the ingredients thereof are kept, handled, prepared, stored or sold for subsequent dispensing through vending machines. 
EMPLOYEE - Any operator or his or her representative who handles any food, beverage or ingredient to be dispensed through vending machines or who comes into contact with food contact surfaces of containers, equipment, utensils or packaging materials used in connection with vending machine operations or who otherwise services or maintains a vending machine. 
FOOD - Any raw, cooked or processed edible substance, beverage or ingredient used or intended for use, in whole or in part, for human consumption. 
HEALTH OFFICER - The Health Officer of the city or his or her authorized representatives. 
MACHINE LOCATION - The room, enclosure, space or area where one or more vending machines are installed and operated. 
OPERATOR - Any person who sells food, nonalcoholic beverages, drugs, cosmetics, goods, wares or merchandise through a vending machine. For the purpose of this Article, the person having custody and control of the coin receptacle, box or container in a vending machine shall be conclusively presumed to be the "operator" thereof and shall have the responsibility of obtaining the license therefor. 
READILY PERISHABLE FOODS - Any food, consisting in whole or in part of milk, milk products, eggs, meats, fish or poultry, or other foods or beverages requiring refrigeration to prevent decomposition or spoilage. However, powdered products, and those which are commercially sterile and in hermetically sealed containers, are excluded from the term. 
VENDING MACHINE - Any device which, upon insertion of a coin or coins, token, disc or like object, dispenses food, nonalcoholic beverages, drugs, cosmetics, goods, wares or merchandise.  
§ 329-2. - License required. 
No person shall engage in the business of operating one or more vending machines without first having obtained an operator's license for each such machine.  
§ 329-3. - License application. 
Applications for a vending machine operator's license shall be made to the Health Officer upon forms provided by the Health Officer. Such application shall set forth the following information: 
A.  Applicant's full name, residence and post office address and whether such applicant is an individual, firm or corporation. 
B.  Type and kind of vending machines to be operated and the proposed location of all such vending machines. 
C.  Name and address of the person from whom such vending machine is to be purchased, rented or otherwise obtained. 
D.  Terms of agreement governing the acquisition and installation of such vending machine.  
§ 329-4. - Compliance with other standards; license issuance; transferability. 
A.  Before an applicant for a vending machine license shall receive a license: 
(1)  The Division of Construction Code Official shall, upon the request of the Health Officer, certify whether the location of the vending machine complies with Chapter 131, Construction Codes, Uniform, and Chapter 345, Zoning. 
[Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
(2)  The Health Officer shall make or have made an inspection of the commissary, servicing facilities and Class A, Class B and Class C machine locations to determine compliance with the provisions of the public health and sanitation requirements of this Code. 
B.  If, after the aforesaid certification has been made, the Health Officer shall be reasonably satisfied that the statements set forth in the application are correct and that the applicant is in compliance with this article, an operator's license shall be issued by the Health Officer to the applicant for each such vending machine. No such license issued under the terms of this article shall be transferable. 
C.  The operator's numbered license shall be of size and style approved by the Health Officer.  
§ 329-5. - License fees. [Amended 4-28-1988 by Ord. No. C-730; 9-22-1988 by Ord. No. C-824] 
A.  The license fee to be paid for an operator's license for each such vending machine shall be as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges. 
[Amended 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050] 
B.  Class D machines used for charitable purposes shall be exempt from the licensing fee. The Health Officer may require proof of the charitable use of the machines. Exemption from licensing fees shall not exempt such vending machines from compliance with all applicable sanitary requirements. 
[Added 3-23-1989 by Ord. No. C-910] 
C.  Any machine licensed under this article shall not be removed from the location for which it was licensed to another location or replaced by another machine without the approval of the Health Officer.  
§ 329-6. - Inspections; right of entry. 
The Health Officer may inspect all vending machines as often as deemed necessary. The Health Officer, after proper identification, shall be permitted to enter at any reasonable time upon any private or public property where vending machines are stored or operated, or commissaries are operated, or from which such machines are otherwise serviced, for the purpose or determining compliance with this article. The operator or custodian of such machines at the point of storage shall make provisions for the Health Officer to have such access, in the company of any employee or otherwise, to all vending machines operated or stored. [1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's Note: Original Secs. 8-217 through 8-220, which immediately followed this section and established sanitation standards, were deleted 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050. For current provisions dealing with this topic, see Chapter XII of the State Sanitary Code. 
 
§ 329-7. - Revocation of license. 
Any license may be revoked for cause, after a summary hearing before the Health Officer. A printed or written notice, setting forth the charges and the time and place of hearing, shall be served upon the licensee by leaving such notice at the place where the licensee conducts his or her business, at least five days prior to the date of the hearing. The Health Officer, pending the hearing, may suspend such license before such hearing if in his or her judgment the protection of the public health demands. In such event, it shall be unlawful for the operator to engage in the business for which he or she was licensed.  
§ 329-8. - Purpose. 
This Article is for the purpose of regulation and shall in no way affect any of the fees as now provided for or to be hereafter provided for in any other ordinance, but shall be in addition thereto.  
§ 329-9. - Violations and penalties. [Added 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050] 
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this Article shall, upon conviction, be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions. § 1-25.  
ARTICLE II - Cigarette Vending Machines[2] 
[Adopted 2-24-1993 by Ord. No. 93-019] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's Note: See also Ch. 316, Tobacco. 
 
§ 329-10. - Machines to be attended. 
A.  Subject to Subsection B, no cigarette vending machine shall be placed on any premises, public or private, unless the owner or lessee of each machine provides in writing to the city the names and business addresses of a person or persons who shall serve as attendant and deputy attendant for that machine. More than one attendant or deputy attendant may serve a machine, provided that the owner or lessee specifies the time periods when each of two or more attendants or deputy attendants shall be on duty and thus responsible for compliance with this Article. 
B.  The requirements of Subsection A shall not apply to any bar or tavern or any premises which is holder of a plenary retail consumption license pursuant to Chapter 84, Alcoholic Beverages; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any restaurant holding such a license which permits minors on the premises.  
§ 329-11. - Responsibilities of attendants. 
The attendant and, in the attendant's stead, the deputy attendant shall be responsible for the penalties and fees which may, upon conviction, be imposed for violations of this Article. Nothing in this Article shall prohibit the employer of an attendant from paying penalties imposed under this Article but payment by the employer shall not be required.  
§ 329-12. - Qualifications of attendants. 
A.  An attendant or deputy attendant shall be at least 18 years of age or more, as certified by the City Health Officer by birth certificate or driver's license only, and an employee or agent of the firm, corporation, partnership or entity having possessory interest, including but not limited to leaseholds, in the premises where the cigarette vending machine is located. 
B.  An attendant or deputy attendant shall be responsible for placing and maintaining the cigarette vending machine at a site not more than 50 feet from his or her normal place of transacting business, which shall include but not be limited to a cash register, checkout counter, bar or place for the consumption or sale of liquor, desk, office, bathroom or lounge area. The attendant shall assure that he or she has a clear unobstructed line of sight between the normal place of transacting business and the location of the cigarette vending machine. 
C.  The attendant shall make a machine inoperable during any time when the public has access to the machine but for any reason the attendant or deputy attendant is not available to attend the machines. 
D.  No attendant may permit a person who is under 18 years of age to purchase a product from a cigarette vending machine.  
§ 329-13. - Violations and penalties.[3] 
For violation of this Article, the penalty shall be as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25. 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. 
 
Chapter 332 - VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-114, adopted September 15, 2010, adopted Ch. 332, §§ 332-1—332-83 in its entirety. Subsequent amendments are notated by a history note following the title of amended sections. 
Cross reference— Parking lots and garages, Ch. 236, taxicabs, limousines and transportation network company vehicles, Ch. 307. 
 
ARTICLE I - General Provisions 
 
§ 332-1. - Definitions. 
A.  Whenever any words and phrases are used in this chapter, the meanings respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the New Jersey Statutes Annotated shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases used herein. 
B.  In addition, the following terms, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings indicated: 
COMMUTER VEHICLE — A motor vehicle, other than the ones described herein, parking in a residential zone. 
EMPLOYEE VEHICLE — A motor vehicle parked in a residential zone wherein the owner of said vehicle is an employee of a business located within said zone. 
HOLIDAY — Any of the following days or the day on which any of the following are celebrated: 
(1)  New Year's Day, January 1. 
(2)  Martin Luther King's Birthday, the third Monday in January. 
(3)  Abraham Lincoln's Birthday, February 12. 
(4)  George Washington's Birthday, the third Monday in February. 
(5)  Good Friday, falling between March 21 and April 23. 
(6)  Memorial Day, the last Monday in May. 
(7)  Independence Day, July 4. 
(8)  Labor Day, the first Monday in September. 
(9)  Columbus Day, the second Monday in October. 
(10)   General Election Day, the Tuesday after the first Monday in November. 
(11)   Veterans' Day, November 11. 
(12)   Thanksgiving Day, the fourth Thursday in November. 
(13)   The Friday immediately after Thanksgiving. 
(14)   Christmas Day, December 25. 
Date specific holidays falling on Saturday are observed on Friday; date specific holidays falling on Sunday are observed on Monday. 
PERSON — A natural person, joint-stock company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust, organization or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them. 
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A self-propelled or towed vehicle equipped to serve as temporary living quarters for recreational camping or travel purposes and used solely as a family or personal conveyance. 
[Added 11-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-171 ] 
RESIDENTIAL ZONE — A contiguous or nearly contiguous area containing public streets and highways or parts thereof. 
RESIDENTIAL VEHICLE — A motor vehicle parking in a residential zone in which it is registered. 
RESIDENTIAL PERMIT PARKING ZONE — A residential area designated as herein provided wherein a resident motor vehicle displaying a valid permit as described herein shall be exempt from parking restrictions established pursuant to this chapter. 
TRANSIENT VEHICLE — A motor vehicle, other than a resident vehicle, which has been issued a temporary residential parking permit pursuant to this chapter.  
ARTICLE II - Traffic Regulations 
 
§ 332-2. - Traffic control signals. 
A.  Traffic control signals shall be installed and operated at the intersection of those streets described below. 
BALDWIN AV and 
 Clifton Pl 
 Montgomery St 
 Mercer St 
 Wayne St 
 Academy St 
 Newkirk St 
 Magnolia Av 
 Pavonia Av 
 Newark Av 
 Saint Paul's Av 
 Beacon Av 
 Jefferson Av 
BALDWIN AV/WEBSTER AV and Prospect St 
BERGEN AV and 
 Stegman St 
 Wegman Pkwy/Audubon Av 
 Claremont Av 
 Virginia Av 
 Union St 
 Bramhall Av 
 Communipaw Av 
 Gifford Av 
 Belmont Av 
 Jewett Av 
 Fairview Av 
 Fairmount Av 
 Montgomery St 
 Mercer St/Glenwood Av 
 Highland Av 
 Vroom St 
 Academy St 
 Newkirk St 
 Sip Av 
BROADWAY and 
 Wales Av 
BRUNSWICK ST and 
 Seventh St 
 Newark Av/Fourth St 
 Columbus Dr 
 Montgomery St 
CAVEN POINT RD and 
 Linden Av E 
 Chapel Av 
 Bayview Av 
CENTRAL AV and 
 Beacon Av 
 Laidlaw Av 
 Jefferson Av 
 Prospect St 
 Manhattan Av 
 Franklin St 
 Hutton St 
 Bowers St 
 Thorne St 
 Congress St 
 North St 
CHESTNUT AV and 
 Pavonia Av 
COLUMBUS DR and 
 Barrow St 
 Coles St/Varick St 
COMMUNIPAW AV and 
 Woodward St 
 Garfield Av/Summit Av 
 Park St 
 Crescent Av 
 Martin Luther King (MLK) Dr/Monticello Av 
CORNELISON AV and 
 Fairmount Av 
DANFORTH AV and 
 Old Bergen Rd/Rose Av 
 Sullvan Dr/West Side Av 
ERIE ST and 
 Sixth St 
 Ninth St 
 Tenth St beacon 
FOWLER AV and 
 Danforth Av 
 Mc Adoo Av beacon 
GARFIELD AV and 
 W 55th St 
 Gates Av 
 Neptune Av 
 Lembeck Av 
 Danforth Av 
 Chapel Av 
 Armstrong Av 
 Woodlawn Av 
 Bayview Av 
 Caven Point Av 
GRAND STREET and 
 Center St 
 Merseles St 
 Prior St 
 Fairmount Av 
 Johnston Av 
 Garfield Av/Ivy Pl 
 Communipaw Av 
GRAND ST/OCEAN AV and Bramhall Av 
GREENE ST and 
 Morris St 
 Sussex St 
 Grand St 
 York St 
 Montgomery St 
 Columbus Dr 
GROVE ST and 
 Eighteenth St 
 Sixteenth St 
 Newark Av 
 Columbus Dr 
 Wayne St 
 Montgomery St 
 York St 
 Grand St 
JERSEY AV and 
 Grand St 
 Montgomery St 
 Columbus Dr 
 Newark Av 
 Sixth St 
 Sixteenth St 
 Eighteenth St 
MALLORY AV and 
 Culver Av 
 Claremont Av 
 Clarke Av 
 Virginia Av 
 Boyd Av 
 Clendenny Av 
 Communipaw Av 
 Duncan Av 
MANHATTAN AV and 
 Montrose Av/Sanford Pl 
 Liberty Av 
MANILA AV and 
 Sixth St 
MARIN BLVD and 
 Grand St 
 York St 
 Montgomery St 
 Columbus Dr 
 Morgan St 
 First St 
 Sixth St 
 Eighth St 
 Ninth St 
 Eighteenth St 
MARTIN LUTHER KING (MLK) DR 
 McAdoo Av 
 Wade St 
 Armstrong Av 
 Stegman St 
 Wegman Pkwy 
 Bidwell Av 
 Bayview Av 
 Claremont Av 
 Kearney Av 
 Forrest St 
 Union St 
 Bramhall Av 
MONMOUTH ST and 
 Grand St 
 Montgomery St 
 Columbus Dr 
 Newark Av/Second St 
MONTGOMERY ST and 
 Barrow St 
 Varick St 
 Center St/Merseles St 
 Florence St 
 Mill Rd 
 Jordan Av 
MONTICELLO AV and 
 Belmont Av 
 Jewett Av 
 Fairview Av 
 Orchard St/Jordan Av 
NELSON AV and 
 North St 
NEWARK AV and 
 Coles St 
OAKLAND AV and 
 Beacon Av 
OCEAN AV/OLD BERGEN RD and Merritt St 
OCEAN AV and 
 Gates Av 
 Neptune Av 
 Lembeck Av 
 Linden Av 
 Danforth Av 
 Van Nostrand Av 
 Fulton Av 
 Dwight St 
 Wegman Pkwy 
 Bidwell Av 
 Bayview Av 
 Wilkinson Av 
 Claremont Av 
 Carteret Av/Kearney Av 
 Forrest St 
 Union St 
GRAND ST/OCEAN AV and Bramhall Av 
OLD BERGEN RD and 
 Bartholdi Av 
 Greenville Av 
PACIFIC AV and 
 Grand St 
 Communipaw Av 
 Lafayette St 
 Johnston Av 
 Ash St 
PALISADE AV and 
 Newark Av 
 Christ Hospital garage driveway 
 Beacon Av 
 Ravine Av/Wood Pl 
 Franklin St 
 Griffith St 
 Bowers St/Holland St 
 South St 
 Congress St 
PHILLIP ST and 
 Jersey City Blvd 
PRINCETON AV and 
 Linden Av 
SIP AV and 
 Port Authority driveway 
 Enos Pl 
 Newkirk St/Van Reypen St 
 Tonnele Av 
 Bryant Av 
SUMMIT AV and 
 Grand St 
 Astor Pl 
 Jewett Av/Fairmount Av 
 Montgomery St 
 Mercer St 
 Academy St 
 Newkirk St 
 Sip Av 
 Magnolia Av 
 Pavonia Av/Central Av 
 Newark Av/Hoboken Av 
 Hopkins Av 
 Beacon Av 
 Jefferson Av 
 Carlton Av 
 Manhattan Av 
 Hutton St 
 Griffith St 
 Lincoln St 
 Bowers St 
 Charles St 
 Thorne St 
 South St 
 Bleecker St 
 Congress St 
 Graham St 
TONNELE AV and 
 Broadway 
 Newark Av 
 Saint Paul's Av 
WARREN ST and 
 Grand St 
 Montgomery St 
 Columbus Dr 
WASHINGTON BLVD and 
 Fourth St 
 Sixth St/Gangemi Dr 
 Pavonia Av 
 Newport Pkwy 
 Fourteenth St 
WASHINGTON ST and 
 Grand St 
 Montgomery St 
 Columbus Dr 
 Morgan St 
 Bay St 
WEBSTER AV and 
 Booraem Av 
 Ravine Av 
 Ferry St 
 Franklin St 
 Hutton St 
 Griffith St 
 Bowers St 
 South St 
 Congress St 
WEST SIDE AV and 
 Stevens Av 
 Armstrong Av 
 Stegman Pkwy 
 Audubon Av 
 Culver Av 
 Grant Av 
 Ege Av 
 Virginia Av 
 Boyd Av 
 Union St 
 Clendenny Av 
 Communipaw Av 
 Bentley Av 
 Belmont Av 
 Kensington Av 
 Duncan Av 
 Montgomery St 
 Sip Av 
 Broadway 
B.  The traffic signal installations shall be in accordance with the provisions of An Act Concerning Motor Vehicles and Traffic Regulations, Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the New Jersey Statutes Annotated, and shall conform to the design and shall be maintained in operation in accordance with the Act.  
§ 332-3. - Traffic control signal monitoring system (red light cameras). 
[Added 5-28-2008 by Ord. No. 08-065; Amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] 
A.  Installation. 
(1)  The City of Jersey City hereby determines to install and utilize a traffic control signal monitoring system [System] at various intersections within the City of Jersey City as approved by the Commissioner of Transportation pursuant to the Act 
(2)  The System to be installed shall be approved by the Governing Body by resolution. 
(3)  The City of Jersey City shall have the authority to enter into a contract, following a lawful procurement process, for the installation of the System. Any contract that shall contain provisions contrary to the Act shall not be deemed invalid but rather reformed to conform to the Act 
(4)  The signs notifying drivers that a System is being utilized shall be approved by the Municipal Engineer, and shall be placed on each street converging into the affected intersection as required by the Act. 
(5)  The Municipal Engineer shall inspect and certify the System at least once every six (6) months from the date of its installation 
B.  Issuance of a Summons. The Department of Public Safety of the City of Jersey City shall review the recorded images produced by the System, to determine whether sufficient evidence exists demonstrating that a traffic control signal violation has occurred and shall issue a Summons when appropriate in accordance with the rules of the Court. 
C.  Use of Recorded Images. 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, the recorded images produced by the System shall be available for the exclusive use of the Department of Public Safety for the purpose of discharging his or her duties under P.L. 2007, Ch. 348. 
(2)  Any recorded image or information produced in connection with the System shall not be deemed a public record under N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq., or common law. The recorded images shall not be: (i) discoverable as a public record by any person, entity, or governmental agency, except upon a subpoena issued by a grand jury or a court order in a criminal matter, or (ii) offered as evidence in any civil or administrative proceeding not directly related to a traffic control signal violation. 
(3)  Any recorded image or information collected in connection with a traffic control signal violation shall not be retained after sixty (60) following the collection of any fine or penalty. 
(4)  If a summons is not issued within forty (40) business days following the traffic control signal violation, all recorded images and any information collected with respect to the traffic control signal violation shall be removed by the Department of Public Safety within two (2) business days. 
(5)  The City of Jersey City shall certify compliance of this Section by filing a report to with the Commissioner of Transportation in accordance with the Act. 
D.  Owner's Liability. The liability of the Owner and Operator of a motor vehicle for a traffic control signal violation summons pursuant to the System shall be joint subject to provisions of the Act. 
E.  Fines. Any person liable for a traffic control signal violation, pursuant to the Ordinance and the Act, utilizing the System shall be subject to the fines listed in Chapter 160.  
§ 332-4. - Speed limits. 
[Amended 9-14-2016 by Ord. No. 16-120 ; 11-16-2017 by Ord. No. 17-149 ] 
The speed limit for traffic along the streets, or parts thereof, listed below are hereby established at the rate of speed indicated in New Jersey State Statute and Amendments 39:4-98. 
Speed Limits 
Name of Street 	Speed 
Limit 
(mph) 	Limits 
Eighteenth St 	25 	Entire length 
Eleventh St 	25 	Entire length 
Garfield Av 	25 	Entire length 
Hoboken Av 	25 	From City line to Highway 139 
No. 40 School Zone 1 	25 	During recess or while children are going to and from school, during opening and closing hours 
  
§ 332-5. - One-way streets. 
[Amended by 4-28-2010 by Ord. No. 10-059; 12-18-2013 by Ord. No. 13-134 ; 7-16-2014 by Ord. No. 14-043 ; 9-23-2014 by Ord. No. 14-115 ; 9-23-2014 by Ord. No. 14-119 ; 10-8-2014 by Ord. No. 14-127 ; 10-22-2014 by Ord. No. 14-133 ; 11-12-2014 by Ord. No. 14-140 ; 9-24-2015 by Ord. No. 15-123 ; 10-28-2015 by Ord. No. 15-140 ; 4-27-16 by Ord. No. 16-063 ; 6-14-2017 by Ord. No. 17-018 ; 11-16-2017 by Ord. No. 17-149 ; 6-27-2018 by Ord. No 18-061 ; 6-27-2018 by Ord. No. 18-062 ; 8-15-2018 by Ord. No. 18-087 ; 10-24-2018 by Ord. No. 18-121 ; 1-9-2019 by Ord. No. 18-148 ; 5-22-2019 by Ord. No. 19-049 ] 
The streets or parts of streets listed below are hereby designated as one-way streets in the direction indicated. 
One-Way Streets 
Name of Street 	Direction 
of Travel 	Limits 
Abbett St 	North 	Entire length 
Alan Ter 	East 	Entire length 
Armstrong Av 	West 	Entire length 
Astor Pl 	East 	Monticello Av to Park St 
Atlantic St 	East 	Entire length 
Barbara Pl 	East 	Entire length 
Barrow St 	North 	Grand St to Newark Av 
Bartholdi Av 	West 	Ocean Av to Romar Av 
Bates St 	South 	Bright St to Grand St 
Bay St 	West 	Greene St to Newark Av 
Bayview Av 	East 	Entire length 
Beach St 	East 	Entire length 
Beacon Av 	West 	Baldwin Av to Kennedy Blvd 
Belmont Av 	West 	Entire length 
Bentley Av 	West 	Entire length 
Berkeley Pl 	West 	Entire length 
Bevan St 	South 	Hopkins Av to Route 139 
Bidwell Av 	West 	Garfield Av to Bergen Av 
Bishop St 	West 	Entire length 
Bleecker St 	East 	Kennedy Blvd to Central Av 
	West 	Kennedy Blvd to Columbia Av 
Boland St 	South 	Entire length 
Bond St 	East 	Entire length 
Booraem Av 	West 	Entire length 
Bostwick Av 	East 	Entire length 
Bowers St 	West 	Ogden Av to Central Av 
Boyd Av 	East 	Entire length 
Boyle Plaza 	West 	Entire length 
Briarwood Rd 	East 	Sycamore Rd to Country Village Rd 
Brinkerhoff St 	West 	Monticello Av to Bergen Av 
Britton St 	North 	Entire length 
Brooks Pl 	West 	Entire length 
Brown Pl 	East 	Entire length 
Brunswick St 	South 	Tenth St to York St 
Bryant Av 	North 	Sip Av to Logan Av 
Cambridge Av 	North 	Entire length 
Cator Av 	West 	Princeton Av to Garfield Av 
	West 	Ocean Av to West Side Av 
Center St 	North 	Entire length 
Chapel Av 	East 	Rutgers Av to Ocean Av 
Charles St 	West 	Entire length 
Claremont Av 	East 	Halstead St to Bergen Av 
Clarke Av 	West 	West Side Av to Bennett Av 
Clendenny Av 	East 	Entire length 
Clerk St 	South 	Entire length 
Cliff St 	East 	Entire length 
Clifton Pl 	Counterclockwise 	Entire length 
Clinton Av 	West 	Entire length 
Colden St 	East 	Merseles St to Center St 
	North to west counterclockwise 	Grand St to Prior St 
Coles St 	South 	Tenth St to Columbus Dr 
Colgate St 	South 	Brunswick Estates Driveway to York St 
Collard St 	South 	Spruce St to Hopkins Av 
Columbia Av 	North 	Leonard St to Secaucus Rd 
Concord St 	North 	Entire length 
Condict St 	East 	Entire length 
Congress St 	East 	Nelson Av to Central Av 
	East 	Nelson Av to Summit Av 
Cook St 	South 	Entire length 
Corbin Av 	North 	Stuyvesant Av to Broadway 
Cottage St 	West 	Summit Av to Kennedy Blvd 
	West 	a point 210 feet west of Kennedy Blvd to Herbert Pl 
Country Village Rd 	South 	Mina Dr to Briarwood Rd 
Court House Pl 	East 	Baldwin Av to McPherson Pl 
	West 	Baldwin Av to Oakland Av 
Crawford St 	East 	Orchard St to Summit Av 
Crescent Av 	North 	Clinton Av to Communipaw Av 
	South 	Belmont Av to Communipaw Av 
Crossgate Rd 	West 	Entire length 
Cuneo Pl 	West 	Entire length 
Custer Av 	East 	Kennedy Blvd to Old Bergen Rd 
Dales Av 	North 	Entire length 
DeKalb Av 	East 	Kennedy Blvd to Van Reypen St 
	West 	Kennedy Blvd to West Side Av 
Delaware Av 	North 	Kensington Av to Duncan Av 
Delmar Rd 	East 	Entire length 
Dudley St 	West 	Warren St to Van Vorst St 
Duncan Av 	West 	Bergen Av to West Side Av 
Dwight St 	East 	Entire length 
Ege Av 	East 	Entire length 
Eighth St 	West 	Marin Blvd to Division St 
Eleventh St Viaduct 	East 	Entire length 
Emory St 	East 	Entire length 
Enos Pl 	South 	Entire length 
Eric St 	North 	Entire length 
Essex St (for vehicular traffic only) 	West 	Hudson St to Washington St 
	West 	Warren St to Van Vorst St 
Exeter Rd 	East 	Entire length 
Fairmount Av 	East 	Monticello Av to Storms Av 
	East 	West Side Av to Bergen Av 
Fairmount Ter 	South 	Entire length 
Fairview Av 	East 	Entire length 
Fayette Pl 	East 	Giles Av to West Side Av 
Ferncliff Rd 	Clockwise 	Exeter Rd to Sycamore Rd 
Ferry St 	East 	Entire length 
Fifteenth St 	West 	Marin Blvd to Jersey Av 
Fifth St 	East 	Entire length 
First St 	East 	Entire length 
Fisk St 	East 	Route 440 to Martorano Way 
	East 	Mallory Av to West Side Av 
Fleet St 	East 	Entire length 
Forrest St 	East 	Bergen Av to Ocean Av 
Fourteenth St 	West 	Light rail trestle to Marin Blvd 
	West 	Jersey Av to Coles St 
Fourth St 	West 	Entire length 
Fox Pl 	East 	Entire length 
Franklin St 	West 	Mountain Rd to Ogden Av 
Fulton Av 	West 	Entire length 
Gardner Av 	East 	Entire length 
Garfield Av 	North 	Communipaw Av to Grand St 
Garrison Av 	South 	Entire length 
Gates Av 	West 	Princeton Av to Ocean Av 
	West 	Old Bergen Rd to Kennedy Blvd 
Gautier Av 	West 	Entire length 
Gifford Av 	East 	Entire length 
Giles Av 	North 	Pavonia Av to Broadway 
Glenn Ln 	West 	Entire length 
Glenwood Av 	West 	Entire length 
Grace St 	West 	Entire length 
Graham St 	West 	Entire length 
Grant Av 	East 	Bergen Av to Ocean Av 
	West 	Bergen Av to West Side Av 
Gray St 	North 	Entire length 
Greene St 	North 	Columbus Dr to Second St 
Greenville Av 	West 	Old Bergen Rd to Kennedy Blvd 
Griffith St 	East 	Kennedy Blvd to Ogden Av 
Grove St 	South 	Sixteenth St to Boyle Plz 
	South 	First St to Columbus Dr 
	South 	Sussex St to Morris Blvd 
Hague St 	West 	Entire length 
Halladay St 	South 	Entire length 
Hancock Av 	South 	Entire length 
Harmon St 	West 	Entire length 
Harrison 		Entire length 
Henry St 	West 	Waldo Av to Chestnut Av 
Herbert Pl 	North 	Entire length 
High St 	West 	Baldwin Av to Summit Av 
Highland Av 	East 	Entire length 
Highview Rd 	Counter- 
clockwise 	Stevens Av to last two legs before Fowler Av 
Hoboken Av 	East 	Oakland Av to Baldwin Av 
	West 	Coles St to Route 139 
Hobson St 	West 	Entire length 
Homestead Pl 	South 	Entire length 
Hopkins Av 	East 	Entire length 
Howard Pl 	West 	Entire length 
Howie Fink Way (formerly Pershing Plaza) 	West 	Entire length 
Hudson St 	South 	Montgomery St to Essex St 
Huron Av 	South 	Entire length 
Hutton St 	East 	Kennedy Blvd to Sanford Pl 
	West 	Sherman Av to Palisade Av 
Irving St 	West 	Entire length 
Ivy Pl 	West 	Entire length 
Jackson Av 	South 	Beginning at a point approximately 240 feet south of Communipaw Av (north building line of the West District Police Precinct) to Clinton Av 
Jefferson Av 	West 	Entire length 
Jersey Av 	South 	Twelfth St to Tenth St 
Jewett Av 	West 	Entire length 
Johnston Av 	West 	Grand St to Cornelison Av 
Jones St 	North 	Entire length 
Jordan Av 	North 	Orchard St to Montgomery St 
	South 	Vroom St to Montgomery St 
Kearney Av 	West 	Ocean Av to Bergen Av 
Kensington Av 	East 	West Side Av to Bergen Av 
Lafayette St 	East 	Pacific Av to Monitor St 
Laidlaw Av 	East 	Summit Av to Palisade Av 
	West 	Summit Av to Collard St 
Lake St 	West 	Entire length 
Lembeck Av 	West 	Entire length 
Leonard St 	East 	Nelson Av to Central Av 
Lexington Av 	West 	Entire length 
Liberty Av 	North 	Newark Av to Saint Paul's Av 
	South 	Lake St to Spruce St 
	North 	Lake St to Manhattan Av 
	South 	Hutton St to Manhattan Av 
	North 	Leonard St to Secaucus Rd 
	South 	Lake St to Spruce St 
Lienau Pl 	North 	Entire length 
Lincoln St 	West 	Central Av to Kennedy Blvd 
Linden Av 	East 	Fowler Av to Princeton Av 
Logan Av 	West 	West Side Av to Dales Av 
Ludlow St 	South 	Chapel Av to New St 
Madison Av 	North 	Entire length 
Magnolia Av 	East 	Summit Av to Waldo Av 
Maiden Ln 	West 	Entire length 
Mallory Av service road 	North 	Clendenny Av to Roosevelt Av 
Manhattan Av 	East 	County Rd to Tonnele Av 
	West 	Central Av to Sherman Av 
Manila Av 	South 	Entire length 
Maple St 	West 	Monitor St to Van Horne St 
Marion Pl 	East 	Entire length 
Maxwell St 	West 	Entire length 
McAdoo Av 	East 	West Side Av to Sterling Av 
	East 	Martin Luther King Dr to Rutgers Av 
McDougal St 	East 	Entire length 
McPherson Pl 	South 	Entire length 
McWilliams Pl 	South 	Entire length 
Mercer St 	West 	Entire length 
Merseles St 	South 	Columbus Dr to Grand St 
	South 	Fourth St to Third St 
Monitor St 	North 	Communipaw Av to Johnston Av 
Monmouth St 	North 	Grand St to Tenth St 
Monticello Av 	South 	Clinton Av to Bramhall Av 
Morgan St 	East 	Grove St to Marin Blvd 
Morris Blvd 	West 	Marin Blvd to St. Peter's St 
	East 	Grove St to St. Peter's St 
Morris St 	East 	Hudson St to Van Vorst St 
	West 	Washington St to Van Vorst St 
Morton Pl 	West 	Bergen Av to Kennedy Blvd 
Mountain Rd 	West 	Franklin St to Franklin St 
Msgr. Wojtycha Dr 	East 	Entire length 
Myrtle Av 	East 	Ocean Av to Garfield Av 
	West 	Ocean Av to Bergen Av 
Neptune Av 	East 	Sayles St to Kennedy Blvd 
	West 	Old Bergen Rd to Kennedy Blvd 
	West 	Princeton Av to Garfield Av 
Nesbitt St 	South 	Entire length 
New St 	East 	Entire length 
New York Av 	South 	Paterson Plank Rd to Ravine Av 
Newark Av 	West 	Columbus Dr to Grove St 
Ninth St 	East 	Brunswick St. to Manila Av 
Ninth St (South side of median) 	East 	Manila Av to Marin Blvd 
Ninth St (North side of median) 	West 	Marin Blvd to west end of median 
Norcroft Rd 	East 	Entire length 
North St 	East 	Nelson Av to Palisade Av 
Oak St 	West 	Entire length 
Oakland Av 	North 	Newark Av to Hoboken Av 
Ogden Av 	South 	Griffith St to Cuneo Pl 
	North 	Griffith St to Congress St 
Old Bergen Rd 	South 	Pamrapo Av to Merritt St 
Orchard St 	East 	Montgomery St to Monticello Av 
Orient Av 	East 	Kennedy Blvd to Ocean Av 
Oxford Av 	East 	Entire length 
Pacific Av 	North 	Caven Point Av to Carteret Av 
Paterson St 	West 	Entire length 
Pavonia Av 	East 	Erie St to Manila Av 
	West 	West Side Av to Giles Av 
Pearsall Av 	East 	Entire length 
Perry St 	North 	Saint Paul's Av to Hopkins Av 
Pierce Av 	South 	Entire length 
Pine St 	South 	Johnston Av to Communipaw Av 
Pinecrest Rd 	Counterclockwise 	Entire length 
Pollack Av 	West 	West Side Av to Mallory Av 
Poplar St 	East 	Entire length 
Prescott St 	North 	Communipaw Av to Park St 
Prospect St 	West 	Entire length 
Randolph Av 	North 	Entire length 
Reed St 	West 	Entire length 
Reservoir Av 	East 	Entire length 
Robinson Dr 	Counterclockwise 	Robinson Dr to Lee Ct 
Rock St 	West 	Entire length 
Romaine Av 	North 	Entire length 
Roosevelt Av 	East 	Entire length 
Rutgers Av 	North 	Entire length 
Sackett St 	North 	Entire length 
St. Paul's Av 	West 	Palisade Av to Summit Av 
St. Peter's St 	North 	Morris Blvd to Sussex St 
Sanford Pl 	South 	Entire length 
Sayles St 	South 	Entire length 
Seaview Av 	East 	Old Bergen Rd to Princeton Av 
Second St 	West 	Marin Blvd to Newark Av 
	West 	Monmouth St to Merseles St 
Seidler St 	South 	Entire length 
Service Rd 	East 	Entire length 
Seventh St 	East 	Newark Av to Manila Av 
Sheffield St 	West 	Entire length 
Sherman Av 	North 	Entire length 
	West 	Entire length 
Sixth St 	West 	Jersey Av to Newark Av 
Skillman Av 	South 	Saint Paul's Av to Van Winkle Av 
South St 	East 	Central Av to Ogden Av 
	West 	Central Av to Kennedy Blvd 
Spring St 	North 	Cator Av to McAdoo Av 
Spruce St 	East 	Liberty Av to Collard St 
Stagg St 	West 	Entire length 
Stegman St 	East 	Ocean Av to Garfield Av 
	West 	Ocean Av to Martin Luther King Dr 
Stevens Av 	West 	Entire length 
Storms Av 	East 	Entire length 
Stuyvesant Av 	West 	Entire length 
Suburbia Ct 	Counterclockwise 	Entire length 
Suburbia Dr 	North 	Suburbia Ter to 102 Suburbia Dr 
Suburbia Ter 	Counterclockwise 	
Summit Av 	South 	Ivy Pl to Communipaw Av 
Sussex St 	West 	Greene St to Van Vorst St 
	East 	St. Peter's St clockwise to St. Peter's St 
	West 	St. Peter's St to Grove St 
Sycamore Rd 	North 	The city line to Mina Dr 
Tenth St 	West 	Marin Blvd to Manila Av 
Terhune Av 	East 	Entire length 
Third St 	East 	Merseles St to Manila Av 
Thorne St 	East 	Terrace Av to Central Av 
Tonnele Av 	North 	Sip Av to Kennedy Blvd 
	South 	Sip Av to Van Reypen St 
Towers St 	Clockwise 	Entire length 
Town Square Ring Rd 	Counterclockwise 	Entire length 
Troy St 	West 	Entire length 
Tuers Av 	North 	Entire length 
Twelfth St 	East 	Jersey Av to Holland Tunnel 
	East 	Marginal St from Coles St to Jersey Av (south side of viaduct) 
	West 	Marginal St from Jersey Av to Coles St (north side of viaduct) 
Tyson Ln 	Clockwise: Southbound to Westbound 	Communipaw Av to Kennedy Blvd 
Union St 	West 	Garfield Av to West Side Av 
	East 	Mallory Av to West Side Av 
Van Horne St 	North 	Bramhall Av to Johnson Av 
Van Nostrand Av 	East 	Entire length 
Van Reypen Av 	East 	Kennedy Blvd to Summit Av 
	North 	Tonnele Av to Sip St 
	South 	Academy St to Sip Av 
Van Vorst St 	South 	York St to Grand St 
	North 	Essex St to Morris St 
Van Wagenen Av 	South 	Broadway to Pavonia Av 
	South 	Sip Av to Stuyvesant Av 
Van Winkle Av 	East 	Tonnele Av to Kennedy Blvd 
	West 	Tonnele Av to Senate Pl 
Varick St 	South 	Colden St to Bright St 
Virginia Av 	West 	Entire length 
Vroom St 	East 	Bergen Av to Gray St 
	West 	Bergen Av to Van Reypen St 
Wade St 	East 	Entire length 
Waldo Av 	North 	Magnolia Av to Newark Av 
Wales Av 	South 	Entire length 
Wallis Av 	South 	Broadway to Logan Av 
Warner Av 	West 	Entire length 
Warren St 	South 	Montgomery St to Morris St 
Washburn St 	East 	Oakland Av to Baldwin Av 
	West 	Palisade Av to Baldwin Av 
Washington Blvd 	South 	Second St to First St 
Washington St 	South 	First St to Montgomery St 
Water St 	South 	Culver Av to Fisk St 
Waverly St 	East 	Entire length 
Wayne St 	East 	Chopin Ct to Merseles St 
	East 	Summit Av to Mill Rd 
	East 	Monmouth St to Grove St 
	West 	Marin Blvd to Grove St 
Webster Av 	North 	Ferry St to South St 
Wegman Pkwy 	East 	Van Cleef St to Ocean Av 
	West 	Garfield Av to Ocean Av 
	West 	Martin Luther King Dr to Bergen Av 
Weldon St 	North 	Entire length 
West Hamilton Pl 	North 	Entire length 
Westervelt Pl 	East 	Entire length 
Whiton St 	North 	Communipaw Av to Ash St 
Wilkinson Av 	West 	Ocean Av to Bergen Av 
Williams Av 	West 	Entire length 
Winfield Av 	East 	Kennedy Blvd to Princeton Av 
	West 	Kennedy Blvd to Sayles St 
Wood Pl 	West 	Entire length 
Woodland Av 	North 	Lembeck Av to Linden Av 
Woodlawn Av 	East 	Entire length 
Woodward St 	South 	Grand St to Johnston Av 
	South 	Lafayette St to Communipaw Av 
Wright Av 	North 	Entire length 
Yale Av 	East 	Mallory Av to West Side Av 
York St 	East 	Center St to Greene St 
Zabriskie St 	East 	Summit Av to Central Av 
	West 	Summit Av to Sanford Pl 
	West 	Kennedy Blvd to Liberty Av 
  
§ 332-6. - U-turns. 
[Amended 6-19-2013 by Ord. No. 13-077 ; 11-12-2014 by Ord. No. 14-140 ] 
No person shall make a U-turn on any of the streets or parts of streets listed below. 
U-Turns 
Name of Street 	Limits 
Baldwin Av 	Entire length 
Bergen Av 	Entire length 
Broadway 	Wallis Av to Tonnele Av 
Carlton Av 	Tonnele Av to Liberty Av 
Central Av 	Manhattan Av to North St 
Communipaw Av 	Pacific Av to Route 1 
Grand St 	Marin Blvd to Bramhall Av 
Huron Av 	Entire length 
Jackson Av 	Communipaw Avenue to a point approximately 240 feet south (north building line of the West District Police Precinct) 
Jersey Av 	Grand St to Newark Av 
Jersey Av 	Twelfth St north to the city line 
Journal Square 	Entire length 
Kennedy Blvd 	Newark Av to Sip Av 
Montgomery St 	Entire length 
Monticello Av 	Entire length 
Newark Av 	Entire length 
Newport Pkwy 	Entire length 
Ocean Av 	Entire length 
Pacific Av 	Entire length 
Palisade Av 	Entire length 
Pavonia Av 	Kennedy Blvd to Summit Av 
Sip Av 	Entire length 
Summit Av 	Newark Av to Sip Av 
Tonnele Av 	Sip Av to Tonnele Circle 
Washington St 	Grand St to Montgomery St 
West Side Av 	Entire length 
  
§ 332-7. - Prohibited turns at intersections. 
[Amended 4-7-1982 by Ord. No. MC-153; 8-31-2011 by Ord. 11-098; 12-18-2013 by Ord. No. 13-133 ; 1-27-2016 by Ord. No. 16-003 ; 1-27-2016 by Ord. No. 16-005 ; 8-15-2018 by Ord. No. 18-087 ] 
No person shall make a turn of the kind designated (left or right) at any of the locations listed below. 
Prohibited Turns at Intersections 
Name of Street 	Direction 

of Travel 	Prohibited 

Turn 	Hours 

Days of the Week 	At Intersection of 
Bay St 	West 	Left 	All 	Newark Av 
Beacon Av 	West 	Left 	All 	Kennedy Blvd 
Bergen Av 	North 	Left 	All 	Sip Av 
Bergen Av 	South 	Left 	7:00 am to 7:00 pm 
M—Sat 	Storms Av 
Central Av 	North 	Left 	All 	Newark Av 
Communipaw Av 	East 	Left 	All 	Prescott St 
Communipaw Av 	East 	Right 	All 	Grand St 
Culver Av 	West 	Left 	All 	Jersey City State College Student Union parking garage entrance 
Dales Av 	North 	Left 	All 	Routes 1 and 9 
Dunkin Donuts exit 	East 	Left 	Daily 	M.L. King Dr 
Exchange Place Center driveway exit 	West 	Left 	All 	Hudson St 
Fifteenth St 	East 	Left 	All 	Jersey Av 
Hoboken Av 	East 	Left 	Daily 	Baldwin Av 
Holland Tunnel Motel driveway exit 	West 	Left 	All 	Marin Blvd 
Hudson St 	South 	Left 	All 	Exchange Pl 
Jones St 	North 	Left 	All 	Sip Av 
Journal Square Plaza II 	North 	Left 	All 	Cottage St 
Kennedy Blvd 	North 	Left 	All 	Tonnele Av 
Madison Av 	North 	Left 	All 	Communipaw Av 
Manhattan Av 	East 	Left 	4:00 pm to 6:00 pm 
M—F 	Western Av 
Manhattan Av 	East 	Left 	4:00 pm to 6:00 pm 
M—F 	Terrace Av 
Montgomery St 	East 	Left 	7:00 am to 9:00 am 
M—F 	Barrow St 
Ninth St 	East 	Left 	7:00 am to 9:00 am and 4:00 pm to 6:00 pm 
M—F 	Marin Blvd 
Randolph Av 	North 	Left 	All 	Communipaw Av 
Romaine Av 	North 	Left 	School Days 
7:30 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. 
2:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. 	Broadway 
Sackett St 	North 	Left 	All 	Communipaw Av 
Sip Av 	East 	Left 	All 	Journal Square Plaza 
Sip Av 	West 	Left 	All 	Enos Pl 
Spruce St 	East 	Left 	7:00 am to 9:00 am and 4:00 pm to 6:00 pm 
M—F 	Liberty Av 
Saint Paul's Av 	West 	Left 	All 	Summit Av 
Summit Av 	North 	Left 	7:00 am to 9:00 am and 4:00 pm to 6:00 pm 
M—F 	Newkirk St 
Tyson Lane (east portion) 	North 	Left 	All 	Communipaw Av 
Waldo Av 	North 	Left 	All 	Newark Av 
York St 	West 	Left 	7:00 am to 9:00 am and 4:00 pm to 6:00 pm 
M—F 	Greene St 
  
§ 332-7A. - Prohibited turns at intersections during the northbound Pulaski Skyway lane closure. 
[Added 2-26-2014 by Ord. No. 14-021 ] 
No person shall make a turn of the kind designated (left or right) at any of the locations listed below during the time the northbound lane of the Pulaski Skyway is closed for construction. 
Prohibited Turns at Intersections 
Name of Street 	Direction 

of Travel 	Prohibited 

Turn 	Hours 

Days of the Week 	At Intersection of 
Center St 	North 	Right 	M—F 
except holidays 
6:00 am to 10:00 am 	Brook St 
	North 	Right 	M—F 
except holidays 
6:00 am to 10:00 am 	Bright St 
	North 	Right 	M—F 
except holidays 
6:00 am to 10:00 am 	York St 
Columbus Dr 	East 	Left 	M—F 
except holidays 
6:00 am to 10:00 am 	Barrow St 
Communipaw Av 	East 	All 	M—F 
except holidays 
6:00 am to 10:00 am 	West Side Av 
	East 	All 	M—F 
except holidays 
6:00 am to 10:00 am 	Bergen Av 
	East 	Left 	M—F 
except holidays 
6:00 am to 10:00 am 	Park St 
Grand St 	East 	Left 	M—F 
except holidays 
6:00 am to 10:00 am 	Ivy Pl 
	East 	Left 	M—F 
except holidays 
6:00 am to 10:00 am 	Barrow St 
	East 	Left 	M—F 
except holidays 
6:00 am to 10:00 am 	Marin Blvd 
  
§ 332-8. - Prohibited right turns on red signal. 
[Amended 5-11-2011 by Ord. No. 11-053; 12-18-2013 by Ord. No. 13-136 ; 1-15-2014 by Ord. No. 13-146 ; 10-8-2014 by Ord. No. 14-126 ; 3-25-2015 by Ord. No. 15-030 ; 6-24-2015 by Ord. No. 15-086 ; 8-16-17 by Ord. No. 17-099 ; 9-27-2017 by Ord. No. 17-124 ; 12-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-160 ; 11-7-2018 by Ord. No. 18-124 ; 6-12-2019 by Ord. No. 19-055 ] 
No person shall make a right turn when facing a steady red signal (stop indication) at any of the locations listed below. 
Prohibited Right Turns on Red Signal 
Name of Street 	Direction 
of Travel 	Prohibited Right Turn 
on Red Signal Onto 	Hours 
and Days 
Academy St 	Both 	Bergen Av 	7:00 am to 7:00 pm 
M—Sat 
	East 	Summit St 	All times 
	West 	Baldwin Av 	All times 
	West 	Summit Av 	All times 
Audubon Av 	West 	West Side Av 	8:00 am to 4:00 pm 
School days 
Baldwin Av 	North 	Academy St 	All times 
	North 	Magnolia Av 	8:00 am to 4:00 pm 
School days 
Bayview Av 	East 	Ocean Av 	8:00 am to 4:00 pm 
School days 
Beacon Av 	West 	Summit Av 	All times 
Belmont Av 	West 	Bergen Av 	7:00 am to 7:00 pm 
M—Sat 
	West 	Kennedy Blvd 	All times 
	All 	Monticello Av 	8:00 am to 4:00 pm 
School days 
Bergen Av 	Both 	Academy St 	7:00 am to 7:00 pm 
M—Sat 
	South 	Belmont Av 	8:00 am to 4:00 pm 
School days 
	All 	Jewett Av 	8:00 am to 4:00 pm 
School days 
	Both 	Montgomery St 	All times 
	Both 	Sip Av 	All times 
	South 	Newkirk St 	7:00 am to 7:00 pm 
M—Sat 
	All 	Union St 	All times 
	South 	Vroom St 	All times 
Bleecker St 	East 	Summit Av 	7:00 am to 7:00 pm 
Bowers St 	Both 	Central Av 	7:00 am to 7:00 pm 
M—F 
Broadway 	East 	Wales Av 	8:00 am to 4:00 pm 
School days 
Brunswick St 	Both 	Newark Av 	All times 
	South 	Columbus Dr 	8:00 am to 4:00 pm 
School days 
Canal St 	North 	Grand St 	8:00 am to 4:00 pm 
School days 
Center St 	North 	Montgomery St 	8:00 am to 4:00 pm 
School days 
Central Av 	South 	Bowers St 	7:00 am to 7:00 pm 
M—F 
	South 	Pavonia Av 	All times 
Chestnut Av 	South 	Pavonia Av 	All times 
Columbus Dr 	All 	Grove St 	All times 
	All 	Jersey Av 	All times 
	All 	Marin Blvd 	All times 
Communipaw Av 	Both 	West Side Av 	6:00 am to 10:00 pm daily 
	East 	Grand St 	All times 
Congress St 	Both 	Central Av 	All times 
	Both 	Webster Av 	All times 
	East 	Paterson Plank Rd 	All times 
Culver Av 	Both 	West Side Av 	All times 
Danforth Av 	All 	Old Bergen Rd and Rose Av 	All times 
	Both 	Ocean Av 	8:00 am to 4:00 pm 
School days 
	West 	Westside Av 	
Douglas and Arthur Skinner Dr (f/k/a Jersey Av) 	All 	Grand St 	All times 
Duncan Av 	Both 	West Side Av 	All times 
Ege Av 	East 	West Side Av 	8:00 am to 4:00 pm 
School days 
Erie St 	North 	Sixth St 	7:00 am to 7:00 pm M—F 
Fairmount Av 	Both 	Bergen Av 	All times 
	East 	Kennedy Blvd 	All times 
Fowler Av 	All 	Kennedy Blvd and Van Nostrand Av 	All times 
Franklin Av 	Both 	Palisade Av 	All times 
Gates Av 	Both 	Ocean Av 	8:00 am to 4:00 pm 
School days 
Grand St 	All 	Grove St 	All times 
	All 	Monmouth St 	8:00 am to 4:00 pm 
School days 
	All 	Douglas and Arthur Skinner Memorial Dr (f/k/a Jersey Av) 	All times 
	All 	Barrow St 	8:00 am to 4:00 pm 
School days 
	All 	Marin Blvd 	All times 
	All 	Washington St 	8:00 am to 4:00 pm 
School days 
Griffith St 	East 	Summit Av 	7:00 am to 7:00 pm 
Grove St 	All 	Columbus Dr 	All times 
	All 	Grand St 	All times 
Highland Av 	East 	Bergen Av 	8:00 am to 4:00 pm 
School days 
Hopkins Av 	East 	Summit Av 	All times 
Hudson St 	North 	Exchange Pl 	All times 
Jefferson Av 	West 	Summit Av 	8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
School days 
Jersey Av 	South 	Fourteenth St 	All times 
	All 	Columbus Dr 	All times 
	All 	Newark Av 	All times 
	All 	Sixth St 	7:00 am to 7:00 pm M—F 
Jewett Av 	All 	Bergen Av 	8:00 am to 4:00 pm 
School days 
	All 	Monticello Av 	8:00 am to 4:00 pm 
School days 
Johnston Av 	Both 	Grand St 	All times 
	Both 	Pacific Av 	7:00 am to 4:00 pm 
School days 
Journal Square 	South 	Kennedy Blvd 	All times 
Kennedy Blvd 	All 	Van Nostrand Av and Fowler Av 	All times 
	Both 	Pavonia Av 	All times 
	Both 	Sip Av 	7:00 am to 7:00 pm 
M—Sat 
	Both 	Saint Paul's Av 	8:00 am to 4:00 pm 
School days 
	East 	Journal Square 	All times 
	South 	Bleecker St 	All times 
	South 	Newark Av 	7:00 am to 7:00 pm 
M—Sat 
Laidlaw Av 	East 	Central Av 	8:00 am to 4:00 pm 
School days 
Lincoln St 	Both 	Kennedy Blvd 	7:00 am to 7:00 pm 
M—Sat 
Magnolia Av 	East 	Baldwin Av 	8:00 am to 4:00 pm 
School days 
Manhattan Av 	East 	Montrose Av 	All times 
	East 	Sanford Pl 	All times 
Marin Blvd 	All 	Metro Plaza 	7:00 am to 7:00 pm daily 
	All 	Grand St 	All times 
	All 	Columbus Dr 	All times 
	All 	Morgan St 	All times 
Martin Luther King Dr 	North 	Bayview Av 	8:00 am to 4:00 pm 
School days 
Mercer St 	West 	Bergen Av 	8:00 am to 4:00 pm 
School days 
Merseles St 	South 	Montgomery St 	8:00 am to 4:00 pm 
School days 
Metro Plaza 	All 	Marin Blvd 	7:00 am to 7:00 pm daily 
Monmouth St 	North 	Grand St 	8:00 am to 4:00 pm 
School days 
Montgomery St 	Both 	Bergen Av 	All times 
	East 	Merseles St 	8:00 am to 4:00 pm 
School days 
	East/West 	Washington St 	7:00 am to 7:00 pm 
M—F 
	West 	West Side Av 	7:00 am to 7:00 pm 
M—Sat 
Monticello Av 	All 	Belmont Av 	8:00 am to 4:00 pm 
School days 
	All 	Jewett Av 	8:00 am to 4:00 pm 
School days 
Montrose Av 	North 	Manhattan Av 	All times 
Morgan St 	All 	Marin Blvd 	All times 
Nelson Av 	South 	North St 	8:00 am to 4:00 pm 
School days 
Newark Av 	Both 	Brunswick St 	All times 
	Both 	Kennedy Blvd 	7:00 am to 7:00 pm 
M—Sat 
	Both 	Tonnele Av 	7:00 am to 7:00 pm 
M—Sat 
	East 	Summit Av 	All times 
	North 	Hoboken Av 	All times 
	North 	Summit Av 	All times 
	West 	Palisade Av 	All times 
	All 	Jersey Av 	All times 
Newkirk St 	All 	Sip Av and van Reypen St 	7:00 am to 7:00 pm 
M—Sat 
	West 	Bergen Av 	All times 
North St 	East 	Nelson Av 	8:00 am to 4:00 pm 
School days 
Ocean Av 	Both 	Danforth Av 	8:00 am to 4:00 pm 
School days 
	Both 	Wilkinson Av 	8:00 am to 4:00 pm 
School days 
Old Bergen Rd 	All 	Danforth Av and Rose Av 	All times 
Pacific Av 	Both 	Communipaw Av 	All times 
	North 	Grand St 	7:00 am to 9:00 am 
M—F 
	Both 	Johnston Av 	7:00 am to 4:00 pm 
School days 
Palisade Av 	Both 	Franklin Av 	All times 
	South 	Newark Av 	All times 
Pavonia Av 	Both 	Kennedy Blvd 	All times 
	West 	Summit Av 	All times 
	West 	Washington Blvd 	7:00 am to 7:00 pm 
M—F 
Port Authority driveway 	South 	Sip Av 	All times 
Prospect St 	West 	Webster Av 	All times 
Ravine Av 	All 	Webster Av 	All times 
Rose Av 	All 	Old Bergen Rd and Danforth Av 	All times 
Saint Paul's Av 	Both 	Kennedy Blvd 	8:00 am to 4:00 pm 
School days 
	Both 	Tonnele Av 	7:00 am to 7:00 pm 
M—Sat 
Sanford Pl 	South 	Manhattan Av 	All times 
	South 	Manhattan Av 	All times 
Sip Av 	All 	Van Reypen St and Newkirk St 	7:00 am to 7:00 pm 
M—Sat 
	Both 	Bergen Av 	All times 
	Both 	Kennedy Blvd 	7:00 am to 7:00 pm 
M—Sat 
Sixth St 	West 	Erie St 	7:00 am to 7:00 pm M—F 
	All 	Jersey Av 	7:00 am to 7:00 pm M—F 
South St 	West 	Summit Av 	All times 
Stegman Pkwy 	All 	West Side Av 	8:00 am to 4:00 pm 
School days 
Summit Av 	North 	Academy St 	All times 
	North 	Hoboken Av 	All times 
	North 	Newark Av 	All times 
	North 	Pavonia Av 	All times 
	South 	Newark Av 	7:00 am to 7:00 pm 
All days 
	North 	Magnolia Av 	All times 
	South 	Magnolia Av 	All times 
	East 	Summit Av 	All times 
Tonnele Av 	Both 	Newark Av 	7:00 am to 7:00 pm 
M—Sat 
	Both 	Saint Paul's Av 	7:00 am to 7:00 pm 
M—F 
Thorne St 	East 	Central Av 	All times 
Union St 	All 	Bergen Av 	All times 
	Both 	West Side Av 	8:00 am to 4:00 pm 
School days 
Van Nostrand Av 	All 	Kennedy Blvd and Fowler Av 	All times 
Van Reypen St 	All 	Sip Av and Newkirk St 	7:00 am to 7:00 pm 
M—Sat 
Virginia Av 	West 	West Side Av 	8:00 am to 4:00 pm 
School days 
Warren St 	South 	Grand St 	8:00 am to 4:00 pm 
School days 
Washington Blvd 	North 	Pavonia Av 	7:00 am to 7:00 pm 
M—F 
Washington St 	North/South 	Montgomery St 	7:00 am to 7:00 pm 
M—F 
	North/South 	Grand St 	8:00 am to 4:00 pm 
School days 
Webster Av 	Both 	Congress St 	All times 
	All 	Ravine Av 	All times 
	North 	South St 	8:00 am to 4:00 pm 
School days 
West Side Av 	Both 	Communipaw Av 	6:00 am to 10:00 pm daily 
	Both 	Duncan Av 	All times 
	North 	Broadway 	8:00 am to 4:00 pm 
School days 
	South and North 	Belmont Av 	All times 
	All 	Stegman Pkwy 	8:00 am to 4:00 pm 
School days 
Wilkinson Av 	West 	Ocean Av 	8:00 am to 4:00 pm 
School days 
  
§ 332-9. - Stop intersections. 
[Amended 5-11-2011 by Ord. No. 11-052; 11-9-2011 by Ord. No. 11-138; 09-23-2014 by Ord. No. 14-116 ; 11-12-2014 by Ord. No. 14-140 ; 7-15-2015 by Ord. No. 15-091 ; 9-9-2015 by Ord. No. 15-113 ; 11-24-2015 by Ord. No. 15-154 ; 2-24-2016 by Ord. No. 16-030 ; 4-27-2016 by Ord. No. 16-063 ; 5-25-2016 by Ord. No. 16-084 ; 9-28-2016 by Ord. No. 16-141 ; 9-28-2016 by Ord. No. 16-143 ; 3-8-2017 by Ord. No. 17-019 ; 3-22-2017 by Ord. No. 17-029 ; 8-16-2017 by Ord. No. 17-100 ; 8-16-2017 by Ord. No. 17-101 ; 9-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-115 ; 9-27-2017 by Ord. No. 17-122 ; 9-27-2017 by Ord. No. 17-127 ; 10-11-2017 by Ord. No. 17-134 ; 11-16-2017 by Ord. No. 17-149 ; 11-29-2017 by Ord. No. 17-154 ; 5-9-2018 by Ord. No. 18-037 ; 6-27-2018 by Ord. No 18-061 ; 8-15-2018 by Ord. No. 18-083 ; 8-15-2018 by Ord. No. 18-084 ; 9-12-2018 by Ord. No. 18-100 ; 9-26-2018 by Ord. No. 18-109 ; 10-10-2018 by Ord. No. 18-117 ; 10-24-2018 by Ord. No. 18-121 ; 11-7-2018 by Ord. No. 18-125 ; 12-19-2018 by Ord. No. 18-138 ; 3-27-2019 by Ord. No. 19-018 ; 4-10-2019 by Ord. No. 19-021 ; 4-24-2019 by Ord. No. 19-032 ; 4-24-2019 by Ord. No. 19-033 ; 5-8-2019 by Ord. No. 19-042 ; 5-22-2019 by Ord. No. 19-050 ] 
The intersections listed below are hereby designated as stop intersections or multi-way stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as provided therein. 
Stop Intersections 
Street 1
(Stop Sign On) 	Direction of Travel 	Street 2 
(At Intersection) 
Abbett St 	North 	Ferry St 
Academy St 	West 	Van Reypen St 
Aetna St 	East 	Skinner Dr (formerly Jersey Av) 
Alan Ter 	East 	Waldo Av 
Alexander Ct 	North 	Lyon Ct (E/W) 
Alexander Ct 	South 	Robinson Dr 
Amity St 	South 	Fairmount Av 
Apollo Ct 	North 	Duncan Av 
Arlington Av 	South 	Bayview Av 
Arlington Av - (multi-way) 	North and south 	Bramhall Av 
Arlington Av - (multi-way) 	North and south 	Carteret Av 
Arlington Av - (multi-way) 	North and south 	Claremont Av 
Arlington Av - (multi-way) 	North and south 	Union St 
Arlington Av 	North and south 	Wilkinson Av 
Arlington Av 	North 	Communipaw Av 
Arlington Av 	South 	Harmon St 
Arlington Av 	North and south 	Grand St 
Armstrong Av 	West 	Ocean Av 
Armstrong Av 	West 	Bergen Av 
Armstrong Av 	West 	Sterling Av 
Astor Pl 	East 	Park St 
Atlantic St 	East 	Martin Luther King Dr 
Atlas Ct 	North 	Robinson Dr 
Audrey Zapp Dr 	West 	Phillip St - (multi-way) 
Avenue C 	North 	Mulcahy St/Merritt St - (multi-way) 
Barbara Pl 	East 	Pacific Av 
Barrow St - (multi-way) 	North 	Wayne St 
Barrow St 	North 	Newark Av 
Barrow St 	North 	York St - (multi-way) 
Bartholdi Av 	East and west 	Romar Av 
Bates St 	South 	Brook St 
Bates St 	South 	Grand St 
Bay St 	East and west 	Provost St 
Bay St 	West 	Marin Blvd 
Bay St 	East and west 	Warren St 
Bay St 	West 	Grove St 
Bay St 	West 	Erie St 
Bay St 	West 	Newark Av 
Beach St - (multi-way) 	East 	Liberty Av 
Beach St 	East 	Montrose Av 
Beach St 	East 	Sanford Pl 
Beacon Av - (multi-way) 	West 	Collard St 
Belvidere Av 	North 	Condict St 
Belvidere Av 	South 	Communipaw Av 
Belvidere Av 	South 	Duncan Av 
Bennett St 	North 	Clendenny Av 
Berry La 	North 	Communipaw Av 
Berkeley Pl 	West 	Tonnele Av 
Bidwell Av 	West 	Bergen Av 
Bishop St 	West 	Cornelison Av 
Bleecker St 	West 	Terrace Av 
Bleecker St 	East 	Central Av 
Bleecker St 	East and west 	Liberty Av 
Booraem Av 	West 	Central Av 
Bostwick Av 	East 	Martin Luther King Dr 
Bostwick Av 	East 	Ocean Av 
Boyd Av 	East 	Bergen Av 
Bramhall Av - (multi-way) 	East and west 	Arlington Av 
Bramhall Av 	East and west 	Halladay St 
Bramhall Av 	East 	Garfield Av 
Bramhall Av 	East 	Pacific Av 
Briarwood Rd 	East 	Sycamore Rd 
Briarwood Rd 	East 	Country Village Rd 
Bright St - (multi-way) 	West 	Center St 
Bright St 	East 	Merseles St 
Bright St 	East 	Grand St 
Bright St 	East and west 	Jersey Av 
Bright St 	East and west 	Varick St - (multi-way) 
Bright St 	West 	Monmouth St 
Bright St 	West 	Cornelison Av 
Brinkerhoff St 	West 	Monticello Av 
Brinkerhoff St 	West 	Bergen Av 
Britton St 	North 	Montgomery St 
Brook St 	West 	Center St 
Brown Pl 	East 	Princeton Av 
Brunswick St 	South 	York St 
Brunswick St 	South 	Second St - (multi-way) 
Brunswick St 	South 	Eighth St - (multi-way) 
Brunswick St 	South 	Pavonia Av - (multi-way) 
Brunswick St 	South 	Ninth St - (multi-way) 
Brunswick St 	South 	Sixth St - (multi-way) 
Cambridge Av 	North 	Griffith St 
Cambridge Av 	North 	Hutton St - (multi-way) 
Cambridge Av 	North 	Bowers St 
Cambridge Av 	North 	South St 
Cambridge Av 	North 	Congress St 
Cambridge Av 	North 	North St 
Carbon Pl 	East 	West Side Av 
Carlton Av - (multi-way) 	East and west 	Liberty Av 
Carlton Av 	East and west 	Montrose Av - (multi-way) 
Carpenter Ct 	North 	Smit Ct 
Carteret Av - (multi-way) 	East and west 	Arlington Av 
Carteret Av 	East 	Pacific Av 
Carteret Av 	East and west 	Garfield Av 
Carteret Av 	West 	Ocean Av 
Catherine Ct 	West 	Garfield Av 
Cator Av 	West 	Rose Av 
Cator Av 	East and west 	Garfield Av 
Cator Av 	West 	Ocean Av 
Cator Av 	West 	Old Bergen Rd 
Cator Av 	West 	Fowler Av 
Cator Av 	West 	Spring St 
Center St - (multi-way) 	North 	Bright St 
Central Av 	North 	Newark Av 
Central Av 	South 	Hoboken Av 
Chapel Av 	East 	Ocean Av 
Chestnut Av - (multi-way) 	North and south 	Magnolia Av 
Chestnut Av 	North 	Newark Av 
Chopin Ct 	South 	Montgomery St 
Claremont Av - (multi-way) 	East and west 	Arlington Av 
Claremont Av 	East 	Garfield Av 
Claremont Av 	East and west 	West Side Av 
Clerk St 	South 	Carteret Av 
Clerk St 	South 	Claremont Av 
Clerk St 	South 	Union St 
Clerk St 	South 	Wilkinson Av 
Clifton Pl 	North 	Fairmount Av 
Clifton Pl 	West 	Summit Av 
Clinton Av 	West 	Bergen Av 
Clinton Av 	West 	West Side Av 
Colden St 	East and west 	Center St 
Colden St 	South 	Grand St 
Coles St 	South 	Eighth St 
Coles St - (multi-way) 	South 	Pavonia Av 
Coles St - (multi-way) 	South 	Sixth St 
Coles St 	South 	Tenth St - (multi-way) 
Coles St 	South 	Seventh St - (multi-way) 
Colgate St 	South 	Bright St 
Colgate St 	South 	First St 
Colgate St 	North and south 	Second St 
Colgate St 	South 	York St 
Collard St - (multi-way) 	South 	Beacon Av 
Collard St 	South 	Hopkins Av 
College Dr 	North 	Culver Av 
College Dr 	South 	Audubon Av 
College St 	North 	Culver Av 
College St 	South 	Audubon Av 
Colony Rd 	South 	Pt Jersey Blvd 
Columbia Av 	North and south 	Bleecker St 
Columbia Av 	North and south 	Thorne St 
Columbia Av 	South 	Zabriskie St - (multi-way) 
Columbia Av 	North and south 	North St - (multi-way) 
Columbia Av 	North and south 	Lincoln St - (multi-way) 
Concord St - (multi-way) 	North and south 	Fleet St 
Concord St 	North and south 	Hopkins Av 
Concord St 	North and south 	Saint Paul's Av 
Condict St 	East 	Delaware Av 
Congress St 	East and west 	New York Ave - (multi-way) 
Cook St 	South 	Newark Av 
Corbin Av 	North 	Sip Av 
Corbin Av 	North 	Pavonia Av 
Corbin Av 	North and south 	Broadway 
Cornelison Av 	South 	Summit Av 
Country Village Rd 	North and south 	Briarwood Rd 
Court House Pl 	West 	Oakland Av 
Crawford St 	East 	Summit Av 
Crescent Av 	South 	Astor Pl 
Crescent Av 	South 	Harrison Av 
Cuneo Pl 	West 	Palisade Av 
Custer Av 	East 	Old Bergen Rd 
Dales Av 	North 	Broadway 
Danforth Av 	East 	Princeton Av 
DeKalb Av 	East and west 	Van Reypen St 
DeKalb Av 	West 	West Side Av 
Delaware Av 	North 	Gautier Av 
Delaware Av 	North and south 	Duncan Av 
Delaware Av 	South 	Communipaw Av 
Delmar Rd 	East 	Sycamore Rd 
Demsey Ct 	North 	Smit Ct 
Dey St 	East 	Tonnele Av 
Division St 	North and south 	Seventh St - (multi-way) 
Division St 	North and south 	Sixth St 
Division St 	South 	Newark Av 
Division St 	North and south 	Eighth St - (multi-way) 
Dudley St 	West 	Warren St 
Dudley St 	East 	Washington St 
Duffield Av 	North and south 	Saint Paul's Av 
Duncan Ct 	North 	Duncan Av 
Dwight St 	East 	Bergen Av 
Dwight St 	East 	Martin Luther King Dr 
Dwight St 	East 	Garfield Av 
Dwight St 	East 	Van Cleef St 
E Bidwell Av 	West 	Garfield Av 
Eastern Pkwy 	East 	Garfield Av 
Eastern Pkwy 	West 	Ocean Av 
Edward Hart Dr 	North and south 	Theodore Conrad Dr 
Ege Av 	East 	Mallory Av 
Ege Av 	East 	Bergen Av 
Ege Av 	East 	Martin Luther King Dr 
Eighteenth St Channelization lane 	East 	Jersey Av 
Eighteenth St 	West to south 	Coles St 
Eighth St 	West 	Coles St 
Eighth St - (multi-way) 	West 	Erie St 
Eighth St 	West 	Manila Av - (multi-way) 
Eighth St 	West 	Division St - (multi-way) 
Eighth St 	West 	Brunswick St - (multi-way) 
Eighth St 	West 	Monmouth St - (multi-way) 
Eighth St 	West 	Jersey Av - (multi-way) 
Eighth St 	West 	McWilliams - (multi-way) 
Elizabeth St 	East 	Waldo Av 
Elizabeth St 	West 	Chestnut Av 
Emerson Av 	North 	Logan Av 
Emerson Av 	North and south 	Sip Av 
Emory St 	East 	Monticello Av 
Enos Pl 	South 	Newkirk St 
Erie St - (multi-way) 	North 	Eighth St 
Erie St 	North 	Seventh St - (multi-way) 
Erie St 	North 	Pavonia Av 
Erie St 	North 	Sixteenth St 
Erie St 	North 	First St - (multi-way) 
Everett St 	North 	Clendenny Av 
Everett St 	South 	Williams Av 
Exeter Dr 	East 	Sycamore Rd 
Fairmount Av 	East 	Storms Av 
Fairmount Av 	East 	Monticello Av 
Fairview Av 	East 	Fairmount Av 
Ferncliff Rd 	East 	Sycamore Rd 
Ferry St 	East 	Palisade Av 
Field Av 	North 	Sip Av 
Fifteenth St 	West 	Grove St 
Fifteenth St 	West 	Erie St 
Fifteenth St 	West 	Coles St 
Fifth St 	East 	Brunswick St 
Fifth St 	East 	Monmouth St 
Fifth St 	East 	Coles St 
Fifth St 	East 	Jersey Av 
Fifth St 	East 	Erie St 
Fifth St 	East 	Manila Av 
First St 	East 	Brunswick St 
First St 	East 	Monmouth St 
First St 	East 	Coles St 
First St 	East 	Newark Av 
First St 	East 	Jersey Av 
First St 	East 	Provost St 
First St 	East 	Grove St 
First St 	East 	Warren St 
First St 	East 	Erie St - (multi-way) 
Fisk St 	East 	West Side Av 
Fisk St 	East 	Mallory Av - (multi-way) 
Fleet St 	East 	Oakland Av 
Fleet St 	East 	Baldwin Av 
Fleet St 	East 	Palisade Av 
Fleet St - (multi-way) 	East 	Concord St 
Florence St 	South 	Bright St 
Florence St 	West 	Cornelison Av 
Forrest St 	East 	Clerk St 
Forrest St 	East and west 	Halladay St 
Forrest St 	East 	Pacific Av 
Fourteenth St 	West 	Coles St 
Fourth St 	West 	Erie St 
Fourth St 	West 	Jersey Av 
Fourth St 	West 	Coles St 
Fourth St 	West 	Monmouth St 
Fourth St 	West 	Merseles St - (multi-way) 
Fowler Av 	North and south 	McAdoo Av - (multi-way) 
Fox Pl 	East 	West Side Av 
Foxhound Ct 	North 	Hudson Ct 
Frances Ct 	West 	Foxhound Ct 
Franklin St 	South 	New York Av 
Franklin St 	East and west 	New York Av - (multi-way) 
Franklin St 	East 	Ogden Av - (multi-way) 
Freedom Pl 	West 	Garfield Av 
Freeman Av 	North and south 	Sip Av 
Freeman Av 	South 	Duncan Av 
Fremont St 	North 	Bright St 
Fremont St 	South 	Colden St 
Fulton Av - (multi-way) 	West 	Sterling Av 
Fulton Av 	West 	Martin Luther King Dr 
Fulton Av 	West 	Bergen Av 
Fulton Av 	West 	West Side Av 
Garabrant St 	South 	Johnston Av 
Gardner Av 	East 	Summit Av 
Garrison Av 	South 	DeKalb Av 
Garrison Av 	South 	Stuyvesant Av 
Garrison Av 	South 	Pavonia Av 
Garrison Av 	South 	Sip Av 
Gates Av 	West 	Old Bergen Rd 
Giles Av 	North and south 	Broadway 
Glenwood Av 	West 	West Side Av 
Glenn La 	West 	West Side Av 
Grace St 	West 	Summit Av 
Grace St 	West 	Nelson Av 
Graham St 	West 	Nelson Av 
Grant Av 	East 	Martin Luther King Dr 
Grant Av 	East 	Ocean Av 
Grant Av 	East 	Washington St 
Grant Av 	East 	West Side Av 
Gray St 	North 	Academy St 
Gray St 	North 	Wayne St 
Grieco Dr 	South 	Lembeck Av 
Grieco Dr 	West 	Sullivan Dr 
Griffith St - (multi-way) 	East 	New York Av 
Griffith St 	East and west 	Ogden Av 
Griffith St 	East 	Central Av 
Grove St 	North and south 	Mercer St - (multi-way) 
Hague St 	West 	Summit Av 
Hague St 	West 	Nelson Av 
Halladay St 	South 	Carteret Av 
Halladay St 	South 	Caven Point Av 
Halladay St 	South 	Johnston Av 
Halladay St 	South 	Communipaw Av 
Hancock Av 	South 	Griffith St 
Hancock Av 	South 	Hutton St 
Hancock Av 	South 	Franklin St 
Hancock Av 	South 	Congress St 
Hancock Av 	South 	South St 
Hancock Av 	South 	Bowers St 
Harbor Dr 	East 	Industrial Dr 
Harmon St 	West 	Crescent Av 
Harmon St 	West 	Randolph Av 
Harmon St 	West 	Grand St 
Harrison Av 	East 	Bergen Av 
Harrison Av 	East 	Monticello Av 
Hawthorne Av 	North 	Sip Av 
Henry St 	East and west 	Chestnut Av 
Henry St 	East 	Waldo Av 
Herbert Pl 	North 	Newark Av 
High St 	West 	Baldwin Av 
High St 	West 	Summit Av 
Highview Rd 	East 	Fowler Av 
Hill St 	West 	Palisade Av 
Hobson St 	West 	Palisade Av 
Holland Gardens South Driveway 	West 	Jersey Av 
Holmes Av 	North 	Sip Av 
Homestead Pl 	South 	Pavonia Av 
Hopkins Av 	East 	Central Av 
Hopkins Av 	East 	Oakland Av 
Hopkins Av 	East 	Baldwin Av 
Hopkins Av 	East 	Palisade Av 
Howard Pl 	West 	Storms Av 
Howie Fink Way (Formerly Pershing Plz) 	West 	Summit Av 
Hudson Ct 	South 	Robinson Dr 
Hudson Ct 	East 	Society Hill Dr 
Huron Av 	North 	Saint Paul's Av 
Hutton St 	East and west 	Cambridge Av - (multi-way) 
Hutton St 	West 	Liberty Av 
Hutton St 	East and west 	Sherman Av 
Hutton St 	East and west 	Sanford Pl 
Hutton St 	West 	Liberty Av 
Industrial Dr 	South 	Pt Jersey Blvd 
Irving St 	West 	Summit Av 
Irving St 	West 	Nelson Av 
Jackson Av 	North 	Communipaw Av 
James Av 	South 	Newark Av 
James Av 	North 	Van Keuren Av 
James Av 	North and south 	St. Paul's Av - (multi-way) 
Jefferson Av 	West 	Oakland Av - (multi-way) 
Jersey Av 	North and south 	York St - (multi-way) 
Jersey Av 	North and south 	Mercer St - (multi-way) 
Jersey Av 	North 	Eighth St - (multi-way) 
Jersey Av 	South 	Ninth St - (multi-way) 
Jersey Av 	North and south 	Tenth St - (multi-way) 
Jersey City Blvd 	West 	Wilson St - (multi-way) 
Jewett Av 	West 	West Side Av 
Johnston Av 	East 	Phillip St - (multi-way) 
Johnston Av 	West 	Cornelison Av 
Jones St 	North 	Sip Av 
Jordan Av 	South 	Mercer St 
Kearney Av 	East 	Ocean Av 
Kearney Av 	West 	Bergen Av 
Kearney Av 	West 	West Side Av 
Kensington Av 	East 	Bergen Av 
Kissam Ct 	North 	Lyon Ct (E/W) 
Lafayette St 	East and west 	Halladay St 
Lafayette St 	East and west 	Van Horne St 
Laidlaw Av 	West 	Collard St 
Laidlaw Av 	East 	Oakland Av 
Laidlaw Av 	East 	Baldwin Av 
Laidlaw Av 	East 	Palisade Av 
Lake St 	West 	Liberty Av 
Laurel Ct 	South 	First St 
Lee Ct 	North 	Robinson Dr 
Lee Ct 	South 	Tottenham Ct 
Lembeck Av 	West 	Sullivan Dr 
Lembeck Av 	West 	Old Bergen Rd 
Lembeck Av 	West 	Romar Av 
Leonard St 	East and west 	Columbia Av 
Leonard St 	West 	Terrace Av 
Leonard St 	East 	Summit Av 
Leonard St 	East 	Central Av 
Lexington Av 	West 	West Side Av 
Lexington Av 	West 	Mallory Av 
Lexington Av 	West 	Marcy Av 
Liberty Av - (multi-way) 	North 	Beach St 
Liberty Av 	North 	Leonard St 
Liberty Av 	North and south 	Lincoln St - (multi-way) 
Liberty Av 	South 	Spruce St 
Liberty Av - (multi-way) 	North 	Van Winkle Av 
Liberty Av 	North and south 	St. Paul's Av - (multi-way) 
Liberty Av - (multi-way) 	North 	Carlton Av 
Liberty Av 	North and south 	North St - (multi-way) 
Liberty Av 	North and south 	Zabriskie St - (multi-way) 
Lienau Pl 	North 	Booraem Av 
Lienau Pl - (multi-way) 	North 	Prospect St 
Lienau Pl 	North 	Reservoir Av 
Lincoln St 	East and west 	Columbia Av - (multi-way) 
Lincoln St 	East and west 	Liberty Av - (multi-way) 
Lincoln St - (multi-way) 	West 	Milton Av 
Lincoln St 	East and west 	Terrace Av - (multi-way) 
Linden Av 	East 	Fowler Av 
Linden Av 	East 	Old Bergen Rd 
Linden Av 	East 	Garfield Av 
Logan Av 	West 	Freeman Av 
Long St 	South 	Rose Av 
Ludlow St 	South 	New St 
Lyon Ct (N/S) 	North 	Lyon Ct (E/W) 
Lyon Ct (N/S) 	South 	Robinson Dr 
Madison Av 	North 	Clinton Av 
Madison Av 	North 	Communipaw Av 
Magnolia Av - (multi-way) 	East 	Chestnut Av 
Magnolia Av 	East 	Waldo Av 
Magnolia Av 	West 	Tonnele Av 
Maiden Ln 	West 	Orchard St 
Mallory Av 	South 	Fisk St - (multi-way) 
Mallory Av service road 	North 	Roosevelt Av 
Mallory Av 	North 	Roosevelt Av 
Manhattan Av 	West 	Central Av 
Manila Av - (multi-way) 	South 	Ninth St 
Manila Av 	South 	Second St - (multi-way) 
Manila Av 	South 	Pavonia Av - (multi-way) 
Manning Av 	South 	Communipaw Av 
Manila Av 	South 	Eighth St - (multi-way) 
Maple St 	West 	Halladay St 
Maple St 	East and west 	Van Horne St 
Maple St 	West 	Pacific Av 
Marcy Av 	North 	Communipaw Av 
Marcus St 	East 	Garfield Av 
Marion Pl 	East 	West Side Av 
Martorano Way 	South 	Carbon Pl 
Martorano Way 	North 	Fisk St 
Maxwell St 	West 	Coles St 
McAdoo Av 	East and west 	Fowler Av - (multi-way) 
McAdoo Av 	East 	Rose Av 
McAdoo Av 	East 	Rutgers Av 
McMartin Ct 	North 	Lyon Ct (E/W) 
McPherson Pl 	South 	Newark Av 
McWilliams Av 	South 	Eighth St - (multi-way) 
Mead Av 	North 	Broadway 
Mercer Loop 	West and east 	Ristaino Dr 
Mercer St 	West 	Barrow St 
Mercer St 	West 	Varick St 
Mercer St 	West 	Grove St - (multi-way) 
Mercer St 	West 	Jersey Av - (multi-way) 
Mercer St 	West 	Monmouth St 
Merritt St 	East 	Garfield Av 
Merritt St 	West 	Avenue C - (multi-way) 
Merseles St 	North 	Newark Av 
Merseles St 	South 	Fourth St - (multi-way) 
Miller St 	North 	Clendenny Av 
Miller St 	South 	Williams Av 
Milton Av 	North 	Charles St 
Milton Av 	South 	Griffith St 
Milton Av - (multi-way) 	North and south 	Lincoln St 
Milton Av 	North and south 	Bowers St 
Mina Dr 	East 	Sayles St 
Monitor St 	North and south 	Johnston Av 
Monmouth St - (multi-way) 	North 	York St 
Monmouth St 	North 	Sixth St - (multi-way) 
Monmouth St 	North 	Seventh St - (multi-way) 
Monmouth St 	North 	Eighth St - (multi-way) 
Montague Pl 	West 	Palisade Av 
Montrose Av 	North and south 	Carlton Av - (multi-way) 
Morgan St 	East and west 	Warren St - (multi-way) 
Morris St 	East 	Washington St - (multi-way) 
Morris St 	East 	Warren St 
Morton St 	North 	Clendenny Av 
Morton St 	South 	Williams Av 
Mountain Rd 	West 	Ogden Av - (multi-way) 
Msgr. McWilliams Pl 	South 	Eighth St 
Msgr. Wojtycha Dr 	East 	Grieco Dr 
Mulcahy St 	East 	Avenue C - (multi-way) 
Mury Lu Dr 	East 	Garfield Av 
Myrtle Av 	East 	Arlington Av 
Myrtle Av 	East 	Clerk St 
Myrtle Av 	East 	Garfield Av 
Myrtle Av 	West 	Martin Luther King Dr 
Myrtle Av 	West 	Bergen Av 
Neptune Av 	East 	Romar Av 
Neptune Av 	West 	Old Bergen Rd 
Neptune Av 	West 	Sayles St 
New St 	East 	Ocean Av 
New York Av 	South 	Ravine Av 
New York Av 	South 	North St 
New York Av 	South 	Congress St - (multi-way) 
New York Av 	South 	South St 
New York Av 	South 	Bowers St 
New York Av - (multi-way) 	South 	Griffith St 
New York Av 	South 	Hutton St 
New York Av 	South 	Franklin St - (multi-way) 
New York Av 	South 	Ferry St 
Ninth St 	East 	Monmouth St 
Ninth St 	East 	Coles St 
Ninth St - (multi-way) 	East 	Manila Av 
Ninth St 	East 	Marin Blvd 
Ninth St 	East 	Brunswick St - (multi-way) 
Ninth St 	East 	Jersey Av - (multi-way) 
Ninth St 	East 	West Hamilton Pl - (multi-way) 
Norcroft Rd 	East 	Sycamore Rd 
North St 	East 	Summit Av 
North St 	East 	Webster Av - (multi-way) 
North St 	East 	Palisade Av 
North St 	East and west 	Columbia Av - (multi-way) 
North St 	East and west 	Liberty Av - (multi-way) 
North St 	East and west 	Terrace Av - (multi-way) 
Nunda Av 	South 	Communipaw Av 
Nunda Av 	South 	Duncan Av 
Oak St 	West 	Martin Luther King Dr 
Oak St 	West 	Bergen Av 
Oakdale Rd 	West 	Riverview Rd 
Oakdale Rd 	East 	Sycamore Rd 
Oakland Av 	North and south 	Hoboken Av 
Oakland Av 	North and South 	Jefferson Av - (multi-way) 
Oakland Av 	North and south 	St. Paul's Av - (multi-way) 
Oakland Av 	North 	Prospect St 
Ogden Av 	South 	Cuneo Pl 
Ogden Av 	South 	Franklin St - (multi-way) 
Ogden Av 	South 	Mountain Rd - (multi-way) 
Ogden Av 	North and south 	Congress St 
Old Bergen Rd 	North 	McAdoo Av 
Olean Av 	South 	Communipaw Av 
Olean Av 	South 	Duncan Av 
Orient Av 	East 	Bergen Av 
Orient Av 	East 	Martin Luther King Dr 
Orient Av 	East 	Ocean Av 
Oxford Av 	East 	Bergen Av 
Oxford Av 	East 	Sackett St 
Pamrapo Av 	East 	Old Bergen Rd 
Parnell Pl 	South 	McAdoo Av 
Passaic Av 	North and south 	Bleecker St 
Passaic Av 	North and south 	Paterson St 
Passaic Av 	North 	Congress St 
Passaic Av 	South 	South St 
Paterson St 	West 	Summit Av 
Pauleson Ct 	West 	Foxhound Ct 
Pavonia Av - (multi-way) 	East and west 	Coles St 
Pavonia Av 	East 	Manila Av - (multi-way) 
Pavonia Av 	East and west 	Monmouth St 
Pavonia Av 	East 	Newark Av 
Pavonia Av 	East and west 	Tonnele Av 
Pavonia Av 	West 	West Side Av 
Pavonia Av 	West 	Giles Av 
Pavonia Av 	West 	Brunswick St - (multi-way) 
Pearl St 	East 	Greene St 
Pearl St 	West 	Washington St 
Pearsall Av 	East 	Romar Av 
Pearsall Av 	East 	Old Bergen Rd 
Pearsall Av 	East 	Ocean Av 
Pearsall Av 	East 	Garfield Av 
Pearsall Av 	East 	Princeton Av 
Perry St 	North 	Hopkins Av 
Perry St 	South 	Saint Paul's Av 
Phillip St 	North and south 	Audrey Zapp Dr/Johnston Av - (multi-way) 
Pierce Av 	South 	Bleecker St 
Pierce Av 	South 	Paterson St 
Pierce Av 	South 	South St 
Pine St 	South 	Lafayette St 
Pine St 	South and north 	Johnston Av 
Pine St 	North and south 	Communipaw Av 
Pine St 	South 	Maple St 
Plainfield Av 	South 	Duncan Av 
Pollock Av 	West 	Mallory Av 
Poplar St 	East 	Summit Av 
Poplar St 	East 	Central Av 
Prescott St 	West 	Park St 
Prospect St - (multi-way) 	West 	Lienau Pl 
Provost St 	North 	Second St 
Randolph Av 	North 	Bramhall Av 
Randolph Av 	North 	Carteret Av 
Randolph Av 	North 	Claremont Av 
Randolph Av 	North 	Myrtle Av 
Randolph Av 	North 	Union St 
Randolph Av 	North 	Communipaw Av 
Ravine Av 	West 	Abbett St 
Reserve Av 	East 	Terrace Av 
Reserve Av 	East and west 	Western Av 
Reservoir Av 	East 	Baldwin Av 
Reservoir Av 	East 	Palisade Av 
Richard St 	West 	Garfield Av 
Ring Rd E 	North 	Ring Rd N 
Ring Rd W - (multi-way) 	South 	Town Sq Pl 
Ristaino Dr 	South 	Montgomery St 
River Dr S 	North 	Newport Pkwy - (multi-way) 
River Dr S 	South 	Ring Rd N 
Riverview Rd 	South 	Mina Dr 
Riverview Rd 	North 	Pinecrest Rd 
Robinson Dr 	East 	Society Hill Dr 
Rock St 	West 	Summit Av 
Romaine Av 	North 	Sip Av 
Romaine Av 	North 	Pavonia Av 
Romaine Av 	North 	Broadway 
Romar Av 	North 	Greenville Av 
Roosevelt Av 	East 	Mallory Av 
Roosevelt Av 	East 	West Side Av 
Roosevelt Stadium Ct 	West 	Foxhound Ct 
Rose Av 	North and south 	Claremont Av 
Rose Av 	North and south 	Orient Av 
Rose Av 	South 	Grant Av 
Rose Av 	North 	Warner Av 
Rose Av 	North and south 	Woodlawn Av 
Ruby Ct 	North 	Lyon Ct (E/W) 
Rutgers Av 	North 	Stevens Av 
Rutgers Av 	North 	Van Nostrand Av 
Rutgers Av 	North 	Wade St 
Rutgers Av 	North 	Warner Av 
Sackett St 	North 	Atlantic St 
Sackett St 	North 	Bramhall Av 
Sackett St 	North 	Clinton Av 
Sackett St 	North 	Union St 
Sackett St 	North 	Communipaw Av 
Saddlewood Ct 	North 	Second St 
St. Paul's Av 	East and west 	Liberty Av - (multi-way) 
St. Paul's Av 	West 	Oakland Av - (multi-way) 
St. Paul's Av 	West 	Central Av 
St. Paul's Av 	West 	Summit Av 
St. Paul's Av 	East and west 	James Av - (multi-way) 
Sanford Pl 	East 	Summit Av 
Scott St 	South 	Greenville Av 
Scott St 	North 	Linden Av 
Seaview Av 	East 	Old Bergen Rd 
Seaview Av 	East 	Ocean Av 
Seaview Av 	East 	Garfield Av 
Seaview Av 	West 	Romar Av 
Second St 	West 	Merseles St 
Second St 	West 	Marin Blvd 
Second St 	West 	Manila Av - (multi-way) 
Second St 	West 	Erie St 
Second St 	West 	Jersey Av 
Second St 	West 	Coles St 
Second St 	West 	Brunswick St - (multi-way) 
Seidler St 	South 	Bramhall Av 
Seidler St 	South 	Clinton Av 
Senate Pl 	South 	Newark Av 
Service Rd 	South 	Stevens Av 
Seventeenth St 	East and west 	Coles St 
Seventeenth St 	East 	Jersey Av 
Seventh St 	East 	Division St - (multi-way) 
Seventh St 	East 	Jersey Av 
Seventh St 	East 	Erie St - (multi-way) 
Seventh St 	East and west 	Manila Av 
Seventh St 	East 	Coles St - (multi-way) 
Seventh St 	East 	Monmouth St - (multi-way) 
Sherman Av 	North 	Franklin St 
Sherman Av 	North 	Griffith St 
Sherman Av 	North 	Bowers St 
Sherman Av 	North 	South St 
Sherman Av 	North 	Congress St 
Sherman Av 	North 	North St 
Sherman Pl 	West 	Summit Av 
Sherman Pl 	West 	Sanford Pl 
Sixteenth St 	East and west 	Coles St 
Sixteenth St 	East 	Marin Blvd 
Sixth St - (multi-way) 	West 	Coles St 
Sixth St 	West 	Monmouth St - (multi-way) 
Sixth St 	West 	Brunswick - (multi-way) 
Sixth St 	West 	Newark Av 
Skillman Av 	South 	Saint Paul's Av 
Skillman Av 	South 	Van Winkle Av 
Skyline Dr 	West 	Garfield Av 
Smit Ct 	West 	Atlas Ct 
Smit Ct 	West 	Tellicherry Ct 
Smith St 	West 	Bergen Av 
South St 	East 	Ogden Av 
Spring St 	North 	McAdoo Av 
Spruce St 	East 	Collard St 
Stagg St 	West 	Liberty Av 
State St 	East 	Grand St 
State St 	West 	Cornelison Av 
Stegman St 	East 	Garfield Av 
Stegman St 	West 	Van Cleef St 
Sterling Av - (multi-way) 	North and south 	Fulton Av 
Sterling Av 	South 	McAdoo Av 
Steuben St 	East 	Washington St 
Steuben St 	East and west 	Warren St 
Steuben St 	West 	Marin Blvd 
Stevens Av 	West 	Martin Luther King Dr 
Stevens Av 	West 	Fowler Av 
Stevens Av 	West 	Sterling Av 
Storms Av 	East 	Monticello Av 
Stuyvesant Av 	West 	West Side Av 
Suburbia Dr 	South 	Bartholdi Av 
Suburbia Ct 	East 	Suburbia Dr 
Sullivan Dr 	South 	Bartholdi Av 
Summit Av 	South 	Baldwin Av 
Surry Ct 	South 	Smit Ct 
Sussex St 	East and west 	Van Vorst St 
Sussex St 	East 	Marin Blvd 
Sussex St - (multi-way) 	West 	Warren St 
Sussex St 	West 	Washington St - (multi-way) 
Suydam Av 	North 	Communipaw Av 
Swan Ct 	North 	Robinson Dr 
Swan Ct 	South 	Tottenham Ct 
Sycamore Rd 	North 	Bartholdi Av 
Sycamore Rd 	North and south 	Mina Dr 
Tellicherry Ct 	North 	Robinson Dr 
Tellicherry Ct 	North 	Smit Ct 
Tenth St 	East and west 	Manila Av 
Tenth St 	East and west 	Coles St 
Tenth St 	East and west 	Monmouth St 
Tenth St 	East and west 	Jersey Av - (multi-way) 
Terhune Av 	East 	Fowler Av 
Terrace Av 	South 	Manhattan Av 
Terrace Av 	North and south 	North St - (multi-way) 
Terrace Av 	North and south 	Lincoln St - (multi-way) 
Theo. Conrad Dr 	West 	Burma Rd 
Third St 	East 	Brunswick St 
Third St 	East 	Newark Av 
Third St 	East 	Monmouth St 
Third St 	East 	Coles St 
Third St 	East 	Jersey Av 
Third St 	East 	Erie St 
Third St 	East 	Manila Av 
Thirteenth St 	East and west 	Provost St 
Thirteenth St 	East 	Coles St 
Thirteenth St 	West 	Marin Blvd 
Thorne St 	East 	Liberty Av 
Thorne St 	East 	Terrace Av 
Tonnele Av 	South 	Van Reypen St 
Tottenham Ct 	North 	Robinson Dr 
Towers St 	North 	Culver Av 
Town Sq Pl - (multi-way) 	East 	Ring Rd W 
Trenton St 	West 	Chestnut Av 
Tuers Av 	North 	Mercer St 
Tuers Av 	North 	Newkirk St 
Tuers Av 	North 	Vroom St 
Twelfth Marginal St 	West 	Coles St 
Tyson Ln 	West 	Kennedy Blvd 
Union St - (multi-way) 	West 	Arlington Av 
Van Cleef St 	South 	Armstrong Av 
Van Cleef St 	North 	Dwight St 
Van Cleef St 	North and south 	Fulton Av 
Van Cleef St 	South 	Stegman St 
Van Cleef St 	North and south 	Wegman Pkwy 
Van Cleef St 	North and south 	Woodlawn Av 
Van Horne St 	North 	Lafayette St 
Van Horne St 	North 	Ash St 
Van Horne St 	North 	Communipaw Av 
Van Horne St 	North and south 	Johnston Av 
Van Nostrand Av 	East 	Sterling Av 
Van Nostrand Av 	East 	Martin Luther King Dr 
Van Nostrand Av 	East 	Garfield Av 
Van Reipen Av 	East 	Summit Av 
Van Reipen Av 	West 	Tonnele Av 
Van Vorst St 	North and south 	Grand St 
Van Wagenen Av 	South 	Saint Paul's Av 
Van Wagenen Av 	South 	Stuyvesant Av 
Van Wagenen Av 	South and north 	Broadway 
Van Wagenen Av 	South 	Pavonia Av 
Van Wagenen Av 	South 	Sip Av 
Van Winkle Av - (multi-way) 	East 	Liberty Av 
Van Winkle Av 	West 	Senate Pl 
Varick St 	South 	Bright St - (multi-way) 
Varick St - (multi-way) 	South 	York St 
Vreeland Ter 	West 	Garfield Av 
Vroom St 	East 	Gray St 
Vroom St 	East 	Summit Av 
Vroom St 	East 	Baldwin Av 
Vroom St 	West 	Van Reypen St 
Wade St 	East 	Ocean Av 
Waldo Av 	North 	Newark Av 
Wales Av 	South 	Logan Av 
Wallis Av 	South 	Logan Av 
Wallis Av 	South 	Broadway 
Warner Av 	West 	Martin Luther King Dr 
Warren St 	North 	Second St 
Warren St - (multi-way) 	South 	Sussex St 
Warren St 	North and south 	Morgan St - (multi-way) 
Washburn St 	East and west 	Baldwin Av 
Washington St 	North and south 	Morris St - (multi-way) 
Washington St 	North and south 	Sussex St - (multi-way) 
Waverly St 	East 	Oakland Av 
Waverly St 	East 	Baldwin Av 
Waverly St 	East 	Palisade Av 
Wayne St - (multi-way) 	East 	Barrow St 
Wayne St 	East 	Merseles St 
Wayne St 	East 	Jersey Av 
Webster Av 	North/South 	North St - (multi-way) 
Wegman Ct 	West 	Garfield Av 
Weldon St 	North 	DeKalb Av 
Weldon St 	North 	Stuyvesant Av 
West Hamilton Pl 	North 	Ninth St - (multi-way) 
West View Ct 	North 	Broadman Pkwy 
West View Ct 	South 	Culver Av 
Western Av 	South 	Manhattan Av 
Westervelt Pl 	East 	Grand St 
Whitman Av 	North 	Sip Av 
Whiton St 	North 	Lafayette St 
Whiton St 	North 	Maple St 
Whiton St 	North and south 	Ash St 
Whiton St 	North 	Communipaw Av 
Whiton St 	North 	Johnston Av 
Wilkinson Av 	East 	Garfield Av 
Wilkinson Av 	West 	Martin Luther King Dr 
Wilkinson Av 	West 	Bergen Av 
Williams Av 	West 	Bennett St 
Williams Av 	West 	Mallory Av 
Wilson St 	South 	Jersey City Blvd- Multi 
Winfield Av 	West 	Romar Av 
Winfield Av 	East 	Old Bergen Rd 
Winfield Av 	East 	Ocean Av 
Winfield Av 	East 	Garfield Av 
Winfield Av 	East 	Princeton Av 
Woodland Av 	North 	Greenville Av 
Woodlawn Av 	East 	Bergen Av 
Woodlawn Av 	East 	Sterling Av 
Woodlawn Av 	East 	Martin Luther King Dr 
Woodlawn Av 	East 	Ocean Av 
Woodward St 	South 	Johnston Av 
Woodward St 	North and south 	Communipaw Av 
Wright Av 	North 	Broadway 
Xavier Ct 	North 	Smit Ct 
Yale Av 	East 	Mallory Av 
Yale Av 	East 	West Side Av 
York St - (multi-way) 	East 	Monmouth St 
York St - (multi-way) 	East 	Varick St 
York St 	East 	Warren St 
York St 	East 	Washington St 
York St 	East 	Jersey Av - (multi-way) 
York St 	East 	Barrow St - (multi-way) 
Zabriskie St 	East 	Central Av 
Zabriskie St 	East and west 	Liberty Av - (multi-way) 
Zabriskie St 	East and west 	Terrace Av 
Zabriskie St 	East 	Western Av 
Zabriskie St 	West 	Columbia Av - (multi-way) 
  
§ 332-10. - Yield intersections. 
[Amended 9-28-2016 by Ord. No. 16-143 ] 
The intersections listed below are hereby designated as yield intersections. Yield signs shall be installed as provided therein. 
Yield Intersections qc> 
Street 1 
(Yield Sign On) 	Direction 
of Travel 	Street 2 
(At Intersection of) 
Eighteenth St 	West to north 	Coles St 
Fairmount Av channelization lane 	South 	Jewett Av 
Ivy Pl 	West 	Summit Av 
  
§ 332-11. - Lane use reservations. 
[Amended 5-22-2019 by Ord. No. 19-049 ] 
The lane locations listed below are hereby designated as lane use reservations, and traffic shall move only as indicated. 
Lane Use Reservations 
Street 1 	Approach 	Street 2 	Lane 
Reserved 	Purpose 
Baldwin Av 	North 	Academy St 	Left 	Left turn 
	South 	Newark Av 	Left 	Left turn 
Bergen Av 	North 	Montgomery St 	Center 	Straight 
	North 	Montgomery St 	Right 	Right turn 
	North 	Montgomery St 	Left 	Left turn 
	South 	Montgomery St 	Right 	Right turn 
	South 	Sip Av 	2 Center 	Straight 
	South 	Sip Av 	Left 	Left turn 
	South 	Sip Av 	Right 	Right turn 
Broadway 	West 	Tonnele Av 	Right 	Right turn 
Center St 	North 	Columbus Dr 	Left 	Left turn 
	North 	Columbus Dr 	Center and right 	Right turn 
	North 	Montgomery St 	Left 	Left turn and straight 
	North 	Montgomery St 	Center 	Straight 
	North 	Montgomery St 	Right 	Straight and right turn 
Communipaw Av 	East 	Grand St 	Left 	Left turn 
	West 	Grand St 	Left 	Left turn 
	East 	Route 440 	2 Left 	Left turn 
Danforth Av 	West 	West Side Av 	Left 	Left turn 
	West 	Sullivan Dr 	Right 	Right turn 
Eighteenth St 	East 	Marin Blvd 	Right 	Right turn 
Eleventh St viaduct 	West 	Mall Dr West 	Right 	Right turn 
Erie St 	South 	Fourteenth St 	Left 	Left turn 
Garfield Av 	North 	Bayview Av 	Left 	Left turn 
	South 	Bayview Av 	Right 	Right turn 
Grand St 	West 	Jersey Av 	Left 	Left turn 
	East 	Communipaw Av 	Right 	Right turn 
	East 	Skinner Dr 	Left 	Left turn 
	East 	Summit Av 	Left 	Left turn 
	West 	Woodward St 	Left 	Left turn 
	West 	Barbara Pl 	Left 	Left turn 
	East 	Colden St 	Left 	Left turn 
Jersey Av 	South 	Fourteenth St 	Left 	Left turn 
Magnolia Av 	West 	Summit Av 	Left 	Left turn 
Manhattan Av 	West 	Kennedy Blvd 	Right 	Right turn 
Marin Blvd 	North 	Columbus Dr 	Left 	Left turn 
	South 	Eighteenth St 	Right 	Right turn 
	South 	Eighteenth St 	Center 	Straight 
	South 	Eighteenth St 	Left 	Left turn 
	South 	Sixth St 	Right 	Right turn 
Merritt St 	West 	Ocean Av 	Left 	Left turn 
Monmouth St 	North 	Columbus Dr 	Right 	Right turn 
	South 	Newark Av 	Left 	Left turn 
Montgomery St 	East 	Orchard St 	Left 	Left turn 
	West 	Bergen Av 	Left 	Left turn 
	East 	Bergen Av 	Center 	Straight 
	East 	Bergen Av 	Left 	Left turn 
	East 	Bergen Av 	Right 	Right turn 
	West 	Jersey Av 	Right 	Right turn 
	West 	Jersey Av 	Center 	Straight 
	West 	Jersey Av 	Left 	Left turn 
Morris St 	West 	Greene St 	Right 	Right turn 
	East 	Hudson St 	Right 	Right turn 
Newark Av 	East 	Palisade Av 	Right 	Right turn 
	West 	Palisade Av 	Left 	Left turn 
	East 	Pavonia Av 	Left 	Left turn 
	West 	Seventh St 	Left 	Left turn 
Newport Pkwy 	West 	Washington Blvd 	Left 	Left turn 
	East 	Washington Blvd 	Left 	Left turn 
Pavonia Av 	West 	Summit Av 	Left 	Left turn 
Phillip St 	North 	Jersey City Blvd 	Left 	Left turn 
	North 	Main entrance of Liberty Science Center 	Left 	Left turn 
Secaucus Rd 	South 	Kennedy Blvd 	Right 	Right turn 
Second St 	West 	Marin Blvd 	Right 	Right turn 
Sip Av 	East 	Bergen Av 	Left 	Left turn 
	East 
starting 
at 
Bergen Av 	Transportation Center driveway 	Inside/center 	Buses only 
	West 	Bergen Av 	Left 	Left turn 
	West 
starting 
at 
Bergen Av 	Transportation Center driveway 	Inside/center 	Buses only 
	East 	West Side Av 	Left 	Left turn 
	West 	West Side Av 	Left 	Left turn 
Sixth St 	East 	Marin Blvd 	Left 	Left turn 
	East 	Marin Blvd 	Right 	Right turn 
Stadium Way 	West 	Route 440 	Left 	Left turn 
Stegman St 	East 	Martin Luther King Dr 	Left 	Left turn 
	East 	Martin Luther King Dr 	Right 	Right and straight 
Summit Av 	North 	Sip Av 	Right 	Right turn 
	North 	Grand St 	Left 	Left turn 
	North 	Grand St 	Right 	Right turn 
	South 	State Highway 139 	Left 	Left turn 
Tonnele Av 	North 	Broadway 	Right 	Right turn 
Washington Blvd 	North 	Fourteenth St 	Right 	Right turn 
	South 	Fourteenth St 	2 Left 	Left turn 
West Side Av 	North 	Montgomery St 	Left 	Left turn 
	South 	Montgomery St 	Right 	Right turn 
  
§ 332-12. - No-passing zones. 
[Amended 11-12-2014 by Ord. No. 14-140 ] 
No-passing zones are hereby established and shall be maintained along those streets or parts of streets listed below. 
No-Passing Zones 
 Academy St 
 Audrey Zapp Dr 
 Bergen Av 
 Broadway 
 Central Av 
 Communipaw Av 
 Danforth Av 
 Duncan Av 
 Garfield Av 
 Grand St 
 Jackson Av, from Communipaw Avenue to 240 feet south (north building line of the West District Police Precinct) 
 Jersey Av 
 Jersey City Blvd 
 Johnston Av 
 Mallory Av 
 Manhattan Av 
 Martin Luther King Dr 
 Montgomery St, Marin Blvd to West Side Av 
 Monticello Av 
 Newark Av 
 Ocean Av 
 Old Bergen Rd 
 Pacific Av 
 Palisade Av 
 Sip Av 
 Summit Av 
 Tonnele Av 
 Washington St 
 West Side Av 
  
§ 332-13. - Truck routes. 
Reserved; pending approval from the New Jersey Department of Transportation.  
§ 332-14. - Trucks prohibited or restricted on certain streets and highways. 
Reserved; pending approval from the New Jersey Department of Transportation.  
§ 332-15. - Driveways. 
The driveway locations listed below are designated as entrances and exits only. No person shall drive a vehicle upon such driveway, except as designated. 
Driveways 
Limits 	Restriction 
352 to 354 Central Av (Municipal Parking Lot) 	Entrance only 
388 Central Av (Municipal parking lot) 	Entrance only 
12 Journal Square (south driveway) 	Entrance only 
20 Journal Square (Sip Av driveway) 	Entrance only 
  
§ 332-16. - Closing of streets at certain times for school use. 
A.  If the Municipal Engineer shall find that a safety problem exists for ingress and egress to any public or private school for the provision of recreational facilities for children attending such school, or both, due to lack of a suitable area surrounding the school, he may close, by regulation, any portion of any street within the block upon which such school is located to the use of through traffic during such time as he shall determine, not to exceed one (1) hour between 7:30 a.m. and 10:00 a.m., two (2) hours between 11:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. and one (1) hour between 2:30 p.m. and 4:30 p.m., on any days upon which such school is in session. 
B.  Such street or portion thereof may be used during said hours for ingress and egress to such school, and for use by the pupils for recreational purposes under proper supervision, and the Director shall provide adequate police facilities for such supervision and for the control of traffic upon such street. 
C.  Proper warning signs shall be posted in said street indicating that it is so closed and the purpose thereof during the time when it is so closed. 
D.  In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:67-16.7 and 40:67-16.9 and 3-54(C)(14) of the Code of the City of Jersey City, a Manual of Regulations authorizing the closing of streets or portions thereof within school areas to through traffic is hereby adopted. 
E.  The list of School Streets shall be incorporated in the Chapter 332 Manual—Traffic and Transportation. The current list of School Streets authorized by Ordinance and/or Regulation within the Chapter 332 Manual—Traffic and Transportation is available for inspection in the Division of Engineering, Traffic and Transportation and/or the Office of the City Clerk.  
§ 332-17. - Traffic regulations applicable to drivers of public vehicles. 
The provision of this Chapter and other applicable provisions of the Code shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States Government, this State, any other State, any Territorial or Federal District, any County, municipality or other political subdivision of the United States. No driver shall violate any provision of this Chapter or other applicable provision of the Code, except as otherwise permitted therein or by New Jersey State statute.  
§ 332-18. - Traffic control devices; Municipal Engineer. 
The Municipal Engineer shall place and maintain, in accordance with State statutes, traffic control signs, signals, and devices, when and as under the provisions of this Code, and may place and maintain such additional traffic-control devices and barriers as he may deem necessary to regulate, to guide or warn traffic.  
§ 332-19. - Official Traffic Barricade Manual. 
The Municipal Engineer shall develop, revise and publish a manual on procedures and practices necessary in establishing temporary traffic control measures to be used in conjunction with partial or full closures of all City rights-of-way. He shall have the responsibility to approve or disapprove all requests for temporary street and sidewalk closures and to maintain a record of each closure for its duration. The Official Traffic Barricade Manual within Chapter 332 Manual—Traffic and Transportation is available for review in the Division of Engineering, Traffic and Transportation and/or in the Office of the City Clerk.  
§ 332-20. - Speed limit construction zones. 
The Municipal Engineer may order a reduction of the regular speed limit for periods not to exceed seventy-two (72) hours on segments of roadways during maintenance and repair operations. The Municipal Engineer may order said reduction of speed when he finds the regular speed limit exceeds a safe limit for a maintenance or construction zone. The Municipal Engineer shall place one or more signs indicating the reduced speed limit along the affected roadway and shall conform to all other requirements of N.J.S.A. 39:4-98.2.  
§ 332-20.1. - Closing of Newark Avenue from Barrow Street to Grove Street and Erie Street from Newark Avenue to Bay Street. 
[Added 7-16-2014 by Ord. No. 14-075 ] 
A.  The Director of Architecture, Engineering, Traffic and Transportation for the City of Jersey City is hereby authorized to provide by regulation (No. 14-006) for the closing of Newark Avenue from Barrow Street to Grove Street and Erie Street from Newark Avenue to Bay Street [Plaza], daily, for a period up to one (1) year for the preservation of the public safety, health or welfare, subject to the conditions set forth in this section. 
B.  Conditions. 
(1)  No source of sound from any amplifier shall be permitted on the Plaza or from any surrounding building, business, or establishment which is audible on the Plaza. 
(2)  Restaurant outdoor table service shall be permitted within the Plaza, but only directly in front of the restaurant and if they provide their own tables and chairs. 
(3)  Delivery by motor vehicle may occur within the Plaza but only during the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m., daily. 
(4)  Garbage, recycling pick-up and street cleaning within the Plaza should be scheduled prior to 3:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. 
(5)  Hours: Motor vehicles shall be prohibited within the Plaza between 3 p.m. to midnight, Monday through Friday and between 12:00 a.m. to midnight, Saturday and Sunday. 
(6)  Traffic and pedestrian walk signals shall be adjusted at the Grove/Newark and the Grove/Christopher Columbus intersections within the Plaza. 
(7)  Reasonable accommodation shall be made within the Plaza for medical offices or other facilities with any special ADA compliance needs. 
C.  This section shall be enforced by the Division of Cultural Affairs and the Division of Traffic and Transportation. 
D.  The Division of Cultural Affairs shall prepare a report containing the following information: 1) a business survey demonstrating the increased revenue for the businesses within the plaza; 2) a police accident report demonstrating either stable or increased safety at Barrow/Newark, Bay/Newark, Bay/Grove (Manila), Morgan/Grove intersections; and 3) community feedback from two (2) community meetings to be scheduled at the second and fourth month. This section may be renewed upon the review of the reports and approval by Ordinance of the Municipal Council. 
E.  The City shall provide for the posting of proper warning signs of such closing in any street or portion thereof during the time the same is closed in pursuance thereof.  
ARTICLE III - Parking, Standing and Stopping 
 
§ 332-21. - Regulations not exclusive. 
The provisions of this Article imposing a time limit on parking shall not relieve any person of the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles as set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-138, any other New Jersey statute or as hereinafter provided.  
§ 332-22. - Parking prohibited at all times. 
[Amended 11-10-2009 by Ord. No. 09-115 ; 4-28-2010 by Ord. Nos. 10-058, 10-059; 6-23-2010 by Ord. No. 10-079; 6-15-2011 by Ord. No. 11-060, Ord. No. 11-061, Ord. No. 11-063; 11-9-2011 by Ord. No. 11-140; 12-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-145; 5-9-2012 by Ord. No. 12-062 ; 10-24-2012 by Ord. No. 12-136 ; 04-24-2013 by Ord. No. 13-044 ; 2-11-2014 by Ord. No. 14-013 ; 5-28-2014 by Ord. No. 14-053 ; 6-11-2014 by Ord. No. 14-061 ; 7-16-2014 by Ord. No. 14-078 ; 9-10-2014 by Ord. No. 14-094 ; 11-12-2014 by Ord. No. 14-140 ; 5-27-2015 by Ord. No. 15-074 ; 1-27-2016 by Ord. No. 16-001 ; 1-27-2016 by Ord. No. 16-002 ; 4-27-16 by Ord. No. 16-063 ; 8-17-2016 by Ord. No. 16-109 ; 12-14-2016 by Ord. No. 16-181 ; 2-22-2017 by Ord. No. 17-016 ; 4-12-2017 by Ord. No. 17-035 ; 5-24-2017 by Ord. No. 17-060 ; 6-28-2017 by Ord. No. 17-078 ; 7-19-2017 by Ord. No. 17-093 ; 8-16-2017 by Ord. No. 17-102 ; 9-27-2017 by Ord. No. 17-126 ; 11-16-2017 by Ord. No. 17-149 ; 6-27-2018 by Ord. No 18-061 ; 6-27-2018 by Ord. No. 18-062 ; 8-15-2018 by Ord. No. 18-086 ; 10-10-2018 by Ord. No. 18-116 ; 10-24-2018 by Ord. No. 18-120 ; 1-9-2019 by Ord. No. 18-147 ; 1-24-2019 by Ord. No. 19-003 ; 4-10-2019 by Ord. No. 19-022 ; 4-24-2019 by Ord. No. 19-031 ; 5-22-2019 by Ord. No. 19-049 ] 
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets, or parts thereof, listed below. 
Parking Prohibited At All Times 
Name of Street 	Side 	Limits 
Abbett St 	West 	Entire length 
Academy St 	North 	Mill Rd to Bergen Av 
	South 	Baldwin Av to Mill St 
		Tuers Av to Van Reypen St 
Aetna St 	South 	400 feet west of Jersey Av 60 feet west 
Amity St 	Both 	Entire length 
Ann St 	West 	172 feet west of Tonnele Av 100 feet counterclockwise 
Arlington Av 	East 	Grand St to Communipaw Av 
Ash St 	North 	Pacific Av to Whiton St 
Astor Pl 	North 	Summit Av to Park St 
Audrey Zapp Dr 	Both 	The light rail crossing east of Garabrant St to the Hudson River 
Baldwin Av 	East 	Summit Av to Rock St 
		South end PATH cut bridge to Route 139 
		Hopkins Av to Beacon Av 
		Waverly St to Prospect St 
	West 	Prospect St to Washburn St 
		Newark Av to south end PATH cut bridge 
		Rock St to Academy St 
		Montgomery St to Summit Av 
Barbara Pl 	Embankment 	Grand St to Pacific Av 
Bartholdi Av 	South 	Sullivan Dr to Romar Av 
Bay St 	North 	130 feet west of Warren St 25 feet west 
Bayside Ter 	East 	Richard St to the southern terminus 
Bennett St 	Both 	Entire length 
Bergen Av 	East 	Duncan Av to Fairmount Av 
		Vroom St to a point 50 feet north thereof 
	West 	Montgomery St 150 feet north thereof 
		Van Nostrand Av to Bayview Av 
Berry Lane 	West 	175 feet south of Communipaw Av 51 feet south 
Bevan St 	West 	Route 139 to Saint Paul's Av 
Bishop St 	South 	583 feet west of Grand St to 606 feet west 
		626 feet west of Grand St to 805 feet west 
Bleecker St 	North 	Beginning at a point approximately 190 feet west of the westerly curb line of Summit Av and extending to a point 25 feet westerly therefrom 
Boland St 	East 	Entire length 
	West 	75 feet south of Montgomery St to Fairmount Av 
Boltwood St 	North 	Entire length 
Bowers St 	Both 	Palisade Av to Ogden Av 
Bramhall Av 	North 	Grand St 70 feet west 
Bright St 	South 	Center St to Bates St 
	North 	142 feet west of Florence St 266 feet west 
Broadway 	Both 	Route 1 & 9 west 345 feet 
	South 	Tonnele Av to Romaine Av 
Carbon Pl 	North 	West Side Av and extending 170 feet west 
	South 	Entire length 
Carroll Av 	Both 	Entire length 
Cator Av 	North 	Garfield Av 75 feet west 
		75 feet east of Ocean Av to Rutgers Av 
	South 	Garfield Av to Ocean Av 
		547 feet west of Ocean Av to 26 feet westerly therefrom 
Caven Point Av 	Both 	Entire length 
Center St 	Both 	Entire length 
Central Av 	West 	Pavonia Av to a point 120 feet north thereof 
		Hoboken Av to Route 139 
Chapel Av 	Both 	Route 185 right of way to Caven Point Rd 
Charlotte Av 	West 	Howell St to Saint Paul's Av 
Claremont Av 	North 	Halstead St to West Side Av 
		Greenwich Dr to Water St 
	South 	Water St to Mallory Av 
		West Side Av to a point 325 feet east thereof 
Clendenny Av 	Both 	Marcy Av to Route 440 
Clifton Pl 	South 	Summit Av 281 feet east 
Clinton Av 	South 	Jackson Av to a point 50 feet west 
	North 	Jackson Av to Seidler St 
		Bergen Av to West Side Av 
Colden St 	South 	Prior St to Freemont St 
Coles St 	Both 	Newark Av to First St 
	East 	Fourteenth St to Sixteenth St 
	Both 	Sixteenth St to Seventeenth St 
Colgate St 	Both 	Montgomery Street to York Street 
Collard St 	East 	Laidlaw Av north to the dead end 
Colony Rd 	Both 	Port Jersey to northern terminus 
Columbus Dr 	Both 	Merseles St to Brunswick St 
	South 	95 feet east of Barrow St 60 feet east 
	North 	55 feet east of Marin Blvd 70 feet east 
	North 	267 feet east of Marin Blvd 40 feet east 
Communipaw Av 	Both 	Garfield Av to Park St 
	North 	Crescent Av to Monticello Av 
		Kennedy Blvd 150 feet east 
		West Side Av to Marcy Av 
	South 	Suydam Av east 350 feet 
		Kennedy Blvd 150 feet east 
		Madison Av to Martin Luther King Dr 
		West Side Av to Mallory Av 
Congress St 	South 	Ogden Av to Paterson Plank Rd 
Cook St 	West 	Entire length 
Cornelison Av 	East 	Fairmont Av to Summit Av 
		Montgomery St to Wayne St 
	West 	Wayne St to Fairmont Av 
Cottage St 	North 	Summit Av to Kennedy Blvd 
	South 	Kennedy Blvd east 100 feet 
Crawford St 	North 	Summit Av to the dead end 
Cubberly Pl 	Both 	Entire length 
Culver Av 	Both 	Beginning at the easterly curbline of Route 440 and extending 110 feet easterly 
	South 	136 feet east of College Av 212 feet east 
		232 feet east of College St 49 feet east 
		245 feet west of Kennedy Blvd 125 feet west 
Dales Av 	West 	opposite the south building of 38 Dales Av 85 feet north 
Danforth Av 	North 	388 feet east of Ocean Av 25 feet east 
		170 feet east of Ocean Av and extending 25 feet east 
DeKalb Av 	Both 	Kennedy Blvd to the eastern terminus 
	North 	West Side Av to Kennedy Blvd 
Dick St 	Both 	Entire length 
Douglas and Arthur Skinner Memorial Dr (F/K/A: Jersey Av) 	East 	130 feet south of Grand Street to 532 feet south 
Duncan Av 	South 	Route 1-9 to the western terminus 
Dwight St 	South 	411 feet east of Martin Luther King Dr 20 feet east 
East St 	East 	Entire length 
East View Ct 	East 	Entire length 
Eighteenth St 	North 	Jersey Av to Coles St 
	South 	Jersey Av 119 feet west 
Elm St 	North 	Entire length 
Erie St 	West 	Boyle Plaza 75 feet south 
		134 feet south of Ninth St 53 feet south 
Essex St 	North 	Between Hudson St and the eastern terminus 
	South 	Hudson St to Washington St 
		Warren St to Van Vorst St 
Exchange Pl 	Both 	Entire length 
Fairmount Av 	North 	Cornelison Av to the western leg of Amity St 
		Eastern leg of Amity St to Grand St 
		171 feet east of Bergen Av 25 feet east 
	South 	Bergen Av to Monticello Av 
		Westerly curbline of Fairview Av and extending 48 feet westerly 
First St 	South 	347 feet east of Marin Boulevard 20 feet east 
Fisk St 	Both 	Martorano Way to Route 440 
Florence St Ext 	North 	Montgomery St to a point 290 feet west 
	South 	Montgomery St to a point 225 feet west 
Forrest St 	North 	Ocean Av to Clerk St 
		Pacific Av to Halladay St 
Fourteenth St 	North 	West of Coles St 
Foxhound Ct 	East 	Frances Ct to Roosevelt Stadium Ct 
Franklin St 	Both 	Paterson Plank Rd to Ogden Av 
	North 	Palisade Av to Sherman Av 
Freemont St 	West 	Colden St to Bright St 
Front St 	East 	Entire length 
Garfield Av 	East 	Cator Av to 150 ft south of the projected south east curb line of Union St 
		1,000 ft north of the projected north east curb line of Union St to Communipaw Av 
		120 feet north of the projected north east curb line of Fifty-Fifth St 75 ft north 
	West 	Bidwell Av to Myrtle Av 
		Carteret Av to Union St 
		Communipaw Av to Grand St 
Gates Av 	North 	Ocean Av to Old Bergen Rd 
	South 	35 feet west of Kennedy Blvd 25 feet west 
Glenn Ln 	North 	Entire length 
Glenwood Av 	North 	346 feet east of Kennedy Blvd 25 feet east 
Graham St 	North 	Central Av to Kennedy Blvd 
Grand St 	North 	Grove St to Barrow St 
		Westervelt St to Arlington Av 
		Fairmount Av to Prior St 
	South 	Barbara Pl to Merseles St 
		Ivy Pl to Arlington Av 
		Pacific Av to Jersey Av 
Greene St 	East 	Essex St to Columbus Dr 
	West 	Montgomery St to southern terminus 
Grieco Dr 	East 	145 feet north of Msgr. Wojtycha Dr to a point 51 feet counterclockwise 
	West 	145 feet north of Msgr. Wojtycha Dr to a point 112 feet counterclockwise 
Grove St 	West 	Hoboken City Line to 133 feet south 
		238 feet south of the Hoboken City Line to 498 feet south of Hoboken City Line 
		620 feet south of Hoboken City Line south to Eighteenth St 
		Sussex St to Morris Blvd 
	East 	Sixteenth St 150 feet north of Eighteenth St 
		238 feet north of Eighteenth St to 429 feet north of Eighteenth St 
		554 feet north of Eighteenth St to Hoboken City Line 
Halstead St 	Both 	Entire length 
Harbor Dr 	Both 	Route 440 to Industrial Dr 
Herbert Pl 	Both 	Entire length 
High St 	North 	Summit Av east to the dead end 
	South 	Baldwin Av east to the dead end 
Highview Rd 	North 	Fowler Av 200 feet west 
Hill St 	Both 	Entire length 
Hoboken Av 	Both 	The City line to Route 139 
	South 	150 feet east of Summit Av to Summit Av 
		49 feet east of Oakland Av 83 feet east 
Holland St 	Both 	Entire length 
Homestead Pl 	Both 	Entire length 
Howell St 	North 	Entire length 
Howie Fink Way 	Both 	Entire length 
Hudson Ct 	East 	Robinson Dr to Y intersection 
	South 	90 degree bend to Society Hill Dr 
	North 	Society Hill Dr to 90 degree bend 
	West 	Designated Parking Spaces to Y intersection 
Designated Parking Spaces to 90 degree bend 
Hudson St 	Both 	Columbus Dr to Essex St 
	West 	Essex St to Morris Canal 
Hutton St 	South 	Central Av to Cambridge Av 
Industrial Dr 	Both 	Port Jersey Blvd to north terminus 
Ingwerson Pl 	Both 	Entire length 
Jackson Av 	East 	Clinton Av to Communipaw Av 
	West 	Beginning approximately 240 feet south of Communipaw Av (north building line of the West District Police Precinct) to Clinton Av 
Jefferson Av 	South 	35 feet west of the westerly curb line of Palisade Av 27 feet west 
Jersey Av 	West 	First St to Newark Av 
	Both 	100 feet south of Eighteenth St to Hoboken Av 
Johnston Av 	South 	Cornelison Av to Grand St 
	West 	Orchard St to Montgomery St 
Jones Pl 	West 	Vroom St north terminus 
Journal Square 	East 	From Sip Avenue to the Boulevard Line 
	West 	From Sip Avenue to the Boulevard Line 
Kellogg St 	Both 	Route 440 to west terminus 
Kennedy Blvd 	South 	Tonnele Av 93 feet east 
	West 	35 feet south of Cottage St 62 feet south 
Laidlaw Av 	North 	Collard St 222 feet east 
		Summit Av 95 feet west 
		35 feet west of Summit Av 240 feet west 
	South 	35 feet west of Summit Av 315 feet west 
Lyon Ct (E/W) 	South 	North side; Lyon Ct to easterly, dead end 
Lembeck Av 	South 	Old Bergen Rd to Greico Dr 
Lewis Av 	West 	Entire length 
Liberty Av 	West 	Newark Av to Van Winkle Av 
Lincoln St 	South 	Columbia Av to Kennedy Blvd 
Linden Av 	South 	Grieco Dr and extending 114 feet east 
Long St 	East 	Entire length 
Lott St 	South 	Central Av to dead end 
Ludlow St 	East 	Entire length 
Magnolia Av 	North 	Tonnele Av to dead end 
Mallory Av 	East 	Claremont Av 120 feet north 
		Roosevelt Av to Lexington Av Pkwy 
Manhattan Av 	South 	Central Av to Sanford Pl 
		Tonnele Av to a point 100 feet east thereof 
Manila Av 	West 	Boyle Plaza to Twelfth St 
		Ninth St to Second St 
	Both 	Twelfth St to Tenth St 
Manning Av 	East 	Communipaw Av to Lafayette St 
Maple St 	North 	Van Horne St west to the dead end 
Marcy Av 	Both 	Clendenny Av to Communipaw Av 
Marin Blvd 	East 	Grand St to York St 
		46 feet north at the projection of the northwest corner of Mercer St to 74 feet north 
		Columbus Dr to Morgan St 
		Second St to the Hoboken city line 
	Both 	Grand St, south, to the Light Rail Crossing 
	West 	Columbus Dr to a point 168 feet south 
		Montgomery St to Mercer St 
		Second St to a point approximately 625 feet north of Eighteenth St 
		Approximately 805 feet north of Eighteenth St and extending to the Hoboken City Line 
Maxwell St 	Both 	Entire length 
McPherson Pl 	West 	Entire length 
Merseles St 	East 	Columbus Dr to Montgomery St 
		85 feet south of Montgomery St to Grand St 
	West 	Columbus Dr to Montgomery St 
		Bright St to Grand St 
		Newark Av to Fourth St 
Mill Rd 	East 	Academy St to Montgomery St 
	West 	Academy St to Wayne St 
Minerva St 	East 	Entire length 
Monmouth St 	East 	Wayne St to Columbus Dr 
		270 feet north of Grand St 40 feet north 
	West 	Canal St to Grand St 
		Mercer St to First St 
	Both 	Twelfth St to Thirteenth St 
Montague Pl 	Both 	Entire length 
Montgomery St 	North 	Colgate St to Merseles St 
		300 feet east of Kennedy Blvd 20 feet east 
		209 feet west of Jersey Av 94 feet west 
		68 feet west of Monmouth St 72 feet west 
	South 	Fairmount Ter to Kennedy Blvd 
		112 feet east of Mill Rd 37 feet east 
		Jersey St to Grove St 
		105 feet east of Bergen Av to Orchard St 
		186 feet south of Monmouth St 101 feet east 
Monticello Av 	Both 	Harrison Av to Communipaw Av 
Morgan St 	North 	Marin Blvd to Warren St 
	South 	Warren St to Washington St 
Morris Blvd 	W/B median curb 	Marin Blvd to St. Peter's St 
Morris Pesin Dr 	Both 	Burma Rd to Liberty State Park entrance 
Myrtle Av 	North 	Ocean Av to Garfield Av 
Neptune Av 	South 	Old Bergen Rd to Garfield Av 
Nevin St 	East 	Entire length 
New York Av 	Both 	Ravine Av to Hoboken City Line 
Newark Av 	South 	Kennedy Blvd east 150 feet 
		Kennedy Blvd west 150 feet 
	North 	Kennedy Blvd east 280 feet 
		Summit Av west 180 feet 
Newkirk St 	Both 	Tuers Av to Sip Av 
	South 	Tuers Av to Summit Av 
	North 	Baldwin Av to Summit Av 
Ninth St 	Both 	Manila Av to Marin Blvd 
	North 	184 feet east of Brunswick St to a point 200 feet east 
	North 	West of Brunswick St 
	South 	Brunswick St to a point 80 feet west thereof 
Oakland Av 	East 	Newark Av to Hoboken Av 
Ocean Av 	West 	To 70 feet south of Bramhall Av 
Ogden Av 	East 	Congress St to dead end 
Old Bergen Rd 	West 	McAdoo Av to Pamrapo Av 
	East 	Custer Av to Gates Av 
		Lembeck Av to Greenville Av 
Oxford Av 	North 	West Side Av to Bergen Av 
	South 	West Side Av to 86 feet east 
		107 feet east of West Side Av to 326 feet east 
		345 feet east of West Side Av 523 feet east 
		543 feet east of West Side Av 657 feet east 
		678 feet east of West Side Av 700 feet east 
		721 feet east of West Side Av 744 east 
		764 feet east of West Side Av 832 feet east 
		852 feet east of West Side Av east to Kennedy Blvd 
		Kennedy Blvd to Bergen Av 
Palisade Av 	Both 	Route 139 to Washburn St 
	East 	Saint Paul's Av 77 feet north 
	West 	Newark Av to Washburn St 
		Route 139 north 150 feet 
Park St 	West 	Entire length 
Pavonia Av 	South 	52 feet east of Kennedy Blvd to 92 feet east 
Perrine Av 	West 	Entire length 
Phillip St 	Both 	Entire length 
Port Jersey Blvd 	Both 	Route 440 to the east terminus 
Provost St 	West 	Bay St to Morgan St 
Robinson Dr 	Both 	North side; Lyon Ct to Society Hill Dr 
Rock St 	South 	Entire length 
Roosevelt Stadium Ct 	North 	Foxhound Ct to 90 degree bend 
St. Paul's Av 	North 	114 feet west of St. James Av 80 feet west 
	Both 	Kennedy Blvd to Skillman Av 
St. Peter's St 	West 	Morris St to Sussex St 
Sayles St 	West 	Pearsall Av to Lembeck Av 
Seaman Av 	Both 	Entire length 
Senate Pl 	West 	Dey St to Newark Av 
Seventh St 	Both 	Manila Av to Marin Blvd 
Seventh St 	South 	114 feet east of Division St 88 feet east 
		170 feet west of Manila Av 50 feet west 
Sip Av 	Both 	Route 1 & 9 Truck to Freeman Av 
Sixteenth St 	South 	Jersey Av to Marin Blvd 
Sixth St 	North 	32 feet east of Brunswick St 25 feet east 
	South 	Manila Av to Marin Blvd 
Smit Ct 	South 	Entire length 
	North 	Adjacent to designated parking spaces 
	East 	Terminus to 90 degree bend 
Smith St 	South 	84 feet east of Bergen Av to east terminus 
Spring St 	West 	Entire length 
Spruce St 	North 	Tonnele Av to Liberty Av 
State St 	North 	478 feet west of Grand St to 627 feet west 
Steuben St 	Both 	Warren St to Washington St 
Storms Av 	East 	Fairmount Av to a point 75 feet north thereof 
	West 	Fairmount Av to Jewett Av 
Sullivan Dr 	West 	50 feet south of the projected south east curb line of Greico Dr to Lembeck Av 
	East 	121 feet north of Msgr. Wojtycha Dr to Grieco Dr 
Summit Av 	East 	Academy St to Rock St 
		Baldwin Av to Montgomery St 
		Communipaw Av to Fairmount Av 
		200 feet south of Sip Av 118 feet south 
		Route 139 to Howie Fink Way 
		135 feet south of Magnolia Av 94 feet south 
		368 feet south of Sip Av 76 feet south 
	West 	Fairmount Av to Baldwin Av 
		Montgomery St to Sip Av 
		118 feet south of Magnolia Av 105 feet south 
		Pavonia Av to Van Reipen Av 
		Route 139 to Beacon Av 
		35 feet north of Laidlaw Av 60 feet north 
		Projected northerly curb line of Jefferson Av 90 feet north 
		145 feet north of projected northerly curb line of Jefferson Av 35 feet north 
		101 feet south of Paterson St 25 feet south 
Sussex St 	North 	St. Peter's to Grove St 
	South 	Van Vorst St to the western terminus 
Tenth St 	North 	Marin Blvd to Brunswick St 
Theodore Conrad Drive 	North 	325 feet east of Edward Hart Drive clockwise to south side to 325 feet east of Edward Hart Drive 
Third St 	North 	Brunswick Av to Newark Av 
Thirteenth St 	North 	Marin Blvd to Provost St 
Tonnele Av 	East 	Newark Av to Tonnele Av Circle 
	West 	Saint Paul's Av to Tonnele Av Circle 
		Van Winkle Av to Newark Av 
Tottenham Ct 	North 	Opposite designated parking spaces to Lee Ct 
Town Square Ring Rd 	Outer Curb 	Pavonia Av clockwise to River Dr South 
Tuers Av 	West 	Newkirk St to 113 feet south of Vroom St 
Twelfth St 	Both 	Jersey Av to Coles St 
Tyson Ln E 	Both 	Entire length 
	West 	Entire length 
Utica St 	Both 	Entire length 
Van Nostrand Av 	South 	650 feet east of Sterling Av 25 feet easterly 
Van Reipen Av 	South 	Kennedy Blvd to Summit Av 
Van Reypen St 	East 	Academy St to Highland Av 
	West 	Academy St to Sip Av 
Van Vorst St 	West 	Grand St to Essex St 
Van Wagenen Av 	Both 	Entire length within cul-de-sac 
	East 	Tonnele Circle ramp to Saint Paul's Av 
	West 	Sip Av to cul-de-sac 
Van Winkle Av 	Both 	James St to the dead end 
	North 	James Av to Charlotte Circle 
		Kennedy Blvd to Skillman Av 
		Tonnele Av to Senate Pl 
Vroom St 	North 	Bergen Av to Summit Av 
	South 	Bergen Av to Van Reypen St 
Waldo Av 	Both 	PATH Cut Bridge to Elizabeth St 
Warren St 	Both 	Entrance to garage at 100 Warren St clockwise to 35 feet north of the fire hydrant opposite 100 Warren St 
Washington Blvd 	Both 	Second St to Gangemi Dr 
	West 	255 feet south of the projected northwest curb line of Town Sq Pl 100 feet southerly 
Washington St 	East 	Columbus Dr to Pearl St 
	Both 	Steuben St to Bay St 
	East 	Bay St to Second St 
Wayne St 	Both 	Cornelison Av to Mill Rd 
Webster Av 	West 	Ferry St to Prospect St 
	East 	Ravine Av to Ferry St 
	South 	Ocean Av to Garfield Av 
Welsh Ln 	Both 	Entire length 
West Side Av 	East 	Cator Av 75 feet south 
		Duncan Av 110 feet north 
		Fairmount Av 110 feet north 
		Oxford Av to Clinton Av 
		100 feet north of Saint Paul's Av 412 feet north 
	West 	Montgomery St 150 feet south 
		Yale Av to Claremont Av 
West St 	East 	Entire length 
West View Ct 	East 	Broadman Pkwy to Ocean Av 
Willard St 	South 	Entire length 
Wilkinson Av 	South 	Ocean Av to Garfield Av 
Wilson St 	Both 	Jersey City Blvd to Gateway Dr 
Winfield Av 	North 	Romar Av to Sayles St 
	South 	Kennedy Blvd to Romar Av 
Wood Pl 	North 	Entire length 
Woodland Av 	West 	Greenville Av to Linden Av 
York St 	North 	Greene St to the Hudson River 
Zabriskie St 	North 	Kennedy Blvd to a point 100 feet east thereof 
  
§ 332-23. - No stopping or standing. 
[Amended 5-26-2010 by Ord. No. 10-070; 6-15-2011 by Ord. No. 11-065; 1-9-2013 by Ord. No. 12-166 ; 5-28-2014 by Ord. No. 14-053 ; 6-11-2014 by Ord. No. 14-061 ; 11-12-2014 by Ord. No. 14-140 ; 1-27-2016 by Ord. No. 16-004 ; 10-25-2017 by Ord. No. 17-142 ; 10-10-2018 by Ord. No. 18-116 ; 5-22-2019 by Ord. No. 19-049 ] 
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the streets, or parts thereof, listed below. 
No Stopping or Standing 
Name of Street 	Side 	Limits 
Arlington Av 	East 	Harmon St to Communipaw Av 
Avenue "C" 	East 	Route 440 south 90 feet 
	West 	Route 440 north 100 feet 
Bergen Av 	East 	Storms Av to Montgomery St 
	West 	170 feet north to 180 feet south of Montgomery St 
Boyle Plaza 	Both 	Entire length 
Bramhall Av 	North 	Grand St 130 feet east 
	South 	Ocean Av 240 feet west 
Chapel Av 	Both 	Garfield Av to Caven Point Rd 
Claremont Av 	Both 	Mallory Av to West Side Av 
Columbus Dr 	Both 	Hudson St to east terminus 
Communipaw Av 	North 	West Side Av to Route 1 & 9 
		Park St to Harrison Av 
		West Side Av 155 feet east 
		139 feet west of Summit Av to Grand St 
	South 	Arlington Av to Grand St 
		Route 440 West Side Av 
		Tyson Ln (west portion) to Bergen Av 
		108 feet east of Randolph Av to Garfield Av 
		127 feet east of Jackson Av to Martin Luther King Dr 
	Both 	Garfield Av to Berry Ln 
Culver Av 	North 	College Dr 200 feet west of West Side Av 
	South 	200 feet west of West Side Av to College Dr 
Danforth Av 	North 	West Side Av 370 feet east 
	South 	Sullivan Dr to Route 440 
Duncan Av 	North 	West Side Av 100 feet east 
	South 	West Side Av 140 feet west 
Eighteenth St 	Both 	Marin Blvd to Jersey Av 
Eleventh St viaduct 	Both 	Entire length 
Fairmount Av 	North 	Boland St to Bergen Av 
Fourteenth St 	Both 	Entire length 
Gangemi Dr 	Both 	Marin Blvd to Washington Blvd 
Garfield Av 	Both 	Communipaw Av to Harmon St 
		Wilkinson Av to Bidwell Av 
		Communipaw Av to Grand St 
Grand St 	North 	Ivy Pl to Fairmount Av 
		Jersey Av to Merseles St 
		Jersey Av 200 feet east 
	South 	Bramhall Av 155 feet east 
		Merseles St to River St (private roadway) 
		Summit Av to Garfield Av 
		Tidewater St (private street) to Marin Blvd 
		Garfield Av to Fairmount Av 
Greene St 	Both 	Columbus Dr to Second St 
Grove St 	Both 	Newark Av to Columbus Dr 
	East 	Sixteenth St 150 feet south 
Jersey Av 	Both 	Tenth St to Fourteenth St 
Kennedy Blvd 	East 	Pavonia Av to Cottage St 
		Pavonia Av to Journal Square 
	South 	Journal Square 200 feet west 
		Sip Av to Tonnele Av 
	West 	Journal Square 138 feet north 
		Pavonia Av to Van Reipen Av 
Linden Av East 	Both 	Entire length 
Magnolia Av 	East 	Communipaw Av to Roosevelt Av 
	North 	Summit Av 370 feet west 
	South 	Summit Av 183 feet west 
Mallory Av 	Both 	Communipaw Av to Roosevelt Av 
Manhattan Av 	South 	County Rd to Tonnele Av 
		Kennedy Blvd 125 feet west 
Marin Blvd 	East 	Beginning 30 feet north at the projection of the northwest corner of Wayne St to Columbus Dr 
ML King Dr 	West 	Northern limit of the West District Police Plaza to a point 130 feet south 
Monmouth St 	East 	Columbus Dr to Second St 
Montgomery St 	North 	Jordan Av to Tuers Av 
		Tuers Av to 110 feet west 
		Bergen Av 120 feet west 
		Kennedy Blvd 340 feet east 
		West Side Av 160 feet east 
		220 feet west of Tuers Av to Bergen Av 
	South 	Boland St to Bergen Av 
		Jordan Av to Orchard St 
		West Side Av 150 feet east 
Morris St 	Both 	Hudson St 150 feet west 
Newark Av 	North 	Kennedy Blvd 150 feet west 
		Monmouth St to Third St 
		Palisade Av 200 feet east 
		150 feet east to Waldo Av to a point 50 feet east thereof 
		240 feet west of Liberty Av to Senate Pl 
	South 	Chestnut Av to Pavonia Av 
		Jersey Av to Columbus Dr 
		Kennedy Blvd 103 feet east 
		Summit Av 250 feet west 
		240 feet west of Liberty Av 50 feet west of railroad crossing 
Newport Pkwy 	Both 	Washington Blvd to Marlin Blvd 
	South 	35 feet east of Washington Blvd to 255 feet easterly 
Palisade Av 	East 	Newark Av 100 feet north 
Pavonia Av 	North 	Kennedy Blvd to 150 east of Summit Av 
	South 	Kennedy Boulevard to 52 feet east 
		144 feet east of Kennedy Blvd to 150 feet east of Summit Av 
Provost St 	West 	Thirteenth St to Fourteenth St 
Sip Av 	North 	Corbin Av to West Side Av 
		Jones St to Bergen Av 
		Van Reypen St to Garrison Av 
	South 	Garrison Av to Jones St 
		Whitman Av to West Side Av 
Summit Av 	East 	Communipaw Av 160 feet north 
		Hoboken Av 80 feet north 
		Newark Av 180 feet south 
		Route 139 south 200 feet 
	West 	Communipaw Av 120 feet north 
		Jewett Av 110 feet south 
		Newark Av to Cottage St 
		Newark Av 180 feet north 
Sussex St 	North 	Greene St to Hudson St 
Tonnele Av 	West 	Berkeley Pl to Route 1 & 9 Circle 
		Van Winkle Av to Kennedy Blvd 
	East 	Sip Av to Route 1 & 9 Circle 
Town Square Ring Rd 	Inner Curb 	Entire length 
	Outer Curb 	Town Square Pl counterclockwise to River Dr South 
Van Vorst St 	East 	Essex St to Morris St 
Washington St 	Both 	100 feet north of the southern terminus to Dudley St 
West Side Av 	East 	Belmont Av 125 feet south 
		Communipaw Av 105 feet south 
		Culver Av to Fisk St 
		Danforth Av 110 feet north 
		Montgomery St 170 feet north 
		Montgomery St 220 feet south 
	West 	Communipaw Av 125 feet north 
		Duncan Av 150 feet north 
		Montgomery St 170 feet north 
		Montgomery St 80 feet south 
		Pollack Av to Culver Av 
  
§ 332-24. - Parking prohibited certain hours. 
[Amended 1-13-2010 by Ord. No. 09-133 ; 5-26-2010 by Ord. No. 10-070; 6-23-2010 by Ord. No. 10-079; 6-15-2011 by Ord. No. 11-062; 8-10-2011 by Ord. No. 11-078; 8-31-2011 by Ord. No. 11-097; 2-8-2012 by Ord. No. 12-012; 2-22-2012 by Ord. No. 12-019; 3-28-2012 by Ord. No. 12-031; 10-10-2012 by Ord. No. 12-125 ; 5-29-2013 by Ord. No. 13-062 ; 10-9-2013 by Ord. No. 13-104 ; 5-28-2014 by Ord. No. 14-053 ; 9-23-2014 by Ord. No. 14-114 ; 10-22-2014 by Ord. No. 14-134 ; 1-14-2015 by Ord. No. 14-168 ; 1-28-2015 by Ord. No. 15-004 ; 2-10-2016 by Ord. No. 16-019 ; 4-27-16 by Ord. No. 16-063 ; 9-14-2016 by Ord. No. 16-121 ; 9-28-2016 by Ord. No. 16-142 ; 10-12-2016 by Ord. No. 16-150 ; 10-12-2016 by Ord. No. 16-151 ; 10-26-2016 by Ord. No. 16-157 ; 11-22-2016 by Ord. No. 16-179 ; 12-14-2016 by Ord. No. 16-182 ; 1-25-2017 by Ord. No. 17-011 ; 2-22-2017 by Ord. No. 17-016 ; 4-26-2017 by Ord. No. 17-040 ; 9-27-2017 by Ord. No. 17-125 ; 11-16-2017 by Ord. No. 17-148 ; 11-29-2017 by Ord. No. 17-155 ; 6-13-2018 by Ord. No. 18-056 ; 1-24-2019 by Ord. No. 19-002 ; 4-10-2019 by Ord. No. 19-022 ] 
No person shall park a vehicle between the times specified upon any of the streets, or parts thereof, listed below. 
Parking Prohibited Certain Hours 
Name of Street 	Side 	Days 

of Week 	Hours 	Limits 
Arlington Av 	East 	M—F 	8:00 am to 5:00 pm 	184 feet south of Wilkinson Av 22 feet south 
Astor Pl 	South 	School days 	8:00 am to 9:00 am and 
2:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	25 feet west of crosswalk on Astor Pl @ Crescent Av 75 feet west 
Baldwin Av 	East 	M—F 	7:00 am to 6:00 pm 	107 feet north of High St 86 feet north 
Beach St 	North 	M—F 	7:45 am to 5:30 pm 	170 feet east of Kennedy Blvd 22 feet east 
Bergen Av 	East 	School days 	8:00 am to 4:00 pm 	Belmont Av to Kensington Av 
Bramhall Av 	South 	School days 	7:30 am to 8:30 am 
3:30 pm to 5:00 pm 	156 feet west of Clerk St 46 feet westerly 
Bright St 	South 	School days 	8:00 am 4:00 pm 	230 feet east of Monmouth St 150 feet east 
	South 	School days 	8:00 am 4:00 pm 	35 feet east of Varick St 90 feet east 
Brother Stan Dr 	East 	School days 	8:00 am to 4:00 pm 	Entire length 
Brunswick St 	South 	M—F 
except public holidays 	7:00 am to 9:00 am and 
4:00 pm to 6:00 pm 	139 feet south of Third St 25 feet south 
Cambridge Av 	East 	M—F 	7:00 am to 5:00 pm 	South St 400 feet south 
Central Av 	East 	M—F 	7:00 am to 4:00 pm 	Pavonia Av 120 feet south of Newark Av 
Claremont Av 	South 	M—F 	7:00 am to 7:00 pm 	Garfield Av to Arlington Av 
Clifton Pl 	North 	M—F 	9:00 am to 4:00 pm 	140 feet east of Baldwin Av to a point 149 feet east thereof 
Columbus Dr 	North 	M—F 	8:00 am to 9:30 am 	Jersey Av to Grove St 
	North 	M—F 	4:00 pm to 6:00 pm 	Brunswick St to Monmouth St 
	South 	M—F 	7:00 am to 9:00 am 	Brunswick St to Monmouth St 
	South 	M—F 	8:30 am to 4:30 pm 	283 feet east of Barrow St 25 east 
Communipaw Av 	North 	All days 	7:00 am to 9:00 am and 4:00 pm to 6:00 pm 	Crescent Av 148 feet east of Monticello Av 
	North 	M—F 	8:00 am to 5:00 pm 	119 feet west of Manning Av 22 feet west 
	North 	All days 	7:00 am to 9:00 am and 4:00 pm to 6:00 pm 	270 feet west of Kennedy Blvd 155 feet east of West Side Av 
	South 	M—F 	6:00 am to 5:00 pm 	Berry Lane 107 feet east 
	South 	M—F 	8:00 am to 5:00 pm 	102 feet east of Manning Av 40 feet west 
	South 	All days 	7:00 am to 9:00 am and 4:00 pm to 6:00 pm 	100 feet east of West Side Av to Tyson Ln 
Cottage St 	South 	All days 	8:00 am to 5:00 pm 	Summit Av 90 feet west 
	South 	M—Sat 	5:00 am to 11:00 pm 	325 west of Summit Av 25 feet west 
Crescent Av 	West 	School days 	8:00 am to 9:00 am and 
2:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	25 feet south of crosswalk on Crescent Av @ Astor Pl 25 feet south 
Danforth Av 	North 	School days 	8:00 am to 9:00 am and 
2:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	290 feet east of Old Bergen Rd 85 feet easterly 
Duffield Av 	West 	M—F 	6:00 am to 6:00 pm 	143 feet south of Van Keuren Av 157 feet south 
Duncan Av 	North 	School days 	8:00 am to 4:00 pm 	500 feet west of Kennedy Blvd 240 feet west 
Dwight St 	North 	School days 	8:00 am to 4:00 pm 	38 feet west of Van Cleef St 202 feet west 
Ege Av 	North 	M—Th 
School days 	8:00 am to 9:00 am and 3:30 pm to 6:30 pm 	148 feet east of West Side Av 86 feet east 
		F 
School days 	8:00 am to 9:00 am, 1:15 pm to 2:15 pm, and 3:30 pm to 6:30 pm 	
Eighteenth St 	South 	M—F 	7:00 am to 9:00 am 
3:00 pm to 7:00 pm 	119 feet west of Jersey Av 40 feet west 
Eighth St 	South 	M—F 	6:00 am to 6:00 pm 	75 feet west of Marin Blvd 20 feet west 
Erie St 	East 	All days 	7:00 am to 7:00 pm 	Bay St 114 feet north 
Essex St 	South 		Sun 10:00 pm to F 10:00 pm 	Entire length; between Hudson St and the eastern terminus 
First St 	South 	M—F 
except 
holidays 	8:00 am to 9:30 am 
2:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	50 feet west of Monmouth St 50 feet west 
Fleet St 	North 	M—F 	7:00 am to 5:00 pm 	165 feet west of Baldwin Av 64 feet west 
Franklin St 	North 	School days 	8:00 am to 4:00 pm 	35 feet west of Sherman Av 141 feet west 
Garfield Av 	West 	M-F except holidays 	8:00 am to 4:00 pm 	25 feet north of Union St 35 feet north 
Gates Av 	North 	School days 	8:00 am to 9:00 am and 2:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	800 feet west of Old Bergen Rd 87 feet west 
	South 	M—F 	9:00 am to 5:00 pm 	Old Bergen Rd to Ocean Av 
Gifford Av 	North 	Sun to Sat 	9:00 am to 9:00 pm 	465 feet east of Kennedy Blvd 30 feet east 
Grand St 	North 	All days 	7:00 am to 9:00 am and 4:00 pm to 6:00 pm 	Westervelt St to Arlington Av 
	South 	All days 	7:00 am to 9:00 am and 4:00 pm to 6:00 pm 	Arlington Av to Ivy Pl 
	North 	School days 	7:00 am to 9:00 am 
3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	25 feet west of Colden St to the projection of the northwest corner of Woodward St 
Projection of the southwest Corner of Woodward St to 105 feet east of Prior St 
	South 	M—F 	7:00 am to 9:00 am 	Between River St (private roadway) and Tidewater St (private roadway) 
Greenville Av 	South 	School days 	7:00 am to 9:00 am/2:00 pm to 3:30 pm 	35 feet west of Old Bergen Rd 203 feet west 
Grove St 	Both 	M—F 	7:00 am to 9:00 am 	Sixteenth St to Fourteenth St 
	East 	M—F 	7:00 am to 6:00 pm 	150 feet north of Eighteenth St to 233 feet north 
	East 	M—F 	7:00 am to 6:00 pm 	429 feet north of Eighteenth St to 554 feet north 
	West 	M—F 	7:00 am to 6:00 pm 	133 feet south of the Hoboken City Line to 238 feet south 
	West 	M—F 	7:00 am to 6:00 pm 	498 feet south of the Hoboken City Line to 620 feet south 
Halladay St 	West 	School days 	8:00 am to 9:00 am/2:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Between Maple St and Lafayette St 
Harrison Avenue 	South 	M—F 	7:00 am to 3:00 pm 	35 feet west of Monticello Av west 25 feet 
		Sat and Sun 	7:00 am to noon 	
Hudson St 	East 	All days 	9:00 pm to 6:00 am 	Essex St to Morris Canal 
Huron Av 	West 	School days 	7:00 am to 4:00 pm 	71 feet south of St. Paul's Av 100 feet south and 120 feet south of St. Paul's Av 160 feet south 
Lembeck Av 	North 	Daily 	8:00 am to 3:00 pm 	93 feet east of Old Bergen Rd 25 feet east 
Linden Av 	North 	Th 	8:00 am to noon 	143 feet west of Ocean Av 60 feet west 
Magnolia Av 	North 		7:00 am to 7:00 pm 	Tonnele Av to dead end 
Marin Blvd 	East 	Sun—F 	12:00 am to 1:00 pm 	25 feet north at the projection of the northwest corner of Mercer St to 46 feet north 
		F—Sat 	3:00 pm to 11:59 pm 	
		Sun—F 	12:00 am to 1:00 pm 	74 feet north at the projection of the northwest corner of Mercer St to 126 feet north 
		F—Sat 	3:00 pm to 11:59 pm 	
		Sun—F 	12:00 am to 1:00 pm 	137 feet north at the projection of the northwest corner of Mercer St to 189 feet north 
		F—Sat 	3:00 pm to 11: 59 pm 	
	West 	Sun—F 	12:00 am to 1:00 pm 	168 feet south of Columbus Dr to 46 feet south 
		F—Sat 	3:00 pm to 11:59 pm 	
		Sun—F 	12:00 am to 1:00 pm 	Wayne St to Mercer St 
		F—Sat 	3:00 pm to 11:59 pm 	
McWilliams Pl 	East 	M—F 
except public holidays 	8:30 am to 9:30 am 	35 feet north of Eighth St to 55 feet north 
Mercer St 	South 	M—Sat 	7:00 am to 9:00 pm 	35 feet west of Tuers Av to a point 122 ft west 
Monmouth St 	East 	School days 	8:00 am 6:00 pm 	75 feet north of Grand St 150 feet north 
Montgomery St 	South 	M—F 	7:30 am to 9:00 am/2:30 pm to 5:30 pm 	170 feet east of Brunswick St 25 feet east 
Morgan St 	North 	M—F 	9:00 am to 5:00 pm 	35 feet west of Marin Blvd 64 feet west 
Morris Blvd 	North 	M—F 	7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. 
4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. 	Beginning 35 feet west of Marin Blvd to 88 feet west 
	North 	M—F 	7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. 	Beginning 88 feet west of Marin Blvd to 25 feet west 
Nelson Av 	East 	School days except holidays 	7:30 am to 8:30 am and 2:30 pm to 3:30 pm 	225 feet north of Kennedy Blvd 165 feet north 
New St 	South 	School days 	8:00 am to 6:00 pm 	73 feet west of Ocean Av 196 feet west 
		School days 	8:00 am to 6:00 pm 	339 feet west of Ocean Av 69 feet west 
Newark Av 	Both 	M—F 	4:00 pm to 6:00 pm 	Kennedy Blvd to Summit Av 
	North 	All days 	7:00 am to 9:00 am and 4:00 pm to 6:00 pm 	105 feet east of Summit Av 400 feet east 
	South 	Tu—Sun 	6:00 pm to 10:00 pm 	63 feet east of Merseles Street 48 feet east 
	Both 	M—Th 	3:00 pm to midnight 	Erie St to Grove St 
		F and Sun 	3:00 pm to midnight 	
Ninth St 	South 	School days 	8:00 am to 4:00 pm 	35 feet east of Erie St 119 feet east 
Ocean Av 	West 	M, W, Th, F and Sat 	9:30 am to 1:30 pm 	316 feet south of Bramhall Av 45 feet south 
Pacific Av 	West 	M—Sat 	5:00 am to 8:00 pm 	160 feet north of Carteret Av 22 feet north 
Palisade Av 	East 	School days 	8:00 am to 4:00 pm 	205 feet north of Newark Av to Washburn St 
	West 	M—F 	7:00 am to 7:00 pm 	State Highway 139 100 feet north 
	West 	M—F 	8:00 am to 8:00 pm 	25 feet north of Laidlaw Av 25 feet north 
	West 	M—F 	7:00 am to 10:00 am and 
3:00 pm to 6:00 pm 	334 feet south of Hutton St 25 feet south 
	West 	M—F 
except 
holidays 	7:00 am to 9:00 am 
4:00 pm to 6:00 pm 	227 feet north of Hutton Street 22 feet north 
Paterson St 	North 	M—F 	9:00 am to 4:00 pm 	305 feet west of Central Av 25 feet west 
Seaview Av 	North 	M—F 	9:00 am to 4:00 pm 	35 feet west of Kennedy Blvd 35 feet west 
Second St 	North 	Tu to Sun 	11:00 am to 10:00 pm 	116 feet west of Coles St 20 feet west 
Second St 	North 	Tu to Sun 	11:00 am to 10:00 pm 	116 feet west of Coles St 20 feet west 
	South 	M—Tu 	5:00 pm to 9:00 am 	368 feet east of Greene St 54 feet east 
		Th—F 	5:00 pm to 9:00 am 	
Seventh St 	South 	M—F 	7:30 am to 9:30 am, 3:30 pm to 5:30 pm 	205 feet east of Division St 70 feet east 
	North 	M—F 	8:00 am to 5:00 pm 	94 feet west of Coles St 80 feet west 
Sherman Pl 	South 	M—F 
except 
holidays 	7:00 am to 10:00 am 
3:00 pm to 7:00 pm 	35 feet east of Summit Av to 60 feet east 
Skillman Av 	East 	M—F 	7:00 am to 4:00 pm 	Saint Paul's Av to dead end 
Third St 	South 	School days 	7:30 am to 9:00 am and 3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	160 feet east of Erie St 60 feet east 
Thorne St 	South 	M—F 	7:00 am to 7:00 pm 	Kennedy Blvd to Columbia Av 
Tuers Av 	West 	School days 	7:30 am to 9:00 am and 2:30 pm to 3:30 pm 	115 north of Mercer St 80 feet north 
Union St 	North 	M, W, Th, F and Sun 	9:30 am to 1:30 pm 	30 feet west of Ocean Av 46 feet west 
Van Horne St 	West 	Daily June through August 	7:00 am to 10:00 pm 	61 feet south of Johnston Av 188 feet south 
Van Reypen St 	North 	M—F 
except 
holidays 	8:00 am to 9:00 am 
11:00 am to noon and 
2:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	130 feet north of Academy St to 25 feet north 
Van Vorst St 	West 	M—F 	7:00 am to 7:00 pm 	Grand St to Essex St 
Van Wagenen Av 	East 	M—Sat 	7:00 am to 6:00 pm 	168 feet north of Sip Av 17 feet north 
	West 	M—F 	7:00 am to 9:00 am 	Tonnele Circle ramp to Saint Paul's Av 
Van Winkle Av 	North 		8:00 pm/Sun to 8:00 am/Sat 
8:00 pm to 8:00 am/Sat to Sun 	Tonnele Av to Liberty Av 
Washington St 	West 	School days 	8:00 am to 9:00 am 
2:30 pm to 3:00 pm 	39 feet north of Sussex St 63 feet north 
West Side Av 	West 	School days 	8:00 am to 4:00 pm 	25 feet north of Carbon Pl 100 feet north 
	West 	All days 	8:00 am to 5:00 pm 	103 feet north of Broadway to north terminus 
Wilkinson Av 	North 	School days 	8:00 am to 4:00 pm 	Ocean Av to Arlington Av 
	North 	All days 	9:00 am to 3:00 pm 	35 feet west of Martin Luther King Dr 73 feet west 
Yale Av 	South 	M—F 	8:00 am to 5:00 pm 	390 feet west of West Side Av 20 feet west 
York St 	South 	School days 	7:00 am to 
9:00 am 
2:00 pm to 
4:00 pm 	35 feet east of Marin Blvd and extend 50 feet east 
  
§ 332-25. - Parking prohibited for sale or repair of vehicles or parking in front of disabled access ramp prohibited. 
A.  No person shall park a vehicle upon any street or other public way for the principal purpose of displaying such vehicle for sale or repairing such vehicle, except when necessitated by an emergency. For the purposes of this section, "repairing" shall mean: 
(1)  Changing oil, transmission fluid or any other auto fluid. 
(2)  Changing a battery, spark plugs or other auto parts. 
(3)  Removing and replacing brakes, brake linings and shocks. 
B.  Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a traffic officer or a traffic sign or signal, no operator of a vehicle shall stand or park a vehicle in front of any disabled access ramp in any street or sidewalk.  
§ 332-26. - No stopping or standing certain hours. 
[Amended 6-23-2010 by Ord. No. 10-079; 5-27-2015 by Ord. No. 15-074 ; 6-29-2017 by Ord. No. 17-077 ; 10-24-2018 by Ord. No. 18-120 ; 4-10-2019 by Ord. No. 19-022 ] 
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle between the times specified upon any of the streets, or parts thereof, listed below. 
No Stopping or Standing Certain Hours 
Name of Street 	Side 	Days 
of Week 	Hours 	Limits 
Bartholdi Av 	North 	School days 	8:00 am to 4:00 pm 	Sullivan Dr 300 feet east 
Bergen Av 	East 	All days 	4:00 pm to 6:00 pm 	Academy St to Sip Av 
Bergen Av 	East 	All days 	6:00 am to 9:00 am 	Sip Av to Montgomery St 
Bergen Av 	West 	All days 	4:00 pm to 6:00 pm 	Montgomery St to Fairmount Av 
Bergen Av 	West 	All days 	6:00 am to 9:00 am 	Sip Av to Duncan Av 
Communipaw Av 	North 	All days 	7:00 am to 9:00 am 
4:00 pm to 6:00 pm 	Summit Av 111 feet east of Grand St 
Communipaw Av 	North 	All days 	7:00 am to 9:00 am 
4:00 pm to 6:00 pm 	100 feet west of Grand St to Park St 
Communipaw Av 	North 	All days 	7:00 am to 9:00 am 
4:00 pm to 6:00 pm 	125 feet west of Bergen Av to 155 feet east of Kennedy Blvd 
Communipaw Av 	South 	All days 	7:00 am to 9:00 am 
4:00 pm to 6:00 pm 	Jackson Av to 100 feet west of Martin Luther King Dr 
Communipaw Av 	South 	All days 	7:00 am to 9:00 am 
4:00 pm to 6:00 pm 	Randolph Av to 100 feet west of Garfield Av 
Communipaw Av 	South 	All days 	7:00 am to 9:00 am 
4:00 pm to 6:00 pm 	100 feet east of Martin Luther King Dr to Arlington Av 
Communipaw Av 	South 	All days 	7:00 am to 9:00 am 
4:00 pm to 6:00 pm 	130 feet east of Kennedy Blvd to Tyson Ln (east portion) 
Duncan Av 	South 	All days 	7:00 am to 9:00 am 
4:00 pm to 6:00 pm 	West Side Av 200 feet west 
Eighteenth St 	Both 	M—F 	7:00 am to 6:00 pm 	Washington Blvd to Marin Blvd 
First St 	North 	M—F 
except 
holidays 	8:00 am to 5:00 pm 	Last four angle parking spaces east of Marin Blvd 
Grand St 	East 	All days 	7:00 am to 9:00 am 
4:00 pm to 6:00 pm 	Harmon St to Communipaw Av 
Grove Street 	Both 	Daily, except Sat, Sun and holidays 	7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. 	From Sixteenth Street to Fourteenth Street 
	East 		7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. 	150 feet north of Eighteenth Street to 233 feet north 
429 feet north of Eighteenth Street to 554 feet north 
	West 		7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. 	133 feet south of the Hoboken City Line to 238 feet south 
498 feet south of the Hoboken City Line to 620 feet south 
Journal Square Plaza 	East 	All days 	6:00 am to 9:00 am 
3:30 pm to 6:00 pm 	Sip Av to Kennedy Blvd (all metered area) 
Kennedy Blvd 	West 	All days 	7:00 am to 9:00 am 
4:00 pm to 6:00 pm 	35 feet south of Cottage St 118 feet south 
Monmouth St 	East 	All days 	7:00 am to 9:00 am 	York St to Columbus Dr 
Sip Av 	North 	All days 	6:00 am to 9:00 am 
4:00 pm to 6:00 pm 	Journal Square Plaza to Tonnele Av 
Sip Av 	North 	All days 	6:00 am to 9:00 am 
4:00 pm to 6:00 pm 	Summit St to Port Authority driveway 
Sip Av 	South 	All days 	6:00 am to 9:00 am 
4:00 pm to 6:00 pm 	Jones St to Summit St 
Sip Av 	South 	All days 	6:00 am to 9:00 am 
4:00 pm to 6:00 pm 	Bergen Av to Enos Pl 
Summit Av 	Both 	All days 	7:00 am to 9:00 am 
4:00 pm to 6:00 pm 	Pavonia Av to Newark Av 
Summit Av 	Both 	All days 	7:00 am to 9:00 am 
4:00 pm to 6:00 pm 	PATH cut Bridge to Pavonia Av 
Summit Av 	East 	All days 	7:00 am to 9:00 pm 
4:00 pm to 6:00 pm 	85 feet south of Newark Av 85 feet south 
Washington Blvd 	Both 	M—F 	7:00 am to 6:00 pm 	Sixth St to Eighteenth St 
Washington Blvd 	East 	M—F 	7:00 am to 6:00 pm 	Gangemi Dr to Eighteenth St 
	West 	M—F 	7:00 am to 6:00 pm 	Eighteenth St to 225 feet south of the projected northwest curb line of Town Sq Pl 
		M—F 	7:00 am to 6:00 pm 	325 feet south of the projected curb line of Town Sq Pl to Sixth St 
Washington St 	Both 	Daily 	10:00 pm to 8:00 am 	25 feet north of southern terminus 75 feet north 
Washington St 	West 	M—F 
except holidays 	6:00 am to 9:00 am & 4:00 pm to 7:00 pm 	Second St to Bay St 
  
§ 332-26A. - No stopping or standing certain hours during the northbound Pulaski Skyway lane closure. 
[Added 2-26-2014 by Ord. No. 14-021 ] 
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle between the times specified upon any of the streets, or parts thereof, listed below during the time the northbound lane of the Pulaski Skyway is closed for construction. 
No Stopping or Standing Certain Hours 
Name of Street 	Side 	Days 

of Week 	Hours 	Limits 
Communipaw Av 	South 	M—F 
except 
holidays 	6:00 am to 10:00 am 	West Side Av to Grand St 
	North 	M—F 
except 
holidays 	4:00 pm to 7:00 pm 	Grand St to West Side Av 
Grand St 	South 	M—F 
except 
holidays 	6:00 am to 10:00 am 	Communipaw Av to Fairmount Av 
	North 	M—F 
except 
holidays 	4:00 pm to 7:00 pm 	Fairmount Av to Communipaw Av 
Greene St 	West 	M—F 
except 
holidays 	6:00 am to 10:00 am 	Columbus Dr to Montgomery St 
  
§ 332-27. - Angle parking. 
[Amended 4-28-2010 by Ord. No. 10-058; 11-9-2011 by Ord. No. 11-140; 5-9-2012 by Ord. No. 12-062 ; 6-29-2017 by Ord. No. 17-076 ; 4-24-2019 by Ord. No. 19-029 ; 5-8-2019 by Ord. No. 19-041 ] 
No person shall park a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts thereof listed below except at the angle designated. 
Angle Parking 
Name of Street 	Side 	Angle 

(degrees) 	Limits 
Bergen Square 	West 	90 and 45 	100 feet north to 100 feet south of Academy St 
Bright St 	North 	90 	Florence St to Cornelison Av 
Douglas and Arthur Skinner Memorial Dr (FKA: Jersey Av) 	East 	60 	532 feet south of Grand Street to 906 feet south 
Elm St 	South 	Reverse 45 	Entire length 
First St 	North 	45 head-in parking only 	70 feet east of Marin Blvd (total of 8 parking spaces) 
		45 head-in parking only 	215 feet east of Marin Blvd (total of 12 parking spaces) 
Hoboken Av 	North 	90 	Oakland Av to State Highway 139 
Laidlaw Av 	South 	45 	Baldwin Av to Palisade Av 
Mallory Av service road 	Both 	45 	Clendenny Av to Roosevelt Av 
Mercer Street 	South 	45-degree reverse-in parking only 	Grove St to Marin Blvd 
Pavonia Av 	North 	45 	Erie St to Manila Av 
Pearsall Av 	South 	45 	Garfield Av to Princeton Av 
Rose Av 	North 	45 	Claremont Av to Grant Av 
Saint Paul's Av 	North 	Reverse 45 	Entire length 
Stegman St 	South 	45 	Ocean Av to Garfield Av 
Washington St 	West 	45 	25 feet north of the southern terminus and extending to a point 72 feet northerly therefrom 
Winfield Av 	North 	60-degree head-in parking only 	Garfield Av to Princeton Av 
  
§ 332-28. - Bus stops, Taxi Stands and Loading Zones. 
A.  In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197(3)a, b and § 3-54C(6) of the Code of the City of Jersey City, a listing of Regulations Designating Bus Stops, Taxi Stands and Loading Zones shall be incorporated in the Chapter 332 Manual—Traffic and Transportation. 
B.  The listing of all Bus Stops, Taxi Stands and Loading Zones of the City of Jersey City shall be incorporated in the Chapter 332 Manual—Traffic and Transportation. The current list of Bus Stops, Taxi Stands and Loading Zones authorized by Ordinance and/or Regulation within Chapter 332 Manual—Traffic and Transportation is available for inspection in the Division of Engineering, Traffic and Transportation and/or the Office of the City Clerk. 
C.  All regulations designating bus stops, taxi stands and loading zones promulgated by the Municipal Engineer and approved by resolution of the Municipal Council shall be transmitted to the City Clerk, who shall keep them on file for public inspection.  
§ 332-28.1. - Parking for electric or plug-in hybrid vehicles. 
[Added 6-28-2017 by Ord. No. 17-075 ] 
A.  Definitions. 
AC—Alternating current (electricity) 
BATTERY—A cell or cells onboard an electric vehicle which is used for storing and furnishing electrical energy for the purpose of propelling the vehicle. 
BATTERY ELECTRIC VEHICLE (BEV)—An electric vehicle with an onboard battery that operates exclusively on electrical energy from the battery, which battery is charged from an electrical power source (charging station) not onboard the vehicle. 
CHARGING LEVEL—The standardized indicators of electrical force or voltage at which an electric vehicle's battery is recharged. Typical electric vehicle charging levels and specifications are: 
(1)  Level 1—AC slow battery charging. Voltage is 120 volts. 
(2)  Level 2—AC medium battery charging. Voltage is between 120 volts and 240 volts. 
(3)  Level 3—DC fast or quick battery charging. Voltage is greater than 204 volts. Sometimes referred to as "DC Fast." 
CHARGING STATION—Equipment that has as its primary purpose the transfer of electric energy by conducive or inductive means to a battery or other energy storage device located onboard an electric vehicle. Various type of charging stations include: 
(1)  Accessible charging station: A charging station incorporated into or immediately adjacent to a handicapped parking space as "handicapped parking space" is defined by the New Jersey State Statutes. 
(2)  Level 3 charging station (sometimes "DC fast charging station"): A charging station that provides any single-phase voltage or current rating higher than that of level 2 or any three-phase supply voltage configuration. 
(3)  Private charging station: A charging station that is (a) privately owned and restricted access (e.g., single-family home, executive parking, designated employee parking, etc.) or (b) publicly owned and restricted (e.g. fleet parking with no access to the general public). 
(4)  Public charging station: A charging station that is (a) publicly owned and publicly available (e.g., park & ride, public parking lots, on-street parking, etc.) or (b) privately owned and publicly available (e.g., shopping center parking, non-reserved parking in multi-family parking lots, etc.). 
CHARGING STATION EQUIPMENT—The conductors, including ungrounded and grounded, and the electric vehicle connectors, attachment plugs, and all other fittings, devices, power outlets, charging stations or apparatus installed specifically for the purpose of delivering electrical energy from the charging station to the electric vehicles. 
CHARGING STATION PLACE—A dedicated, marked space that identifies the use thereof as exclusively for the charging of electric vehicles. 
ELECTRIC SCOOTERS AND/OR MOTORCYCLES—A two-wheel or three-wheel electric vehicle that operates exclusively on electrical energy stored in the vehicle's batteries. 
ELECTRIC VEHICLE—A vehicle that operates, either partially or exclusively, on electrical energy from a charging station or other electrical energy source that is stored in the vehicle's battery for propulsion purposes. "Electric vehicle" includes: (1) a battery electric vehicle; (2) a plug-in hybrid electric vehicle; (3) a neighborhood electric vehicle; and (4) electric scooters or motorcycles. 
NEIGHBORHOOD ELECTRIC VEHICLE—An electric vehicle with four wheels that conforms to federal regulations under Title 49 C.F.R. Part 571.5000 which can from a stand still attain a speed of 20 miles per hour (mph) within one mile but cannot exceed a speed of more than 25 mph. 
NON-ELECTRIC VEHICLE—A vehicle that does not meet the definition of "electric vehicle" as provided herein. 
PLUG-IN HYBRID ELECTRIC VEHICLE (PHEV)—An electric vehicle that (1) contains an internal combustion engine and also allows power to be delivered to drive wheels by an electric motor; and (2) charges its battery primarily by connecting to a charging station or other electrical source not on board the vehicle; (3) may additionally be able to sustain a battery charge using an on-board internal-combustion-driven generator; and (4) has the ability to be propelled through the use of electricity. 
VEHICLE—Has the same meaning as provided in the New Jersey State Statute, Title 39, Motor vehicles and traffic regulations, Chapter 1, Definitions, 39.1.1. Words and phrases defined. 
B.  Guidelines Related to Parking for Electric Vehicles Only. 
(1)  Notification and Signage. 
(a)  At the direction of the Municipal Engineer shall cause appropriate signs and markings to be placed in an around electric vehicle charging stations, indicating prominently thereon the parking regulations. The signs shall identify the voltage and amperage levels; define time limits, fees, and hours of operation, as applicable; and state that the charging station space is reserved for charging purposes only, which is to be defined as occurring when a vehicle is connected to the EVSE for electric charging purposes. 
(b)  Parking signage related to electric vehicle parking and charging stations in public parking facilities or on public roads shall accurately reflect the City's Code of Ordinances provisions as applied to days and times of parking enforcement under City Code Sections 332-31 (street cleaning) and 332-58 (Parking restrictions in residential zones). If there is a conflict between on-street parking signage and associated electric vehicle parking spaces and charging stations with respect to days, hours of enforcement, and/or maximum parking times, the information contained in the parking signage shall apply. 
(2)  Prohibitions. 
(a)  When a sign authorized under Subsection (1) above provides notice that a space is designated as electric vehicle parking or an electric vehicle charging station, no person shall stop, stand, or park any non-electric vehicle, or otherwise block access to parking, in any such designated parking space or charging station. 
(b)  When a sign authorized under Subsection (1) above provides notice that a space is designated as electric vehicle charging station, it is unlawful to park or permit to be parked any vehicle, including an electric vehicle, if such electric vehicle is not in the process of charging. Only one electric vehicle should occupy any space marked as an electric vehicle parking space or charging station, and no person should park except within the boundaries of the space defined. 
(3)  Enforcement. 
(a)  Electric vehicle parking spaces and charging stations shall be enforced by any police officer or parking enforcement officer as defined in Code Section 3-91(2). 
(b)  Violations of this Chapter shall be punishable in accordance with Code Section 3-91(2). Each day such violation is committed shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. 
(c)  In addition to a fine, a person who has parked or left a vehicle standing upon a street, alley, or city parking lot or garage in violation of this paragraph is subject to having the vehicle removed from the street, alley or City parking lot or garage in accordance to Code Section 3-91(4). 
C.  Electric Vehicle Charging Area. No person shall park a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts thereof listed below except an electric or hybrid plug-in vehicle. 
Name of Street 	Side 	Limits 
First St 	North 	Beginning 70 feet east of Marin Blvd (total of 8 parking spaces) 
		Beginning 215 feet east of Marin Blvd (total of 12 parking spaces) 
  
§ 332-29. - Disabled Parking Manual. 
[Amended 5-11-2011 by Ord. No. 11-051; 8-31-2011 by Ord. No. 11-099; 11-9-2011 by Ord. No. 11-139; amended 5-23-2012 by Ord. No. 12-070 ; 9-27-2012 by Ord. No. 12-114 ; 1-9-2013 by Ord. No. 12-165 ; 1-23-2013 by Ord. No. 13-003 ; 4-24-13 by Ord. No. 13-038 ; 5-29-2013 by Ord. No. 13-063 ; 6-19-2013 by Ord. No. 13-076 ; 11-26-2013 by Ord. No. 13-130 ; 3-26-2014 by Ord. No. 14-031 ; 4-9-2014 by Ord. No. 14-035 ; 6-25-2014 by Ord. No. 14-066 ; 9-10-2014 by Ord. No. 14-095 ; 9-23-2014 by Ord. No. 14-113 ; 11-25-2014 by Ord. No. 14-147 ; 1-14-2015 by Ord. No. 14-169 ; 3-25-2015 by Ord. No. 15-029 ; 9-9-2015 by Ord. No. 15-112 ; 1-27-2016 by Ord. No. 16-006 ; 9-14-2016 by Ord. No. 16-119 ; 2-8-2017 by Ord. No. 17-014 ; 4-12-2017 by Ord. No. 17-034 ; 5-24-2017 by Ord. No. 17-062 ; 7-19-2017 by Ord. No. 17-090 ; 8-16-2017 by Ord. No. 17-106 ; 9-27-2017 by Ord. No. 17-123 ; 12-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-163 ; 5-23-2018 by Ord. No. 18-047 ; 6-27-2018 by Ord. No. 18-063 ; 9-12-2018 by Ord. No. 18-098 ; 9-26-2018 by Ord. No. 18-108 ; 5-22-2019 by Ord. No. 19-051 ] 
A.  In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4 197(2)(c) and § 3-54(C)(10) of the Code of the City of Jersey City, a listing of Regulations Designating Reserved Parking Spaces for the Disabled shall be incorporated in the Chapter 332 Manual—Traffic and Transportation. 
B.  The listing of all Reserved Parking Spaces for the Disabled of the City of Jersey City shall be incorporated in the Chapter 332 Manual—Traffic and Transportation. The current list of Disabled Parking Spaces authorized by Ordinance and/or Regulation within Chapter 332 Manual—Traffic and Transportation is available for inspection in the Division of Engineering, Traffic and Transportation and/or the Office of the City Clerk. 
C.  All regulations designating reserved parking spaces for the disabled promulgated by the Municipal Engineer shall be transmitted to the City Clerk, who shall keep them on file for public inspection.  
§ 332-30. - Parking of Trucks, Omnibus, Road Tractor, Semi-Tractor, Truck Tractor, Recreational Vehicles or any Commercial Motor Vehicles. 
[Amended 11-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-171 ] 
A.  No person shall park any truck, omnibus, road tractor, semi-tractor, truck tractor or any commercial motor vehicle upon the streets of the City on any day of the week between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. except for taxicabs and limousines licensed by the City of Jersey City pursuant to Chapter 307 of this Code. 
B.  No person shall park any trailer, semitrailer or tractor upon any public street or public way while it is detached from its component unit, except when such trailer or semitrailer is in a continual process of loading or unloading goods, wares or merchandise. 
C.  No person shall park any recreational vehicle upon any street or public right-of-way.  
§ 332-31. - Parking restrictions for street-cleaning purposes. 
[Amended 11-10-2009 by Ord. No. 09-115 ; 1-13-2010 by Ord. No. 09-132 ; 4-28-2010 by Ord. No. 10-058; 6-15-2011 by Ord. No. 11-064 and Ord. No. 11-068; 5-9-2012 by Ord. No. 12-062 ; 2-26-2014 by Ord. No. 14-016 ; 2-24-2016 by Ord. No. 16-038 ; 4-27-2016 by Ord. No. 16-063 ; 9-14-2016 by Ord. No. 16-123 ; 10-12-2016 by Ord. No. 16-149 ; 11-22-2016 by Ord. No. 16-178 ; 1-11-2017 by Ord. No. 16-192 ; 1-25-2017 by Ord. No. 17-010 ; 2-8-2017 by Ord. No. 17-009 ; 7-19-2017 by Ord. No. 17-093 ; 8-16-2017 by Ord. No. 17-102 ; 12-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-161 ; 7-18-2018 by Ord. No. 18-070 ; 11-20-2018 by Ord. No. 18-129 ; 4-10-2019 by Ord. No. 19-022 ] 
No person shall park a vehicle upon any of the streets or sides of streets either in whole or in part, during the hours of the days listed below. 
Parking Restrictions for Street-Cleaning Purposes 
Name of Street 	Side 	Days 

of the Week 	Hours 	Limits 
Abbett St 	West 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Ferry St to Booraem Av 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Academy St 	North 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Fremont St to Van Reypen St 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Alan Ter 	South 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Chestnut Av to Waldo Av 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Albert Pl 	West 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Linden Av to dead end 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Apollo St 	West 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Duncan Av to dead end 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Arlington Av 	West 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Communipaw Av to Bayview Av 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Armstrong Av 	North 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Garfield Av to Bergen Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
	South 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Kennedy Blvd to West Side Av 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Ash St 	South 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Johnson Av to Pine St 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Astor Pl 	South 	M and Th 	8:00 am to noon 	Monticello Av to Summit St 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Atlantic St 	South 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Bergen Av to Martin Luther King Dr 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Audubon Av 	North 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Bergen Av to West Side Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Baldwin Av 	East 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Clifton Pl to Hoboken Av 
	West 	Tu and F 		
	West 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Prospect Av to Hoboken Av 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Barbara Pl 	South 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Grand St to Pacific Av 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Barrow St 	East 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Canal St to Newark Av 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Bartholdi Av 	North 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Kennedy Blvd to Sullivan Dr 
	South 	Tu and F 		
	South 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Kennedy Blvd to Ocean Av 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Bates St 	East 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Entire length 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Bay St 	North 	M—Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Grove St to Marin Blvd 
	South 	Tu—F 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	
	North 	M 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Marin Blvd to Greene St 
	South 	Tu 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	
	South 	M—Th 	7:00 am to 8:00 am 	Newark Av to Erie St 
	North 	Tu—F 	7:00 am to 8:00 am 	
Bayside Park Dr 	North 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Entire length 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Bayside Pl 	Both 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Fulton Av to dead end 
Bayside Ter 	East 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Entire length 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Bayview Av 	South 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Bergen Av to Garfield Av 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Beach St 	North 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Summit Av to Tonnele Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Beacon Av 	North 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Palisade Av to Kennedy Blvd 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Belmont Av 	North 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Summit Av to Monticello Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
	South 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Monticello Av to Kennedy Blvd 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Belvidere Av 	East 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Communipaw Av to dead end 
	West 	Tu and F 		
	East 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Condict St to Lincoln Park 
	West 	Tu and F 		
	East 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Duncan Av to Lincoln Park 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Bentley Av 	South 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Bergen Av to West Side Av 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Bergen Av 	East 	M and Th 	7:00 am to 8:00 am 	Montgomery St to Sip Av 
	West 	Tu and F 	7:00 am to 8:00 am 	Sip Av to Montgomery St 
	East 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Van Nostrand Av to Montgomery St 
	West 	Tu and F 	10:00 am to noon 	Montgomery St to Van Nostrand Av 
Berkeley Pl 	North 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Liberty Av to Tonnele Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Bernius Ct 	West 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Entire length 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Bevan St 	East 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Depressed Highway to Hopkins Av 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Bidwell Av 	North 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Garfield Av to Bergen Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Bishop Av 	South 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Cornelison Av to Grand St 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Bleecker St 	South 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Terrace Av to Central Av 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Boland St 	West 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Montgomery St to Fairmount Av 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Bond St 	South 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Garrison Av to Kennedy Blvd 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Booraem Av 	North 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Palisade Av to Central Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Bostwick Av 	South 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Bergen Av to Ocean Av 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Bowers St 	North 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Ogden Av to Central Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
	South 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Kennedy Blvd to Central Av 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Boyd Av 	South 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Bennett St to Bergen Av 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Boyd Ct 	East 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Entire length 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Bramhall Av 	North 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Bergen Av to Garfield Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
	South 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Pacific Av to Woodward St 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Briarwood Rd 	North 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Entire length 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Bright St 	North 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Bates St to Center St 
	South 	Tu and F 		
	South 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Cornelison Av to Merseles St 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Brinkerhoff St 	South 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Crescent Av to Bergen Av 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Britton St 	West 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Entire length 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Broadman Pkwy 	North 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Kennedy Blvd to dead end 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Broadway 	South 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Truck Route 1 & 9 to Tonnele Av 
		Tu and F 		
Brook St 	South 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Center St to Bates St 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Brown Pl 	North 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Garfield Av to Princeton Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Brunswick St 	East 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Tenth St to York St 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Bryan Pl 	East 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Van Reipen Av to dead end 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Bryant Av 	West 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	The cemetery to Logan Av 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Cambridge Av 	East 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Franklin St to North St 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Carlton Av 	South 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Tonnele Av to Summit Av 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Carteret Av 	South 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Garfield Av to Pacific Av 
	North 	Tu and F 		
	North 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Garfield Av to Ocean Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Casper Ct 	East 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Van Houten Av to dead end 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Cator Av 	South 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Princeton Av to Kennedy Blvd 
	North 	Tu and F 		
	North 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Kennedy Blvd to West Side Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Caven Point Av 	North 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	The railroad tracks to Garfield Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Center St 	East 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Grand St to Columbus Dr 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Central Av 	West 	M—Sat 	7:30 am to 9:00 am 	Paterson Plank Rd to Howie Fink Way 
	East 	M—Sat 	9:00 am to 10:00 am 	
	East 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Howie Fink Way to Hoboken Av 
	West 	Tu and F 		
	East 	M and Th 	7:00 am to 8:00 am 	Newark Av to Pavonia Av 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Chapel Av 	North 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Rutgers Av to Ocean Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Charles St 	North 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Central Av to Kennedy Blvd 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Chestnut Av 	West 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Newark Av to Trenton St 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Chopin Ct 	East side of island 	Tu and F 	10:00 am to noon 	Montgomery St to Wayne St 
	West side of island 	M and Th 		
Claremont Av 	North 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Garfield Av to Bergen Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
	South 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Route 440 to Bergen Av 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Clarke Av 	North 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	West Side Av to Route 440 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Clendenny Av 	South 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Route 440 to Bergen Av 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Clerk St 	West 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Wilkinson Av to Bramhall Av 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Cliff St 	South 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Liberty Av to Kennedy Blvd 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Clifton Pl 	West 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Summit Av to Summit Av 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Clinton Av 	North 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Entire length 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Colden St 	South 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Grand St to Fremont St 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Coles St 	West 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Columbus Dr to Eighteenth St 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Colgate St 	West 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Montgomery St to Bright St 
	East 	Tu and F 		
	East 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Third St to First St 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Collard St 	West 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	The dead end to Route 139 
	East 	Tu and F 		
College Dr 	West 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Culver Av to Audubon Av 
	East 	Tu and F 		
College St 	West 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Culver Av to Audubon Av 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Columbia Av 	West 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Secaucus Rd to Zabriskie St 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Columbus Dr 	South 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Merseles St to Grove St 
	North 	Tu and F 		
	South 	M and Th 	6:00 am to 8:00 am 	Grove St to the Hudson River 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Communipaw Av 	North 	Tu and F 	7:00 am to 9:00 am 	Suydam Av to Grand St 
	South 	M and Th 		
	South 	M and Th 	7:00 am to 9:00 am 	Route 440 to Grand St 
	North 	Tu and F 	4:00 pm to 6:00 pm 	Route 440 to Grand St 
Concord St 	East 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Hoboken Av to Hopkins Av 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Condict St 	North 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Mallory Av to Delaware Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Congress St 	South 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Nelson Av to Paterson Plank Rd 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Cook St 	West 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Hoboken Av to Newark Av 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Corbin Av 	East 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Stuyvesant Av to dead end off Broadway 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Corcoran St 	West 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Woodlawn Av to Fulton Av 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Cornelison Av 	East 	M and Th 	6:00 am to 8:00 am 	Summit Av to Wayne St 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Cottage St 	North 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Summit Av to dead end 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Country Village Rd 	East 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Entire length 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Court House Pl 	South 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	McPherson Pl to Oakland Av 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Covert St 	West 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Saint Paul's Av to dead end 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Crawford St 	North 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	The dead end to Summit Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Crescent Av 	West 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Belmont Av to Clinton Av 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Crossgate Rd 	South 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Entire length 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Culver Av 	South 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Route 440 to Kennedy Blvd 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Cuneo Pl 	South 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Palisade Av to Ogden Av 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Custer Av 	South 	Tu and F 	1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m. 	Entire length 
	North 	M and Th 		
Dales Av 	East 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Logan Av to Broadway 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Danforth Av 	South 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 11:00 am 	Route 440 to Princeton Av 
	North 	Tu and F 		Princeton Av to West Side Av 
DeKalb Av 	South 	Tu and F 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Entire length 
	North 	M and Th 		
Delaware Av 	East 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Communipaw Av to the dead end 
	West 	Tu and F 		
	East 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Duncan Av to the dead end 
	West 	Tu and F 		
	East 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Duncan Av to Kensington Av 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Delmar Rd 	North 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Entire length 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Dey St 	South 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Senate Pl to Tonnele Av 
	North 	Tu and F 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	
Division St 	East 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Eighth St to Newark Av 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Douglas and Arthur Skinner Memorial Dr (FKA: Jersey Avenue) 	Both 	M and Th 	6:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m. 	Grand St south to the light rail tracks 
Dudley St 	South 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Washington St to Warren St 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Duncan Ct 	West 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Duncan Av to the dead end 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Duncan Av 	South 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Bergen Av to West Side Av 
	North 	Tu and F 		
	North 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	West Side Av to the Hackensack River 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Dwight St 	South 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Kennedy Blvd to Garfield Av 
	North 	Tu and F 		
East Bidwell Av 	North 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Entire length 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Eastern Pkwy 	North 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Garfield Av to Ocean Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
East St 	West 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Entire length 
East View Ct 	East 	M and Th 	10:00 pm to noon 	Entire length 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Ege Av 	South 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Bergen Av to Ocean Av 
	North 	Tu and F 		
	South 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Bennett Av to Bergen Av 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Eight St 	South 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Provost St to Division St 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Eighteenth St 	North 	M and Th 	7:00 am to 9:00 am 	Marin Blvd to Grove St 
	South 	Tu and F 		
	North 	M and Th 	7:00 am to 8:00 am 	Jersey Av to Coles St 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Elizabeth St 	North 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Waldo Av to Chestnut Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Elm St 	South 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Kennedy Blvd to the dead end 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Emerson Av 	West 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	The cemetery to Logan Av 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Emory St 	North 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Bergen Av to Monticello Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Enos Pl 	East 	M and Th 	7:00 am to 9:00 am 	Sip Av to Newkirk St 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Erie St 	East 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Newark Av to Twelfth St 
	West 	Tu and F 		
	East 	M and Th 	6:00 am to 8:00 am 	Twelfth St to Boyle Plaza 
	West 	Tu and F 		
	East 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Boyle Plaza to Sixteenth St 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Essex St 	South 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Hudson St to Washington St 
	North 	Tu and F 		Van Vorst St to Warren St 
Everett St 	East 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Clendenny Av to Williams Av 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Exeter Rd 	South 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Entire length 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Fairmount Av 	North 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	West Side Av to Bergen Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
	South 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Summit Av to Grand St 
	North 	Tu and F 		
	North 	M and Th 	10:00 am to 12 noon 	Bergen Av to Summit Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Fairmount Ter 	West 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Fairmount Av to Montgomery St 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Fairview Av 	North 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Monticello Av to Fairmount Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
	North 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	West Side Av to Monticello Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Ferncliff Rd 	North 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Entire length 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Ferry St 	South 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Central Av to Ogden Av 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Fifteenth St 	North 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Marin Blvd to Erie St 
	South 	Tu and F 		
	South 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Jersey Av to Coles St 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Fifth St 	South 	>M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Newark Av to Manila Av 
	North 	Tu and F 		
First St 	South 	M—Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Merseles St to Marin Blvd 
	North 	Tu—F 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	
	North 	M 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Marin Blvd to Washington St 
	South 	Tu 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	
Fisk St 	North 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Route 440 West Side Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Fleet St 	South 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Central Av to Palisade Av 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Florence St 	West 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Bright St to Montgomery St 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Floyd St 	North 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Kennedy Blvd to the dead end 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Forrest St 	South 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Bergen Av to Clerk St 
	North 	Tu and F 		
	South 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Halladay St to Pacific Av 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Fourteenth St 	North 	M and Th 	6:00 am to 8:00 am 	Jersey Av to Coles St 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Fourth St 	North 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Manila Av to Newark Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
	North 	M and Th 	6:00 am to 8:00 am 	Newark Av to Merseles St 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Fowler Av 	West 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Kennedy Blvd to Greenville Av 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Fox Pl 	South 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	West Side Av to Giles Av 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Franklin 	North 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Ogden Av to Central Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Freedom Pl 	North 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Entire length 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Freeman Av 	East 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Duncan Av to the dead end 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Fremont St 	East 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Bright St to Grand St 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Fulton Av 	North 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Garfield Av to Kennedy Blvd 
	South 	Tu and F 		
	South 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	West Side Av to Kennedy Blvd 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Garabrant St 	West 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Entire length 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Gardner Av 	South 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Monticello Av to Summit Av 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Garfield Av 	East 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Grand St to Communipaw Av 
	West 	Tu and F 		
	West 	W and Sat 	9:00 am to 11:00 am 	Communipaw Av to Bidwell Av 
	East 	M-W-F 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	150 ft south of the projected southeast curb line of Union St to a point 1,200 ft northerly 
	East 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Bidwell Av to Danforth Av 
	West 	Tu and F 		
	East 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Danforth Av to Bayonne City line 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Garrison Av 	West 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Old Bergen Rd to DeKalb Av 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Gates Av 	South 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Old Bergen Rd to dead end 
	North 	Tu and F 		
	South 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Princeton Av to Old Bergen Rd 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Gautier Av 	South 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Mallory Av to West Side Av 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Gifford Av 	North 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	West Side Av to Bergen Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Giles Av 	West 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	The dead end to the dead end off Broadway 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Glenwood Av 	South 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Bergen Av to West Side Av 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Grace St 	North 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Central Av to Nelson Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Graham St 	North 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Central Av to Nelson Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Grand St 	North 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Grove St to Communipaw Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
	East 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Communipaw Av to Bramhall Av 
	West 	Tu and F 		
	South 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Grove St to Greene St 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Grant Av 	South 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Bergen Av to Ocean Av 
	North 	Tu and F 		
	North 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Bergen Av to dead end 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Gray St 	East 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Mercer St to Academy St 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Greene St 	West 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Essex St to Montgomery St 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Greenville Av 	North 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Kennedy Blvd to dead end off Fowler Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
	North 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Kennedy Blvd to Old Bergen Rd 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Grieco Dr 	East and North 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Entire length 
	West and South 	Tu and F 		
Griffith St 	South 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Kennedy Blvd to dead end 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Grove St 	West 	M and Th 	6:00 am to 8:00 am 	Hoboken line to Sixteenth St 
	East 	Tu and F 		
	West 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Sixteenth St to Boyle Plaza 
	East 	Tu and F 		
	West 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	First St to Newark Av 
	East 	Tu and F 		
	East 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 11:00 am 	Newark Av to Grand St 
	West 	Tu and F 		
	East 	M and Th 	10:00 a.m. to noon 	Morris Blvd to Sussex St 
Hague St 	North 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Central Av to Nelson Av 
	South 	Tu and F 	10:00 am to noon 	Paterson Plank Rd to Nelson Av 
Halladay St 	East 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 pm 	Caven Point Av to Ash St 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Halstead St 	West 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Orient Av to Claremont Av 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Hancock Av 	West 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	North St to Franklin St 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Harmon St 	North 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Crescent Av to Garfield Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Harrison Av 	North 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	West Side Av to Communipaw Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Hart St 	West 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Ege Av to Kearney Av 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Hawthorne Av 	East 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	The cemetery to Sip Av 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Henry St 	North 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Waldo Av to the dead end 
	South 	Tu and F 		
High St 	South 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Entire length 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Highland Av 	North 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	West Side Av to Bergen Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Highview Rd 	East 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Stevens Av to Fowler Av 
Hill St 	South 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Palisade Av to dead end 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Hoboken Av 	South 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Summit Av to Route 139 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Hobson St 	South 	Tu and F 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Ogden Av to Palisade Av 
	North 	M and Th 		
Holmes Av 	East 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	The cemetery to Sip Av 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Homestead Pl 	Both 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Van Reipen Av to Pavonia Av 
	Both 	Tu and F 		
Hopkins Av 	South 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Route 139 to Palisade Av 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Howard Pl 	North 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Summit Av to Storms Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Hudson St 	East 	M—Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	York St to Montgomery St 
	West 	Tu—F 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	
	East 	M 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Harborside Pl (private road) to Second St 
	West 	Tu 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	
Huron Av 	West 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Saint Paul's Av to Van Winkle Av 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Hutton St 	South 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Liberty Av to Palisade Av 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Iorio Ct 	East 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Van Houten Av to dead end 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Irene Carson Ct 	North 	M and Th 	10:00 pm to noon 	Manning Av to Woodward St 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Irving St 	North 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Central Av to Nelson Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Ivy Pl 	North 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Grand St to Cornelison Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Jackson Av 	West 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Communipaw Av to Clinton Av 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Jefferson Av 	North 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Palisade Av to Summit Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Jersey Av 	East 	M and Th 	6:00 am to 8:00 am 	Hoboken line to Twelfth St 
	West 	Tu and F 		
	East 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Twelfth St to Canal St 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Jewett Av 	South 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Summit Av to Monticello Av 
	North 	Tu and F 		
	South 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Monticello Av to West Side Av 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Johnston Av 	North 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Grand St to Cornelison Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
	North 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	The light rail tracks to Grand St 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Jones St 	West 	M and Th 	7:00 am to 9:00 am 	Newkirk St to Sip Av 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Jordan Av 	East 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Vroom St to Orchard St 
	West 	Tu and F 		
James Av 	East 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Saint Paul's Av to Dey St 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Kearney Av 	North 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Ocean Av to Bergen Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
	North 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	West Side Av to dead end 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Kensington Av 	North 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	West Side Av to Bergen Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
	North 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	West Side Av to Lincoln Park 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Lafayette St 	North 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Monitor St to Manning Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Laidlaw Av 	South 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Collard St to Palisade Av 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Lake St 	North 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Montrose Av to Liberty Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Larch Av 	West 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Saint Paul's Av to dead end 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Laurel Ct 	West 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Entire length 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Lembeck Av 	South 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Princeton Av to Kennedy Blvd 
	North 	Tu and F 		
	North 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Kennedy Blvd to Sullivan Dr 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Leonard St 	South 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Terrace Av to Central Av 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Lexington Av 	North 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Bergen Av to Marcy Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Liberty Av 	East 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Newark Av to dead end off Saint Paul's Av 
	West 	Tu and F 		
	West 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Secaucus Rd to dead end off Spruce St 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Lienau Pl 	West 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Waverly St to Booraem Av 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Lincoln St 	North 	M and Th 	10:00 pm to noon 	Central Av to Kennedy Blvd 
	South 	Tu and F 		
	North 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Kennedy Blvd to Western Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Linden Av 	North 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Old Bergen Rd to Princeton Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
	North 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Kennedy Blvd to Old Bergen Rd 
	South 	Tu and F 		
	South 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Kennedy Blvd to dead end 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Linden Ct 	West 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Linden Av to dead end 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Logan Av 	North 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	West Side Av to Freeman Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Long St 	East 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Rose Av to McAdoo Av 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Ludlow St 	East 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	New St to Chapel Av 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Madison Av 	East 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Bramhall Av to Communipaw Av 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Magnolia Av 	South 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Waldo Av to Tonnele Av 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Maiden Ln 	South 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Summit Av to Orchard St 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Mallory Av 	East 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Duncan Av to dead end 
	West 	Tu and F 		
	West 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Duncan Av to Gautier Av 
	East 	Tu and F 		
	East 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 pm 	Fisk St to Communipaw Av 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Manhattan Av 	South 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Central Av to Sherman Pl 
	North 	Tu and F 		
	South 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Tonnele Av to Central Av 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Manila Av 	West 	M and Th 	6:00 am to 8:00 am 	Boyle Plaza to Twelfth St 
	East 	Tu and F 		
	West 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Twelfth St to First St 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Manning Av 	West 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Johnston Av to Irene Carson Ct 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Maple St 	South 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Manning Av to dead end 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Marcy Av 	West 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Clendenny Av to Communipaw Av 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Marin Blvd 	West 	M and Th 	7:00 am to 8:00 am 	Twelfth St to Hoboken line 
	East 	Tu and F 		
	West 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Grand St to Twelfth St 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Marion Pl 	South 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Giles Av to West Side Av 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Martin Luther King Dr 	West 	M—Sat 	9:00 am to 10:00 am 	Communipaw Av to McAdoo Av 
	East 	M—Sat 	7:30 am to 9:00 am 	Communipaw Av to McAdoo Av 
McAdoo Av 	North 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Rutgers Av to Kennedy Blvd 
	South 	Tu and F 		
	North 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Kennedy Blvd to West Side Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
McDougal St 	South 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Randolph Av to Arlington Av 
	North 	Tu and F 		
McPherson Pl 	West 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Washburn St to Newark Av 
	East 	Tu and F 		
McWilliams Pl 	East 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Ninth St to Eighth St 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Mercer St 	North 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Marin Blvd to Colgate St 
	South 	Tu and F 		
	South side of St/north side of island 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Cul-de-sac at Mercer Loop 
	North side of St/south side of island 	Tu and F 		
	South 	M and Th 	10:00 am. to noon 	Mill Rd to Tuers Av 
	North 	Tu and F 		
	South 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Tuers Av to Bergen Av 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Merritt St 	North 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Av C to the Western Terminus 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Merseles St 	East 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Columbus Dr to Bright St 
	West 	Tu and F 		
	West 	M and Th 	6:00 am to 8:00 am 	Newark Av to Third St 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Mill Rd 	West 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Montgomery St to Academy St 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Miller St 	East 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Clendenny Av to Williams Av 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Milton Av 	East 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Griffith St to Charles St 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Mina Dr 	South 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Entire length 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Minerva St 	East 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	South terminus to Union St 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Monitor St 	West 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Dead end to Communipaw Av 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Monmouth St 	East 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Dead end off Grand St to Twelfth St 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Montague Pl 	South 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Palisade Av to dead end 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Montgomery St 	North 	M and Th 	6:00 am to 8:00 am 	Baldwin Av to Center St 
	South 	Tu and F 		
	South 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Baldwin Av to West Side Av 
	North 	Tu and F 		
	South 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Center St to Hudson St 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Monticello Av 	East 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Communipaw Av to Orchard St 
	West 	Tu and F 		
	East 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Clinton Av to Bramhall Av 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Montrose Av 	East 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Troy St to Manhattan Av 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Morgan St 	South 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Grove St to Marin Blvd 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Morris Blvd 	North 	M and Th 	10:00 a.m. to noon 	Marin Blvd to Grove St 
Morris St 	South 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Hudson St to Greene St 
	North 	Tu and F 		
	South 	M 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Greene Street to Warren Street 
	North 	Tu 		
	South 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Warren Street to Van Vorst Street 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Morton Pl 	South 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Bergen Av to west terminus 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Morton St 	West 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Clendenny Av to Williams Av 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Msgr. Wojtycha Dr 	South 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Entire length 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Mury Lu Dr 	North 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Entire length 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Myrtle Av 	South 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Ocean Av to Garfield Av 
	North 	Tu and F 		
	North 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Ocean Av to Bergen Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Nelson Av 	East 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Kennedy Blvd to Secaucus Rd 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Neptune Av 	South 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Princeton Av to Garfield Av 
	North 	Tu and F 		
	North 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Garfield Av to Old Bergen Rd 
	South 	Tu and F 		
	South 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Old Bergen Rd to Kennedy Blvd 
	North 	Tu and F 		
	South 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Kennedy Blvd to Sayles St 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Nesbitt St 	West 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Reservoir Av to Booraem Av 
	East 	Tu and F 		
New St 	North 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Rutgers Av to Ocean Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Newark Av 	Both 	M—F 	7:00 am to 9:00 am 	Tonnele Av to Grove St 
	North 	Sat 	7:30 am to 9:00 am 	
	South 	Sat 	9:00 am to 10:00 am 	
Newkirk St 	North 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Sip Av to Baldwin Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Newport Pkwy 	South 	M and Th 	6:00 am to 8:00 am 	River Dr South to Washington Blvd 
	North 	Tu and F 		
New York Av 	West 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Paterson Plank Rd to Ravine Av 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Ninth St 	North 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Marin Blvd to the turnpike bridge 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Norcroft Rd 	North 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Entire length 
	South 	Tu and F 		
North St 	North 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Palisade Av to Central Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
	South 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Terrace Av to Central Av 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Nunda Av 	East 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Duncan Av north to dead end 
	West 	Tu and F 		
	East 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Communipaw Av north to dead end 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Oak St 	North 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Ocean Av to Bergen Av 
	South 	Tu and F 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Ocean Av to Bergen Av 
Oakdale Rd 	South 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Entire length 
	North 	Tu and F 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Entire length 
Oakland Av 	West 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Prospect St to Route 139 
	East 	Tu and F 		
	East 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Newark Av to Route 139 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Ocean Av 	East 	M, W and F 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Merritt St to Bramhall Av 
	West 	Tu, Th and Sat 		
Olean Av 	West 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Duncan Av north to dead end 
	East 	Tu and F 		
	East 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Communipaw Av north to dead end 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Ogden Av 	East 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Entire length 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Old Bergen Rd 	East 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	McAdoo Av to Merritt St 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Orchard St 	East 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Montgomery St to Crawford St 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Orient Av 	South 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Kennedy Blvd to Ocean Av 
	North 	Tu and F 		
	North 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Kennedy Blvd to Halstead St 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Oxford Av 	South 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	West Side Av to Bergen Av 
	North 	Tu and F 		
	North 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Bergen Av to Sackett St 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Pacific Av 	West 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Grand St to Caven Point Av 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Palisade Av 	East 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Hoboken Av to Plank Rd 
	West 	Tu and F 		
	East 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Hoboken Av to Newark Av 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Pamrapo Av 	South 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	The dead end to Old Bergen Rd 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Park St 	West 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Astor Pl to Communipaw Av 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Parnell Pl 	West 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Warner Av to McAdoo Av 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Passaic Av 	East 	M and Th 	10:00 pm to noon 	South St to Congress St 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Paterson St 	North 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Central Av to Kennedy Blvd 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Pavonia Av 	South 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Manila Av to Brunswick St 
	North 	Tu and F 		
	North 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	rear of Loews to Tonnele Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
	North 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Tonnele Av to West Side Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
	North 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	West Side Av to Giles Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
	North 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Newark Av to Kennedy Blvd 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Pearl St 	South 	Th 	6:00 am to 7:00 am 	Washington St to Greene St 
	North 	F 	6:00 am to 7:00 am 	
Pearsall Av 	South 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Kennedy Blvd to Brother Stan Dr 
	North 	Tu and F 		
	North 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Kennedy Blvd to Old Bergen Rd 
	South 	Tu and F 		
	North 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Old Bergen Rd to Princeton Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Perrine Av 	East 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	High St to the dead end 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Perry St 	West 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Hopkins Av to dead end 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Pierce Av 	West 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Congress St to South St 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Pine St 	West 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Ash St to the dead end 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Pinecrest 	South 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Entire length 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Plainfield Av 	East 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Duncan Av to the dead end 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Pollack Av 	North 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	West Side Av to Mallory Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Poplar St 	South 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Nelson Av to Central Av 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Prescott St 	East 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 pm 	Grand St to the dead end 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Princeton Av 	West 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Gates Av to Cator Av 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Prospect St 	North 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Palisade Av to Central Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Provost St 	East 	M 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Bay St to Second St 
	West 	Tu 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	
Randolph Av 	East 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Wilkinson Av to Communipaw Av 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Ravine Av 	South 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Abbett St to Palisade Av 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Reed St 	South 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Monticello Av to Bergen Av 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Reserve Av 	North 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Terrace Av to dead end 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Reservoir Av 	South 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Central Av to Palisade Av 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Richard St 	North 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Entire length 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Ristaino Dr 	East 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Montgomery St to Wayne St 
	West 	Tu and F 		
	West 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Montgomery St to Academy St 
	East 	Tu and F 		
River Dr South 	West 	M and Th 	6:00 am to 8:00 pm 	Newport Pkwy to Pavonia Av 
	East 	Tu and Th 		
Riverview Rd 	East 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Entire length 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Rock St 	South 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Baldwin Av to Summit Av 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Romaine Av 	East 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Stuyvesant Av to Broadway 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Romar Av 	East 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Greenville Av to Seaview Av 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Roosevelt Av 	South 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Marcy Av to West Side Av 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Rose Av 	West 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Kearney Av to Grant Av 
	East 	Tu and F 		
	West 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Fulton Av to Armstrong Av 
	East 	Tu and F 		
	West 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Warner Av to Danforth Av 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Rutgers Av 	West 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Van Nostrand Av to Cator Av 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Sackett St 	East 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Communipaw Av to Oak St 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Saddlewood Ct 	West 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Entire length 
	East 	Tu and F 		
St. Paul's Av 	North 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Palisade Av to Kennedy Blvd 
	South 	Tu and F 		
	North 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Tonnele Av to James Av 
	South 	Tu and F 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Skillman Av to James Av 
St. Peter's St 	East 	M and Th 	10:00 a.m. to noon 	Morris Blvd to Sussex St 
Sanford Pl 	West 	M and Th 	10:00 am to 12:00 am 	Kennedy Blvd to Summit Av 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Sayles St 	West 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Winfield Av to Neptune Av 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Scott St 	East 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Greenville Av to Linden Av 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Seaview Av 	North 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Kennedy Blvd to Romar Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
	North 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Kennedy Blvd to Princeton Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Second St 	North 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Eastern Terminus to Monmouth St 
	South 	Tu and F 		
	North 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Monmouth St to Brunswick St 
	South 	Tu and F 		
	North 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Brunswick St to Merseles St 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Seidler St 	West 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Bramhall Av to Communipaw Av 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Senate Pl 	East 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Newark Av to Dey St 
Seventeenth St 	South 	M and Th 	7:00 am to 8:00 am 	Coles St to Jersey Av 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Seventh St 	North 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Provost St to Newark Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Sheffield St 	South 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Ocean Av to Rutgers Av 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Sherman Av 	East 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Ferry St to North St 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Sherman Pl 	North 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Central Av to Kennedy Blvd 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Sip Av 	South 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Truck Route 1 & 9 to Kennedy Blvd 
	North 	Tu and F 		
	Both 	Sat 	7:00 am to 9:00 am 	Summit Av to Jones St 
	Both 	Sat 	6:00 am to 9:00 am 	Bergen Av to Newkirk St 
Sixteenth St 	North 	M and Th 	6:00 am to 8:00 am 	Coles St to Jersey Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Sixth St 	North 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Marin Blvd to Newark Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
	North 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Jersey Av to Marin Blvd 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Skillman Av 	East 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Van Winkle Av to dead end 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Skyline Dr 	South 	M—Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Entire length 
	North 	Tu—F 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	
South St 	South 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Ogden Av to Central Av 
	North 	Tu and F 		
	North 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Central Av to Kennedy Blvd 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Spring St 	East 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Cator Av to McAdoo Av 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Spruce St 	South 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Tonnele Av to Collard St 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Stagg St 	North 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Kennedy Blvd to Liberty Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
State St 	North 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Grand St to Cornelison Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Stegman Ct 	East 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	The dead end to Stegman Pkwy 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Stegman Pkwy 	South 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	West Side Av to Kennedy Blvd 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Stegman Pl 	East 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	The dead end to Stegman Pkwy 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Stegman St 	South 	Tu and F 	10:00 am to noon 	Garfield Av to Kennedy Blvd 
	North 	M and Th 		
Stegman Ter 	East 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	The dead end to Stegman Pkwy 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Sterling Av 	West 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	The dead end to McAdoo Av 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Steuben St 	North 	M—Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Marin Blvd to Washington St 
	South 	Tu—F 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	
	North 	Th 	6:00 am to 7:00 am 	Washington St to Warren St 
	South 	F 	6:00 am to 7:00 am 	
Stevens Av 	North 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Ocean Av to Kennedy Blvd 
	South 	Tu and F 		
	South 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Kennedy Blvd to West Side Av 
Storms Av 	South 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Summit Av to Bergen Av 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Stuyvesant Av 	North 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Van Reypen St to West Side Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Suburbia Ct 	North 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Suburbia Dr to Route 440, north section 
	South 	Tu and F 		
	South 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Suburbia Dr to Route 440, south section 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Suburbia Dr 	East 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Entire length 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Suburbia Ter 	West and south 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Entire length 
	East and north 	Tu and F 		
Sullivan Dr 	East 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Bartholdi Av to Danforth Av 
	West 	Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Danforth Av to Bartholdi Av 
Summit Av 	West 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Sip Av to Communipaw Av 
	East 	Tu and F 		
	East 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Sip Av to Secaucus Rd 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Sussex St 	North 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Dead end west of Van Vorst St to Washington St 
	South 	Tu and F 		
	North 	M 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Washington St to Greene St 
	South 	Tu 		
	North 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Marin Blvd to St. Peter's St 
	South 	Tu and F 	10:00 am to noon 	Grove St to Marin Blvd 
Suydam Av 	West 	M and Th 	7:00 am to 8:00 am 	Entire length 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Sycamore Rd 	East 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Entire length 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Tenth St 	South 	M—Th 	10:00 a.m. to noon 	Marin Blvd to Brunswick St 
	North 	Tu—F 		
Terhune Av 	South 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Spring St to Kennedy Blvd 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Terrace Av 	East 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Manhattan Av to Tonnele Av 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Third St 	South 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Newark Av to Manila Av 
	North 	Tu and F 		
	South 	M and Th 	6:00 am to 8:00 am 	Western Terminus to Newark Av 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Thorne St 	South 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	The west terminus to Central Av 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Tonnele Av 	East 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Van Reypen St to Kennedy Blvd 
	West 	Tu and F 		
	West 	Tu and F 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Highway Circle to Kennedy Blvd 
	East 	M and Th 		
Town Square Pl 	North 	M and Th 	6:00 am to 8:00 am 	River Dr South to Washington Blvd 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Towers St 	East 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Culver Av to College St 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Trenton St 	South 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Chestnut Av to dead end 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Troy St 	North 	M and Th 	10:00 am to 12:00 pm 	Summit Av to Montrose Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Tuers Av 	East 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Newkirk St to Vroom St 
	West 	Tu and F 		
	West 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Montgomery St to Vroom St 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Union St 	North 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Garfield Av to Bergen Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
	North 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Bergen Av to West Side Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
	South 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Mallory Av to West Side Av 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Van Cleef St 	East 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Armstrong Av to dead end north of Wegman Pkwy 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Van Horne St 	East 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	The dead end Ash St 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Van Houten Av 	North 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Kennedy Blvd to the dead end 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Van Nostrand Av 	South 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Kennedy Blvd to Garfield Av 
	North 	Tu and F 		
	North 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	West Side Av to Kennedy Blvd 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Van Reipen Av 	South 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Kennedy Blvd to Summit Av 
	North 	Tu and F 		
	North 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Tonnele Av to the rear of Loews 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Van Reypen St 	West 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Sip Av to Highland Av 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Van Vorst St 	East 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Grand St to York St 
	West 	Tu and F 		
	East 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Grand St to Essex St 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Van Wagenen Av 	West 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Broadway (dead end) to Stuyvesant Av 
	East 	Tu and F 		
	East 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Saint Paul's Av to the north terminus 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Van Winkle Av 	North 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Huron Av to Kennedy Blvd 
	South 	Tu and F 		
	North 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Senate Pl to Kennedy Blvd 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Varick St 	West 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Columbus Dr to Bright St 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Vine St 	North 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Chestnut Av to dead end 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Virginia Av 	North 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Ocean Av to Bergen Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
	North 	M and Th 	10:00 pm to 12:00 pm 	Bergen Av to the dead end 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Virginia Ter 	East 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Entire length 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Vreeland Pl 	Both 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Fulton Av to the dead end 
Vreeland Ter 	South 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Entire length 
	North 	Tu and F 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	
Vroom St 	South 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Van Reypen St to Gray St 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Wade St 	South 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Kennedy Blvd to Ocean Av 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Waldo Av 	East 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Trenton St to PATH cut bridge 
	West 	Tu and F 		
	East 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	PATH cut bridge to Newark Av 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Wales Av 	West 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	The dead end off Broadway to Logan Av 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Wallis Av 	West 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Broadway to Logan Av 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Warner Av 	North 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Ocean Av to Kennedy Blvd 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Warren St 	East 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Second St to Columbus Dr 
	West 	Tu and F 		
	East 	M and Th 	6:00 am to 8:00 am 	Columbus Dr to Montgomery St 
	West 	Tu and F 		
	East 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Montgomery St to Grand St 
	West 	Tu and F 		
	West 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Grand St to the southern terminus 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Washburn St 	South 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Oakland Av to Palisade Avenue 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Washington St 	East 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Sussex St to Columbus Dr 
	West 	Tu and F 		
	East 	M 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Essex St to Sussex St 
	West 	Tu 		
Waverly St 	South 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Central Avenue to Palisade Avenue 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Wayne St 	North 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Cornelison Avenue to Marin Blvd 
	South 	Tu and F 		
	North 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Summit St to Cornelison Avenue 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Webster Avenue 	West 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Paterson Plank Rd to Prospect St 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Wegman Ct 	South 	M 	10:00 am to noon 	Garfield Av to dead end 
	North 	Tu 	10:00 am to noon 	
Wegman Pkwy 	South 	M—Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Bergen Av to Garfield Av 
	North 	Tu—F 	10:00 am to noon 	
Weldon St 	West 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Stuyvesant Avenue to DeKalb Avenue 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Western Avenue 	West 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Manhattan Avenue to Lincoln St 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Westervelt St 	South 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Cornelison Av to Grand St 
	North 	Tu and F 		
West Hamilton Pl 	East 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Eighth St to Ninth St 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Westminster Ln 	North 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Kennedy Blvd to Iorio Ct 
	South 	Tu and F 		
West Side Av 	East 	Tu and F 	7:30 am to 9:00 am 	Danforth Av to Culver Av 
	West 	M and Th 	9:00 am to 10:00 am 	Danforth Av to Culver Av 
	East 	M—Sat 	7:30 am to 9:00 am 	Culver Av to Montgomery St 
	West 	M—Sat 	9:00 am to 10:00 am 	Culver Av to Montgomery St 
	East 	Tu and F 	7:30 am to 9:00 am 	Montgomery St to Broadway 
	West 	M and Th 	9:00 am to 10:00 am 	Montgomery St to Broadway 
Westview Ct 	West 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Broadman Pkwy to Culver Av 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Whitman Av 	West 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	The cemetery to Sip Av 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Whiton St 	East 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	The railroad tracks to Ash St 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Wilkinson Av 	North 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Garfield Av to Bergen Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Williams Av 	North 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	West Side Av to dead end 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Winfield Av 	North 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Kennedy Blvd to Sayles St 
	South 	Tu and F 		
	North 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Kennedy Blvd to Old Bergen Rd 
	South 	Tu and F 		
	South 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	Princeton Av to Old Bergen Rd 
	North 	Tu and F 		
Wood Pl 	North 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Ogden Av to Palisade Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Woodland Av 	West 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Linden Av to Lembeck Av 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Woodlawn Av 	South 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Kennedy Blvd to Garfield Av 
	North 	Tu and F 		
	North 	M and Th 	3:00 pm to 5:00 pm 	West Side Av to Kennedy Blvd 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Woodward St 	West 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	The railroad tracks to Grand St 
	East 	Tu and F 		
Wright Av 	East 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Logan Av to Broadway 
	West 	Tu and F 		
Yale Av 	South 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	The dead end to West Side Av 
	North 	Tu and F 		
York St 	North 	M and Th 	8:00 am to 10:00 am 	Center St to Jersey Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
	North 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Jersey Av to Marin Blvd 
	South 	Tu and F 		
	North 	M and Th 	1:00 pm to 3:00 pm 	Marin Blvd to Hudson St 
	South 	Tu and F 		
Zabriskie St 	North 	M and Th 	10:00 am to noon 	Central Av to Western Av 
	South 	Tu and F 		
  
§ 332-32. - Solicitation of business on streets. 
No person shall stand on or in proximity to a street or other public way for the purpose of soliciting the watching or guarding of any vehicle while it is parked or about to be parked.  
§ 332-33. - Reservation of powers. 
Nothing in this Article shall be construed as prohibiting the city from providing for bus stops, taxicab stands and other matters of a similar nature, including the loading or unloading of trucks, vans or other commercial vehicles.  
ARTICLE IV - Emergency No Parking 
 
§ 332-34. - Designation of snow emergency no-parking areas. 
A.  Whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is such that it covers the street or highway, no vehicle shall be parked on either side of any of the streets or parts thereof as listed below. 
Designation of Snow Emergency No-Parking Areas 
Name of Street 	Limits 
Academy St 	Van Reypen St to Cornelison Av 
Arlington Av 	Entire length 
Astor Pl 	Summit Av to Park St 
Audrey Zapp Dr 	Entire length 
Audubon Av 	West Side Av to Bergen Av 
Avenue "C" 	Merritt St to Bayonne City line 
Baldwin Av 	Entire length 
Barrow St 	Grand St to Newark Av 
Beacon Av 	Baldwin Av to Palisade Av 
Bergen Av 	Entire length 
Booraem Av 	Entire length 
Bright St 	Florence St to Cornelison Av 
Broadway 	Tonnele Av to Truck Route 1 & 9 
Brunswick St 	Entire length 
Caven Point Av 	Garfield Av to Pacific Av 
Center St 	Entire length 
Central Av 	Entire length 
Clerk St 	Entire length 
Coles St 	Entire length 
Communipaw Av 	Entire length 
Congress St 	Summit Av to Paterson Plank Rd 
Cornelison Av 	Entire length 
Culver Av 	Mallory Av to West Side Av 
Danforth Av 	Entire length 
Duncan Av 	West Side Av to Truck Route 1 & 9 
Eighth St 	West Hamilton Pl to Jersey Av 
Erie St 	Entire length 
Exchange Pl 	Entire length 
Fairmount Av 	Monticello Av to Bergen Av 
Ferry St 	Central Av to Palisade Av 
Florence St 	Bright St to Montgomery St 
Fowler Av 	Danforth Av to Greenville Av 
Garfield Av 	Entire length 
Gates Av 	Garfield Av to Bergen Av 
Grand St 	Entire length 
Grove St 	Entire length 
Hoboken Av 	Summit Av to Route 139 
Hudson St 	York St to Exchange Pl 
Jersey Av 	Entire length 
Johnston Av 	Entire length 
Journal Square 	Entire length 
Long St 	Rose Av to Martin Luther King Dr 
Mallory Av 	Entire length 
Manhattan Av 	Tonnele Av to Central Av 
Manila Av 	Entire length 
Marin Blvd 	Entire length 
Martin Luther King Dr 	Entire length 
Merritt St 	Garfield Av to Avenue "C" 
Merseles St 	Entire length 
Mill Rd 	Baldwin Av to Montgomery St 
Monitor St 	Communipaw Av to Johnston Av 
Monmouth St 	Grand St to Tenth St 
Montgomery St 	Entire length 
Monticello Av 	Communipaw Av to Fairmount Av 
Neptune Av 	Old Bergen Rd to Garfield Av 
New York Av 	Entire length 
Newark Av 	James Av to Columbus Dr 
Ninth St 	West Hamilton Pl to Jersey Av 
Ocean Av 	Entire length 
Ogden Av 	Cuneo Pl to Congress St 
Old Bergen Rd 	Entire length 
Pacific Av 	Entire length 
Palisade Av 	Entire length 
Pamrapo Av 	Entire length 
Park St 	Astor Pl to Communipaw Av 
Pavonia Av 	Kennedy Blvd to Baldwin Av 
Princeton Av 	Entire length 
Randolph Av 	Entire length 
Romar Av 	Greenville Av to Seaview Av 
Rose Av 	Old Bergen Rd to Long St 
Seaview Av 	Romar Av to Old Bergen Rd 
Seventh St 	Grove St to Jersey Av 
Sip Av 	Entire length 
Sixteenth St 	Coles St to Marin Blvd 
Summit Av 	Entire length 
Tonnele Av 	Kennedy Blvd to Tonnele Circle 
Warren St 	Montgomery St to York St 
Washington Blvd 	Entire length 
Washington St 	Grand St to Montgomery St 
Webster Av 	Entire length 
Wegman Pkwy 	Martin Luther King Dr to Garfield Av 
West Hamilton Pl 	Entire length 
West Side Av 	Entire length 
York St 	Jersey Av to Hudson St 
 
B.  The above parking prohibitions shall remain in effect after the snow has ceased until the streets have been plowed sufficiently and to the extent that parking will not interfere with the normal flow of traffic.  
§ 332-35. - Posting of signs. 
A.  Upon the declaration of an emergency, there shall be no parking upon streets or parts of streets where temporary emergency no-parking signs are displayed. The Chief of Police, or in his absence the ranking police officer, is authorized to declare an emergency and to direct the posting of said emergency no-parking signs when weather conditions, accidents, fires or public celebrations dictate or require the avoidance of hazards or other conditions which interfere with the free flow of traffic. 
B.  The posting of "EMERGENCY NO PARKING" signs shall be deemed to be notice to the owner and/or operator of any parked motor vehicle.  
§ 332-36. - Removal of vehicles. 
Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this Article shall be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of traffic, and any police or parking enforcement officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle. The owner shall pay the reasonable costs of the removal and storage which may result from such removal before regaining possession of the vehicle.  
§ 332-37. - Effectiveness of Article. 
A.  The signs to be used as above set forth shall conform to the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD). 
B.  The effectiveness of this Article is contingent upon signs being erected as required by law.  
ARTICLE V - Buses 
 
§ 332-38. - Discharging and picking up passengers. 
A.  All operators of buses, when discharging or picking up passengers at a bus stop, shall cause the bus to be driven to the curb at the bus stop in such a fashion as not to impede or obstruct traffic. 
B.  Whenever there are any prospective passengers waiting at a bus stop, all operators of buses shall stop to pick up said passengers and shall not pass them by unless the bus is filled to legal capacity with passengers.  
§ 332-39. - Enforcement. 
A.  The provisions of this Article shall be enforced by the uniform members of the Department of Public Safety and inspectors of the Division of Commerce. [Amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] 
B.  The inspectors of the Division of Commerce are hereby granted the power and duty to enforce the provisions of this Article.  
ARTICLE VI - Parking Facilities Operated By Division of Parking Enforcement [Amended 11-12-2014 by Ord. No. ] 
 
§ 332-40. - Failure to pay prescribed parking fee. 
[Amended 11-12-2014 by Ord. No. 14-017 ] 
On city streets and properties owned, leased, operated or controlled by the Division of Parking Enforcement of the City of Jersey City, whether on-street or off-street, upon which the Division has installed parking meters requiring the payment of a fee for parking privileges on the days or hours specified on said meters, failure to pay the prescribed fee for such parking privileges shall be a violation of this Article, subject to the penalties as provided herein.  
§ 332-41. - Monthly rental for parking space; expired sticker on vehicle. 
[Amended 11-12-2014 by Ord. No. 14-017 ] 
On city streets and properties owned, leased, operated or controlled by the Division of Parking Enforcement, upon which the Division has rented parking space for a prescribed fee and has issued permits to persons authorized to park at such designated off-street or on-street parking spaces, parking within such parking spaces without a valid permit shall be a violation of this Article, subject to the penalties as provided herein.  
§ 332-42. - Form of summons for violation of Article; uniform traffic ticket. 
The summonses issued under this Article shall be in the form of the uniform traffic ticket or such other summonses as may be from time to time designated by the Director of the Division of Motor Vehicles of the State of New Jersey as the uniform traffic ticket.  
§ 332-43. - Towing away and booting of vehicles with outstanding summonses. 
A.  In addition to any other penalty provided by law, any motor vehicle parked in violation of this Article and Article III and any motor vehicle whose owner has failed to appear in response to three (3) or more parking tickets and has received failure to appear notices from the Jersey City Municipal Court may be: 
(1)  Booted; or 
(2)  Towed from its parking space and impounded by the Jersey City Parking Authority. 
B.  No motor vehicle which has been booted or towed away and impounded shall be released until all of the charges in connection with booting or towing and impounding have been paid. 
C.  The Jersey City Parking Authority is authorized to establish a schedule of charges for booting, impoundment and storage of motor vehicles parked in violation of this Article and Article III. Such schedule shall be filed with the office of the City Clerk.  
§ 332-44. - Towing away and booting of vehicles whose owners have failed to appear in response to traffic tickets.[2] 
A.  Notwithstanding any other penalty provided by law, or any previous authorization given to the Jersey City Division of Parking Enforcement, no motor vehicle parked in violation of Articles IV and V, or parked in violation of any other law, regulation, or ordinance, including but not limited to the City's zone parking ordinances, may be booted; or towed from its parking space and impounded by the City or the Division of Parking Enforcement unless the owner of the vehicle has three (3) or more outstanding parking tickets and has received failure to appear notices from the Jersey City Municipal Court on such parking tickets provided, however, that this limitation does not apply within Parking Zones Three and Eight and also provided, however, that any vehicle may be towed in an emergency, or when the vehicle is unreasonably impeding vehicular or pedestrian traffic, or when the vehicle is deemed a hazard to persons or property. 
[Amended 11-12-2014 by Ord. No. 14-017 ] 
B.  No motor vehicle which has been booted or towed away and impounded shall be released until all of the charges in connection with booting or towing and impoundment have been paid. 
C.  The Jersey City Parking Authority is authorized to establish a schedule of charges for booting, impoundment and storage of motor vehicles as described above. Such schedule shall be filed with the office of the City Clerk. 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— See N.J.S.A. 39:4-139.2 et seq. the Parking Offenses Adjudication Act. N.J.S.A. 39:4-139.5 provides for a default judgment against owners who fail to respond to traffic tickets after receiving a notice to appear. 
 
§ 332-45. - Signs on off-street parking facilities operated by Division of Parking Enforcement. 
[Amended 11-12-2014 by Ord. No. 14-017 ] 
Signs identifying this Article and the penalties for the violation thereof shall be placed upon all off-street parking facilities operated by the Division of Parking Enforcement that are subject to this Article.  
§ 332-46. - Enforcement. 
[Amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ; 11-12-2014 by Ord. No. 14-017 ] 
This Article shall be enforced by the Department of Public Safety and Parking Enforcement Officers of its Division of Parking Enforcement, who shall issue summonses for violations of this Article.  
ARTICLE VII - Metered Parking 
 
§ 332-47. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, which are not defined in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the New Jersey Statutes Annotated, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section for purposes of this Article: 
BOOT — A locking device affixed to a motor vehicle to prevent its movement. The terms "booting" and "booted" mean the act of attaching a boot. 
HOLIDAYS — As defined in 332-1.B. above. 
PARKING METER — Any mechanical device or meter not inconsistent with this Article placed or erected for the regulation of parking by authority of this Article. Each parking meter installed shall indicate by proper legend the legal parking time established by the city and, when operated, shall at all times indicate the balance of legal parking time and, at the expiration of such period, shall indicate illegal or overtime parking. 
PARKING METER SPACE — Any space within a parking meter zone, which is adjacent to a parking meter and which is duly designated for the parking of a single vehicle by lines painted or otherwise durably marked on the curb or on the surface of the street or lot adjacent to or adjoining the parking meters. 
PARKING METER ZONE — Any restricted on-street parking area or off-street parking lot upon which parking meters are installed and in operation. 
PARKING SPACE — Any space within an off-street or on-street nonmetered parking zone that is to be used for parking purposes.  
§ 332-48. - Designation of parking spaces. 
[Amended 5-26-2010 by Ord. No. 10-070; 11-9-2011 by Ord. No. 11-140; 11-22-11 by Ord. No. 11-143; 12-14-11 by Ord. No. 11-153; 2-8-2012 by Ord. No. 12-013; 5-9-2012 by Ord. No. 12-062 ; 1-9-2013 by Ord. No. 12-166 ; 11-12-2014 by Ord. No. 14-017 ; 11-24-2015 by Ord. No. 15-155 ; 1-27-2016 by Ord. No. 16-007 ; 4-27-16 by Ord. No. 16-063 ; 11-22-2016 by Ord. No. 16-180 ; 2-22-2017 by Ord. No. 17-016 ; 1-24-2019 by Ord. No. 19-006 ] 
The Division of Parking Enforcement is hereby directed and authorized to provide for the marking off of individual parking spaces in the parking meter zones designated and described below, said parking spaces to be designated by lines painted or marked on the curbing or surface of the street or lot. At each space so marked off, it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in such a way that said vehicle shall not be entirely within the limits of the space so designated. When a parking space in any parking meter zone is at right angles or diagonal to the curb, sidewalk or island, any vehicle parked in such a parking space shall be parked with the front of the vehicle facing such meter. 
A.  On-Street Parking Meter Zones. Parking or standing a vehicle in a parking meter space in the on-street parking meter zones described below shall be lawful during the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, excepting official State holidays, and only upon the deposit of such amount as is indicated for each specified period of time: 
Parking Meter Zones 
Name of Street 	Limits 
Academy St 	Tuers Av to Tonnele Av 
Baldwin Av 	Courthouse Pl to Newark Av 
Bergen Av 	Jewett Av to Sip Av 
Bleecker St 	Both sides: Central Av 75 feet west 
Central Av 	Booream Av to North St 
Central Av 	Newark Av to Pavonia Av 
Charles St 	Central Av 200 feet west 
Clifton Pl 	Fairmount Av to Baldwin Av 
Congress St 	Central Av 100 feet east 
Cook St 	Newark Av to Hoboken Av 
Cottage St 	Kennedy Blvd 200 feet west 
Ege Av 	West Side Av 200 feet west 
Enos Pl 	Entire length 
Fairmount Av 	Monticello Av to Boland St 
Franklin St 	Central Av to Cambridge Av 
Gautier Av 	West Side Av 200 feet west 
Glenwood Av 	Bergen Av 100 feet west 
Graham St 	Central Av 200 feet west 
Grand St 	Arlington Av to Johnston Av 
Griffith St 	Central Av 200 feet east and west 
Hoboken Av 	Summit Av to Palisade Av 
Hudson Street 	Both sides: Light Rail Crossing to Second Street 
Hutton St 	Central Av 200 feet west 
Jones St 	Sip Av to Newkirk St 
Journal Square 	Entire length 
Liberty Av 	East side; Newark Av to Van Winkle Av 
Lincoln St 	Central Av 200 feet west 
Lott St 	North side, from Central Av to west terminus 
Magnolia Av 	Tonnele Av to Summit Av 
Mercer St 	Tuers Av to Bergen Av 
Montgomery St 	Bergen Av to Boland St 
Montgomery St 	North side, from Kennedy Blvd to West Side Av 
Newark Av 	Chestnut Av to Tonnele Av 
Newkirk St 	Summit Av to Tuers Av 
North St 	Central Av 200 feet east and west 
Oakland Av 	Newark Av to Hoboken Av 
Palisade Av 	Griffith St to Ravine Av 
Paterson St 	Central Av 200 feet west 
Pavonia Av 	Baldwin Av to Summit Av 
Sherman Pl 	Central Av 200 feet west 
Sip Av 	Tonnele Av to Summit Av 
Smith St 	Entire length 
South St 	Central Av 200 feet east and west 
Storms Av 	Bergen Av to Monticello Av 
Summit Av 	East: Rock St to 444 feet south of Sip Av 
Summit Av 	East: Magnolia Av south 175 feet 
Summit Av 	East: Pavonia Av to 180 feet south of Newark Av 
Summit Av 	East: 180 feet north of Newark Av to 200 feet south of Route 139 
Summit Av 	West: 200 feet south of Route 139 to 180 feet north of Newark Av 
Summit Av 	West: Cottage St to Van Reipen Av 
Summit Av 	West: Pavonia Av to 118 feet south of Magnolia Av 
Thorne St 	Central Av 200 feet west 
Tonnele Av 	Sip Av to Kennedy Blvd 
Town Square Pl 	Ring Rd to Washington Blvd 
Tuers Av 	West side: Montgomery St to Mercer St 
Tuers Av 	East side: Montgomery St 250 feet north 
Union St 	West Side Av 200 feet east and west 
Van Reypen St 	Sip Av to Academy St 
Virginia Av 	West Side Av 200 feet west 
West Side Av 	Claremont Av to Newark Av 
West Side Av 	Stegman Pkwy to Audubon Av 
Williams Av 	West Side Av 100 feet west 
Zabriskie St 	Central Av 200 feet west 
 
A1.  On-Street Parking Meter Zones. Parking or standing a vehicle in a parking meter space in the on-street parking meter zones described below shall be lawful during the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, excepting official State holidays, and only upon the deposit of such amount as is indicated for each specified period of time: 
Parking Meter Zones 
Name of Street 	Limits 
Barrow St 	Columbus Dr to Newark Av 
Coles St 	Newark Av to Second St 
Columbus Dr 	Grove St to Barrow St 
Douglas and Arthur Skinner Memorial Dr (FKA: Jersey Av) 	West Side: Grand St South to the light rail tracks 
Eighteenth St 	South: 159 feet west of Jersey Av to Coles St 
First St 	Jersey Av. to Newark Av 
Grand St 	River St (private roadway) south side to Tidewater St (private roadway) south side 
Green St 	Montgomery St to First St 
Grove St 	Grand St to First St 
Jersey Av 	First St to Columbus Dr 
Montgomery St 	Hudson St to Warren St 
Montgomery St 	Monmouth St to Colgate St 
Morgan St 	North side: Greene St to Washington St 
Newark Av 	Jersey Ave to Brunswick St 
Second St 	Coles St to Newark Ave 
Seventeenth St 	North: 100 feet east of Coles St to Jersey Av 
Sussex St. 	South side: beginning 51 feet west of Marin Blvd and extending 60 feet west 
Sussex St. 	North side: beginning 56 feet west of Marin Blvd and extending 60 feet west 
Warren St 	Montgomery St to York St 
Washington St 	York St to Montgomery St 
York St 	Washington St to Greene St north side only 
 
B.  Off-Street Parking Lot Meter Zones. Parking or standing a vehicle in a parking meter space in the off-street parking lot meter zones described below shall be lawful during the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, excepting official State holidays, and only upon the deposit of such amount as is indicated for each specified period of time: 
Off-Street Parking Lot Meter Zones 
Lot# 	Location 
1 	Oakland/Washburn/Hoboken Avenue (leased from DOT) 
2 (a/k/a 28) 	Montgomery Street & Orchard Street (leased) 
3 (a/k/a 33) 	277 Central Avenue (Sherman Place) 
4 (a/k/a 39) 	522 West Side Avenue (between Clendenny Avenue & Union Street) 
5 (a/k/a 44) 	693 Newark Avenue & Cottage Street 
6 (a/k/a 49) 	328—348 Central Avenue (Burger King lot) 
9 (a/k/a 52) 	174 Newark Avenue 
12 (a/k/a 56) 	733—735 Newark Avenue (leased from DOT) 
13 (a/k/a 15) 	754 West Side Avenue (between Fairview and Fairmount Avenue) 
14 (a/k/a 3) 	352 Central Avenue 
15 (a/k/a 4) 	388 Central Avenue 
 
C.  Metered Parking Waiver. Upon a finding of public necessity, need or for a public purpose, the Municipal Council may adopt a resolution to allow free parking in any metered zone, on-street or off-street, in whole or in part, for a stipulated period of time. A copy of the resolution shall be immediately forwarded to the Police Chief and Police Director.  
§ 332-49. - Installation and Regulation of parking meters. 
A.  In said parking meter zones, the Division of Parking Enforcement shall cause parking meters to be installed upon the curb, sidewalk or area immediately adjacent to the parking spaces provided in this Article. No parking meters shall be installed in areas where parking is prohibited pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-138. The Division of Parking Enforcement shall be responsible for the regulation, control, operation, maintenance and use of such parking meters. Each device shall be so set as to display a signal showing legal parking upon the deposit of the appropriate coin, lawful money of the United States of America, for the period of time prescribed in this Article. Each device shall be so arranged that upon the expiration of the lawful time limit, it will indicate by a proper, visible signal that the lawful parking period has expired, and in such case the right of such vehicle to occupy such space shall cease, and the operator, owner, possessor or manager thereof shall be subject to the penalties hereinafter provided. [Amended 11-12-2014 by Ord. No. 14-017 ] 
B.  No parking meter shall be installed in any area in conflict with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 30:4-138 which prohibits vehicles to stand or park in certain locations.  
§ 332-50. - Operation of parking meters. 
A.  Except in a period of emergency determined by an officer of the Department of Public Safety, or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control sign or signal, when any vehicle shall be parked in any parking space alongside or next to which a parking meter is located, the operator of such vehicle shall, upon entering the said parking meter space, immediately deposit or cause to be deposited in said meter such proper coin of the United States of America as is required for such parking meter and as is designated by proper directions on the meter, and when required by the directions on the meter, the operator of such vehicle, after the deposit of the proper coin, shall also set in operation the timing mechanism on such meter in accordance with directions properly appearing thereon, and failure to deposit such proper coin and to set the timing mechanism in operation when so required shall constitute a violation of this Article. Upon the deposit of such coin (and the setting of the timing mechanism in operation when so required), the parking space may be lawfully occupied by such vehicle during the period of time which has been prescribed for the part of the street in which said parking space is located, provided that any person placing a vehicle in a parking meter space adjacent to a meter which indicates that unused time has been left in the meter by the previous occupant of the space shall not be required to deposit a coin so long as his occupancy of said space does not exceed the indicated unused parking time. If said vehicle shall remain parked in any such parking space beyond the parking time limit set for such parking space and if the meter shall indicate such illegal parking, then and in that event such vehicle shall be considered as parking overtime and beyond the period of legal parking time, and such parking shall be deemed a violation of this Article. [Amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] 
B.  When more than one (1) parking space is required within a parking meter zone to legally park a vehicle, the operator of such vehicle shall, upon entering the parking meter spaces, immediately deposit or cause to be deposited in each meter of spaces so occupied, a proper coin of the United States as required for such parking meters.  
§ 332-51. - Manner of parking. 
When a parking meter space is parallel with the adjacent curb or sidewalk, no person shall park or permit the parking of any vehicle in such parking space in any other position than with the foremost part of such vehicle nearest to the parking meter; when a parking meter space is diagonal to the curb or sidewalk, no person shall park or permit the parking of any vehicle in such parking space in any other position than with the foremost part of such vehicle nearest to the parking meter; when a parking meter shall have been installed at the head of and immediately adjacent to any parking space on a municipal off-street parking lot, no person shall park or permit the parking of any vehicle in such parking space in any other position than with the foremost part of such vehicle nearest to the parking meter; provided, however, that in municipal off-street parking lots, signs shall be erected indicating that head-on parking only is permitted. In any event, a vehicle shall be parked within the lines marked on the pavement measuring such parking space.  
§ 332-52. - Violations. 
[Amended 11-22-2016 by Ord. No. 16-180 ] 
It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this Article for any person to: 
A.  Cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in the name of or operated by such person to be parked overtime or beyond the period of legal parking time established for any parking meter zone as herein described, or to deposit in any parking meter any coin for the purpose of parking beyond the maximum legal parking time for the particular parking meter zone. 
B.  Permit any vehicle to remain or be placed in any parking space adjacent to any parking meter while said meter is displaying a signal indicating that the vehicle occupying such parking space has already been parked beyond the period prescribed for such parking space. 
C.  Park any vehicle across any line or marking of a parking meter space or in such position that the vehicle shall not be entirely within the area designated by such lines or markings. 
D.  Deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter installed under the provisions of this Article. 
E.  Deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any slug, device or metal substance or other substitute for lawful coins. 
F.  Park or permit the parking of any vehicle in any parking meter space where the meter does not register lawful parking. 
G.  Park any vehicle in any one (1) parking meter space at an on-street meter or in an off-street parking meter zone for a period of longer than the maximum time limit as specified on the adjacent meter time dial, during the hours from 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. 
[Amended 1-27-2016 by Ord. No. 16-007 ] 
H.  Cause, allow, suffer or permit any vehicle that shall have been parked in a parking meter space in an off-street parking meter zone or in a parking space in an off-street nonmetered parking zone, during the hours from 6:00 p.m. to 9:00 a.m., prevailing time, to remain so parked beyond the hour of 9:00 a.m. 
I.  Park any vehicle in any parking space in an off-street nonmetered parking zone for a period longer than eight (8) hours, during the hours from 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., prevailing time. 
J.  Park a vehicle other than having the front of the vehicle face a meter in any parking meter zone where the parking meter space is at right angles or diagonal to a curb, sidewalk or island. 
K.  Operate a vehicle on any driveway of an off-street parking zone in a manner contrary to the restrictions as set forth for such driveway. 
L.  Park a commercial vehicle with a combined weight, truck and load, in excess of four thousand (4,000) pounds, in any of the off-street parking zones (metered or nonmetered). 
M.  Park a truck, tractor, trailer or a vehicle moved by human or animal power in any of the off-street parking zones (metered or nonmetered). 
N.  Park a vehicle not equipped with pneumatic tires properly inflated in any of the off-street parking zones (metered or nonmetered). 
O.  Wash, grease or make any repairs, except those of any emergency nature, to any vehicle, in any space in any of the off-street parking zones (metered or non-metered). 
P.  Park any vehicle in any one (1) parking meter space on the west side of Douglas and Arthur Skinner Memorial Dr (FKA: Jersey Av) from 3:00 p.m. to 8:00 p.m., Monday through Friday and 9:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., Saturday, except holidays. [Added 5-9-2012 by Ord. No. 12-062 ]  
§ 332-53. - Reports of violations; citations. 
A.  It shall be the duty of the Police and Division of Parking Enforcement Officers, acting in accordance with instructions issued by the Chief of Police and Director of the Division of Parking Enforcement, to report: [Amended 11-12-2014 by Ord. No. 14-017 ] 
(1)  The number of each parking meter which indicates that the vehicle occupying the parking space adjacent to such parking meter is or has been parked in violation of any of the provisions of this Article. 
(2)  The state license number of such vehicle. 
(3)  That such vehicle is parked in violation of any of the provisions of this Article. 
(4)  Any other facts, a knowledge of which is necessary to a thorough understanding of the circumstances attending such violation. 
B.  Each such Police and Parking Enforcement Officer shall also attach to such vehicle a notice to the owner thereof that such vehicle has been parked in violation of a provision of this Article, and instructing such owner to report to the Municipal Court with regard to such violation. The report and notice referred to in this Section shall bear corresponding serial numbers and all reports issued hereunder shall be accounted for by the respective police officers to the Municipal Court, and said Municipal Court shall render written reports thereof to the Municipal Council of Jersey City once a month or as often as the Board shall require same.  
§ 332-54. - Impounding of overtime vehicles. 
[Amended 11-12-2014 by Ord. No. 14-017 ] 
Any vehicle left parked for a period exceeding two hours succeeding expiration of the maximum parking time indicated during the hours of operation specified in the space in which the vehicle is parked shall be towed, under the direction of the Division of Parking Enforcement to the contracted garage or any other place designated by the Division of Parking Enforcement for impoundment, subject to redemption by the owner upon payment of the reasonable cost of towing and a storage charge for each day or portion thereof during which it remains in said garage or other place.  
§ 332-55. - Purpose of meter deposits. 
The coins required to be deposited in parking meters as provided herein are hereby levied and assessed as fees to provide for the proper regulation and control of traffic upon the public streets and also the cost of supervising and regulating the parking of vehicles in the parking meter zones created thereby, and to cover the cost of the purchase, supervision, protection, inspection, installation, operation, maintenance, control and use of the parking meters described herein.  
§ 332-56. - Collection of coins from meters; disposition thereof. 
[Amended 11-12-2014 by Ord. No. 14-017 ] 
It shall be the duty of the Director of the Division of Parking Enforcement to designate some proper person or persons to make regular collections of the moneys deposited in said meters, and it shall be the duty of such person or persons so designated to remove from the parking meters the locked containers therein containing the coins so deposited in said meters and to deliver such locked containers to the bank depository, who shall unlock them and count the funds contained in such containers and deposit such funds in the usual manner provided by law.  
§ 332-57. - On-street permit parking zones. 
[Amended 4-28-2010 by Ord. No. 10-058; 11-9-2011 by Ord. No. 11-140; 10-23-2013 by Ord. No. 13-114 ; 11-24-2015 by Ord. No. 15-163 ] 
The following public streets are established as on-street permit parking zones: 
The monthly permit parking zone will be in effect from 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, except holidays, for the following streets. 
On-Street Permit Parking Zones 
Name of Street 	Limits 
Columbus Dr 	From Marin Blvd to Hudson St 
Hoboken Av 	South side: beginning at a point 73 feet east of Oakland Av and extending to Baldwin Av 
Hoboken Av 	North side: beginning at a point 246 feet east of Oakland Av and extending to Baldwin Av 
Morgan St 	South side: Washington St to Greene St 
Steuben St 	Entire length 
Washington St 	From Montgomery St to Steuben St 
 
The monthly permit parking zone will be in effect from 7:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, except holidays, for the following street [Added 4-28-2010 by Ord. No. 10-058; amended 5-9-2012 by Ord. No. 12-062 ] : 
Name of Street 	Limits 
Douglas and Arthur Skinner Memorial Dr (FKA Jersey Av) 	From Grand St south to the light rail tracks 
 
Pursuant to Chapter 175 (Food Handling Establishments) Article II (Itinerant Eating and Drinking Establishments), Section 175-8 (Itinerant Establishments), Section 175-9.3 (Operation Requirements for all Devices (Push Carts) and Trucks)(C), and Section 175-15 (Parking Permit Exemption—Itinerant Food Trucks)(C), the permit parking zone issued for use by itinerant vendor trucks will be in effect from 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. for the following streets: 
Name of Street 	Limits 
Grand St (both sides) 	Hudson St to the Waterfront 
Sussex St (both sides) 	Hudson St to the Waterfront 
York St (both sides) 	Hudson St to the Waterfront 
  
ARTICLE VIII - Permit Parking 
 
§ 332-58. - Parking restrictions in residential zones. 
[Amended 1-12-2011 by 10-169; 3-9-2011 by 11-026; 6-15-2011 by Ord. No. 11-067; 1-11-2012 by Ord. No. 11-159; 4-25-2012 by Ord. No. 12-053 ; 11-26-2013 by Ord. No. 13-105 ; 10-23-2013 by Ord. No. 13-114 ; 5-27-2015 by Ord. No. 15-074 ; 11-24-2015 by Ord. No. 15-156 ; 2-24-2016 by Ord. No. 16-037 ; 4-27-2016 by Ord. No. 16-063 ; 6-28-2017 by Ord. No. 17-079 ; 7-19-2017 by Ord. No. 17-091 ; 7-19-2017 by Ord. No. 17-092 ; 9-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-114 ; 10-11-2017 by Ord. No. 17-135 ; 9-26-2018 by Ord. No. 18-107 ; 1-24-2019 by Ord. No. 19-006 ] 
A.  No person shall park a vehicle in excess of three (3) hours; between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, except public holidays, without a valid permit upon any of the streets or parts of streets as described below. 
Parking Zone 1 
Name of Street 	Limits 
Barrow St 	Between Grand St and Newark Av 
Bright St 	North side; between Monmouth St and Jersey Av 
	Both sides; between Jersey Av and Grove St 
Columbus Dr 	Between Grove St and Brunswick St 
Grand St. 	Between Jersey Av and Marin Blvd 
Grove St 	Between Grand St and Columbus Dr 
Jersey Av 	Between Grand St and Columbus Dr 
Marin Blvd 	Between Grand St and Columbus Dr 
Maxwell St 	Between Jersey Av and Coles St 
Mercer St 	Between Marin Blvd and Monmouth St 
Monmouth St 	Between Bright St and Columbus Dr 
Montgomery St 	Between Monmouth St and Marin Blvd 
Wayne St 	Between Marin Blvd and Varick St 
York St 	Between Marin Blvd and Monmouth St 
Varick St 	Between Bright St and Columbus Dr 
 
  
Parking Zone 2 
Name of Street 	Limits 
Academy St 	Between Baldwin Av and Van Reypen St 
Alan Ter 	Entire length 
Baldwin Av 	Between Montgomery St and State Highway 139 
Bergen Av 	Between Mercer St and Sip Av 
Bevan St 	St. Paul's Av to State Highway 139 
Berkeley Pl 	Between Liberty Av and Tonnele Av 
Bond St 	Entire length 
Broadway 	Between Tonnele Av and Route 1 & 9 
Bryan Pl 	Entire length 
Bryant Av 	Entire length 
Central Av 	Between Pavonia Av and State Highway 139 
Chestnut Av 	Entire length 
Clifton Pl 	Between Fairmount Av and Baldwin Av 
Cook St 	Entire length 
Corbin Av 	Entire length 
Cottage St 	Entire length 
Court House Pl 	Entire length 
Crawford Pl 	Entire length 
Cubberly Pl 	Entire length 
Dales Av 	Entire length 
DeKalb Av 	Entire length 
Dick St 	Entire length 
East St 	Entire length 
Elizabeth St 	Entire length 
Emerson Av 	Entire length 
Enos Pl 	Entire length 
Field Av 	Entire length 
Fox Pl 	Entire length 
Freeman Av 	Entire length 
Garrison Av 	Between Tonnele Av and DeKalb Av 
Giles Av 	Entire length 
Glenwood Av 	Between Bergen Av and Kennedy Blvd 
Gray St 	Entire length 
Hawthorne Av 	Entire length 
Henry St 	Entire length 
Herbert Pl 	Entire length 
High St 	Entire length 
Highland Av 	Between West Side Av and Bergen Av 
Hoboken Av 	Between Palisade Av and Central Av 
Hoboken Av 	Between Summit Av and State Highway 139 
Holmes Av 	Entire length 
Homestead Pl 	Entire length 
Kennedy Blvd 	Between Glenwood Av and State Highway 139 
Jones Pl 	Entire length 
Jones St 	Entire length 
Jordan Av 	Between Mercer St and Vroom St 
Liberty Av 	Between State Highway 139 and Newark Av 
Logan Av 	Entire length 
Lott St 	Entire length 
Magnolia Av 	Between Summit Av and Waldo Av 
Magnolia Av 	Between Tonnele Av and Journal Square Concourse 
Maiden Ln 	Entire length 
Marion Pl 	Entire length 
Mead St 	Entire length 
Mercer St 	Between Mill Rd and Bergen Av 
Newark Av 	Between Tonnele Av and Waldo Av 
Newkirk St 	Entire length 
Oakland Av 	Between Newark Av and Hoboken Av 
Orchard St 	Between Monticello Av and Crawford St 
Pavonia Av 	Between Giles Av and Newark Av 
Rock St 	Entire length 
Romaine Av 	Entire length 
Sip Av 	Between Summit Av and Route 1 & 9 
Smith St 	Entire length 
St. Paul's Av 	Between Kennedy Blvd and Tonnele Av 
Skillman Av 	Between State Highway 139 and Van Winkle Av 
Stuyvesant Av 	Between Westside Av and Van Reypen St 
Summit Av 	Between Baldwin Av and State Highway 139 
Tonnele Av 	Between Van Reypen St and St. Paul's Av 
Trenton St 	Entire length 
Tuers Av 	Between Mercer St and Newkirk St 
Van Reipen Av 	Entire length 
Van Reypen St 	Entire length 
Van Wagenen Av 	Path R.R. Tracks to Stuyvesant Av 
Van Winkle Av 	Between Kennedy Blvd and Senate Pl 
Vine St 	Entire length 
Vroom St 	Between Van Reypen St and Gray St 
Waldo Av 	Entire length 
Wales Av 	Entire length 
Wallis Av 	Entire length 
Washburn St 	Entire length 
Wayne St 	Between Mill Rd and Summit Av 
Weldon St 	Entire length 
West St 	Entire length 
West Side Av 	Between Glenwood Av and Broadway 
Whitman Av 	Entire length 
Wright Av 	Entire length 
 
  
Parking Zone 3 Exception 
Name of Street 	Limits 
Canal St 	Entire length; Grove St to Jersey Av 
Dudley Street 	Between Washington St and Warren St 
Grand St 	From Marin Blvd to Greene Street 
Greene St 	From Morris Canal to Sussex St 
Morris St 	From Greene St to Van Vorst St 
Sussex St 	From Hudson St to westerly dead-end 
Van Vorst St 	From Dudley St to York St 
Warren St 	From southern terminus and York St 
Washington St 	From Dudley St to York St 
York St 	South side: From Marin Blvd to Hudson St 
 
  
Parking Zone 3 
No person shall park a vehicle in excess of three (3) hours, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 Monday through Friday, except public holidays, without a valid permit upon any of the streets or parts of streets as described below. 
Name of Street 	Limits 
Essex St 	From the eastern terminus to Van Vorst St 
 
  
Parking Zone 4 
Name of Street 	Limits 
Bay St 	From Greene St to Marin Blvd 
First St 	Marin Blvd to Washington St 
Greene St 	From York St to Second St 
Hudson St 	Entire length 
Marin Blvd 	From Columbus Dr to Second St 
Montgomery St 	From Exchange Pl to Marin Blvd 
Morgan St 	From Greene St to Marin Blvd 
Pearl St 	Entire length 
Provost St 	Entire length 
Second St 	From the Eastern Terminus to Marin Blvd 
Steuben St (north side only) 	From Marin Blvd to Warren St 
Warren St 	From York St to Second St 
Washington St 	From York St to Second St 
York St 	North side: From Hudson St to Marin Blvd 
 
  
Parking Zone 5 
Name of Street 	Limits 
Bay St 	Between Marin Blvd and Newark Av 
Coles St 	Between Sixth St and Columbus Dr 
Erie St 	Between Newark Av and Sixth St 
Fifth St 	Between Coles St and Manila Av 
First St 	Between Marin Blvd and Coles St 
Fourth St 	Between Manila Av and Coles St 
Grove St 	Between Columbus Dr and Sixth St 
Jersey Av 	Between Columbus Dr and Sixth St 
Lauren Ct 	Entire length 
Manila Av 	Between Sixth St and Columbus Dr 
Morgan St 	Between Grove St and Marin Blvd 
Newark Ave 	Between Grove St and Coles St 
Saddlewood Ct 	Entire length 
Second St 	Between Marin Blvd and Coles St 
Third St 	Between Coles St and Manila Av 
 
  
Parking Zone 6 
Name of Street 	Limits 
Brunswick St 	Between Tenth St and Sixth St 
Coles St 	Between Sixth St and Twelfth St 
Division St 	Between Newark Av and Eighth St 
Eighth St 	Between the western terminus and Marin Blvd 
Erie St 	Between Sixth St and Twelfth St 
Jersey Av 	Between Sixth St and Tenth St 
McWilliams Pl 	Entire length 
Manila Av 	Between Boyle Plaza and Sixth St 
Monmouth St 	Between Sixth St and Ninth St 
Monmouth St 	East side; Ninth St to Tenth St 
Monmouth St 	Between Tenth St and Twelfth St 
Ninth St 	Between the western terminus and Brunswick St 
Ninth 	South side; Brunswick St to Monmouth St 
Ninth 	Between western terminus and Marin Blvd 
Pavonia Av 	Between Brunswick St and Manila Av 
Seventh St 	Between the western terminus and Manila Av 
Sixth St 	Between Newark Av and Marin Blvd 
Tenth St 	Between Marin Blvd and Brunswick St 
West Hamilton Pl 	Entire length 
 
  
Parking Zone 7 
Name of Street 	Limits 
Erie St 	Between Twelfth St and Hoboken City Line 
Fifteenth St 	Between Marin Blvd and Erie St 
Grove St 	Between Hoboken City Line and Boyle Plaza 
Jersey Av 	Between Twelfth St and Hoboken City Line 
Manila Av 	Between Boyle Plaza and Sixth St 
Newport Pkwy 	Between River Dr South and Washington Blvd 
Sixteenth St 	Between Marin Blvd and Jersey Av 
River Dr South 	Entire length 
 
  
Border Streets 
B.  No person shall park a vehicle in excess of three (3) hours, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, except public holidays, without a valid permit upon any of the streets or parts of streets as described below. 
Border Streets 	Limits 	Zones 
Coles Street 	Between Columbus Dr and Sixth Street 	Zones 5 and 17 
Sixth street 	Between Newark Ave and Marin Blvd 	Zone 5 and 6 
Columbus Dr 	Between Jersey Ave and Brunswick St 	Zone 17 and 1 
Marin Blvd 	Between Columbus Dr and Second Street 	Zones 5 and 4 
York St 	From Marin Blvd to Washington St 	Zone 3 and 4 
 
The above streets are designated border streets because they are located on a block that falls at the edge of two zones. On the streets between the limits above, on either side of the road, any person can park their car if they have one of the two zone permits allowed. Street-sweeping and hours of enforcement still apply. 
  
C.  The parking restriction will be in effect for the following streets, Monday through Friday, 6:00 a.m. to Midnight and 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. on Saturday: 
Parking Zone 10 
Name of Street 	Limits 
Bayside Ter 	Entire length 
Freedom Pl 	Entire length 
Garfield Av 	East side; Armstrong Av to Freedom Pl 
Richard St 	Entire length 
 
C.1.   No person shall park a vehicle in excess of three (3) hours, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, except public holidays, without a valid permit upon any of the streets or parts of streets as described below: 
Parking Zone 15 
Name of Street 	Limits 
Grove St 	Between Morris Blvd and Sussex St 
Marin Blvd 	Between Southern Terminus and Grand St 
Morris Blvd 	Between Marin Blvd and Grove St 
St. Peter's St 	Between Morris Blvd and Sussex St 
Sussex St 	Between Marin Blvd and Grove St 
 
Parking Zone 17 
No person shall park a vehicle in excess of three hours, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, except public holidays without a valid permit upon any of the streets or parts of streets as described below. 
Name of Street 	Limits 
Brunswick St 	Between Sixth St and Columbus Dr 
Coles St 	West side: Between Columbus Dr and Sixth St 
Colgate St 	Between First St and Third St 
Fifth Street 	Between Newark Av and Coles St 
First St 	Between Merseles St and Coles St 
Fourth St 	Between Merseles St and Coles St 
Merseles St 	Between Newark Av and First St 
Monmouth St 	Between Columbus Dr and Sixth St 
Newark Av 	Between Division St and Coles St 
Second St 	Between Merseles and Coles St 
Third St 	Between Merseles and Coles St 
 
Editor's note— Subsection D of Ord. No. 19-006 , which added Zone 17, stipulates: "This ordinance [ 19-006 ] shall take effect within four (4) months and in the manner as provided by law, with the exception of any Zone 1 permit holders who are now in Zone 17. Zone 1 Permits will be allowed in Zone 17 for a period of twelve (12) months from effective date of this ordinance." 
Parking Zone 18 
No person shall park a vehicle in excess of three (3) hours, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, except public holidays, without a valid permit upon any of the streets or parts of streets as described below. 
Name of Street 	Limits 
Erie St 	Between Fourteenth and Sixteenth St 
Fifteenth St 	Between Jersey Ave to Marin Blvd 
Jersey Av 	Between Fourteenth and Sixteenth St 
Sixteenth St 	Between Marin Blvd and Jersey Av 
 
C.2.   No person shall park a vehicle in excess of four hours within Parking Zone 16, Monday through Saturday, except public holidays, without a valid permit upon any of the streets or parts of the streets as described below. 
Parking Zone 16 
Name of Street 	Limits 
All streets in the JC Heights 	State Highway 139 to Paterson Plank Rd/Secaucus Rd 
	Western side of Paterson Plank Rd to Eastern side of Tonnele Av 
 
Residents within Parking Zone 16 will be eligible for a "Zone 16-1" parking permit that will allow them to park anywhere within Parking Zone 16, 24 hours a day, Monday through Saturday, except Sundays and holidays. 
Any person that demonstrates that they are currently working for any employer located within Parking Zone 16 will be eligible to purchase a "Zone 16-2" permit every six months, that will allow them to park anywhere within Parking Zone 16, 24 hours a day, Monday through Saturday, except Sundays and holidays. 
[Added 4-12-2017 by Ord. No. 17-033 ; amended 9-12-2018 by Ord. No. 18-099 ] 
D.  The Director of the Division of Parking Enforcement is hereby authorized to issue a parking permit upon written application therefor. Each such permit shall be designated by the Director or his or her designee to state or reflect thereon the particular residential permit parking zone as well as the license number of the motor vehicle for which it is issued. No more than one (1) parking permit shall be issued to each motor vehicle for which application is made. The Director is authorized to issue such rules and regulations not inconsistent with this chapter governing the manner in which persons shall qualify for permits. 
[Amended 11-12-2014 by Ord. No. 14-017 ; 5-27-2015 by Ord. No. 15-063 ] 
E.  Parking permits shall be issued for each motor vehicle(s) only upon application by the following persons: 
[Amended 5-27-2015 by Ord. No. 15-063 ; 1-25-2017 by Ord. No. 17-008 ] 
(1)  Residential Parking Permit or New Resident Temporary Parking Permit. A legal resident of the residential permit parking zone who (a) has a motor vehicle registered in his/her name or proof that a government or corporate vehicle is available for his/her exclusive use and under his/her exclusive control; and (b) owns or leases a property for which no off-street parking is available to residents, whether free of charge or for a separate fee or rent. Proof of residency (deed or lease) is required. 
(2)  Non-Residential Parking Permit. A person who owns or leases commercial property and is actively engaged in a business located within a residential permit parking area or is an employee thereof (current pay stubs must be submitted for proof of employment) AND (b) works in a property in which no off-street parking is available to residents, whether the off-street parking is provided free of charge or is only offered for a separate fee or rent. However, no more than one (1) parking permit may be issued for each employee for a motor vehicle registered to or under the control of such a person. 
(3)  Non-Residential Student Parking Permit. A person who is a current full-time student of an educational institution except a college that is located in a residential parking permit zone. Proof of full-time student registration is required. 
(4)  Temporary Parking Permits: 
Temporary Work Permit (ninety-day) - Issued to temporary residents who reside within a zone for up to ninety (90) days on work assignments. Proof of current employment and temporary residence is required. One ninety-day extension is permitted for a maximum of six (6) months. 
Temporary Residential Permit (fourteen-day) - Issued to new residents who are awaiting receipt of a driver's license and registration at their Jersey City address. Proof of residency (deed or lease) and proof of request for a change of address to New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission is required. 
Home Healthcare Permit (ninety-day) - Issued to visiting nurses, home health aides, family members during the hours they are in fact providing health services to a resident of the zone. 
(5)  Contractor Parking Permit. 
(i)  Six (6) Months - Issued to contractors for the days and hours they are actually performing extensive construction on existing residential structures or new construction of a one- or two-family residential home (not high-rise units). 
(ii)  Daily Permit - Issued to contractors during per diem repair work on a residential home(s), i.e., plumbing work/electrical work that will require them to be parked in the zone for the day. 
(6)  Visitors Parking Permit. 
Daily - Issued to a person visiting a residence within a zone who will be parked in excess of the permitted hours. Only homeowners can purchase visitor parking permits. Permits may not be sold, exchanged or purchased except directly from the City Division of Parking Enforcement. Permits are valid only for the month and days specified thereon and shall indicate the make, model and license plate number of the vehicle. 
(7)  Transfer Permit. Issued to residents who have changed their temporary information to permanent, or who move from one zone to another. Maximum period of fourteen (14) days. 
F.  Subsection (E)(1)(b) shall not apply to any resident, (a) who is 65 years of age or older, or (b) who held a permit before the effective date of the ordinance imposing the (E)(1)(b) restriction; (c) of property that is restricted to occupancy by low or moderate income persons within the meaning of the New Jersey Fair Housing Act, N.J.S.A. 55:27D-301 et seq.; or (d) who resides in a property classified as R-2 under the City's land use regulations. 
[Amended 5-27-2015 by Ord. No. 15-063 ] 
G.  To assure that both prospective residential tenants and purchasers of property, including condominiums, are aware of the residential parking permit conditions imposed hereunder, every landlord and every seller shall, at least ten (10) days before the date a lease is executed or a deed is conveyed, provide the prospective tenant or prospective purchaser with a copy of Section 332-58. Every landlord or tenant shall file with the Director of the Division of Parking Enforcement an acknowledgement of the receipt of Section 332-58, signed by the prospective tenant or purchaser, no later than thirty (30) days after execution. The acknowledgement shall be in a form to be provided by the Division of Parking Enforcement and posted on the City's website. 
[Amended 11-12-2014 by Ord. No. 14-017 ; 5-27-2015 by Ord. No. 15-063 ] 
H.  Proof required to establish residency, ownership, employment, full-time student status or any other permit term or condition shall be within the sound discretion of the Director. 
I.  The Division of Parking Enforcement shall maintain a current record of all properties with 30 or more dwelling units which make off-street parking available to residents whether as part of the rental or service charge or for an optional fee. The Tax Assessor and all departments of the City which maintain relevant records shall cooperate to assure that the record of available off-street parking maintained by the Division of Parking Enforcement remains current. 
[Amended 11-12-2014 by Ord. No. 14-017 ] 
J.  Any person who obtains a parking permit in violation of Section 332-58 shall, in addition to cancellation of the permit, be liable for the penalties prescribed by Section 1-25. 
K.  Any owner, landlord or seller of real property who fails to comply with Section 332-58G shall be liable for the penalties prescribed by Section 1-25. 
L.  No permit shall be issued to any person who has failed to pay any City of Jersey City municipal parking fines until such fines, including any penalties thereon, are paid in full.  
§ 332-58.1. - Parking restrictions in municipal lots. 
[Added 9-9-2015 by Ord. No. 15-109 ] 
A.  No person shall park a vehicle in a municipal lot without a valid parking permit. 
B.  There may be two (2) types of parking permits allowed in a municipal lot: 
1.  [NP] - Nighttime parking only (7:00 p.m.—7:00 a.m.); 
2.  [24/7] - All day/all night parking (24 hours). 
PARKING PERMITS FOR MUNICIPAL LOTS 
LOT # 	LOCATION 	METERED 	PERMITS 
1 	Oakland/Washburn/Hoboken Avenue (leased from DOT) 	Yes 	NP, 24/7 
2 (a/k/a 28) 	Montgomery Street & Orchard Street (leased) 	Yes 	24/7 
3 (a/k/a 33) 	277 Central Avenue (Sherman Place) 	Yes 	24/7 
4 (a/k/a 39) 	522 West Side Avenue (Between Clendenny Avenue & Union Street) 	Yes 	NP 
5 (a/k/a 44) 	693 Newark Avenue & Cottage Street 	Yes 	24/7 
6 (a/k/a 49) 	328-348 Central Avenue (Burger King Lot) 	Yes 	NP, 24/7 
7 (a/k/a 50) 	Fairview & Bergen Avenue 	No 	24/7 
8 (a/k/a 51) 	404 2nd Street 	No 	24/7 
9 (a/k/a 52) 	174 Newark Avenue 	Yes 	24/7 
10 (a/k/a 53) 	477-79 Central Avenue & Congress 	No 	24/7 
11 (a/k/a 54) 	Boland Street/Fairmount Avenue 	No 	24/7 
12 (a/k/a 56) 	733-735 Newark Avenue (leased from DOT) 	Yes 	24/7 
13 (a/k/a 15) 	754 West Side Avenue (between Fairview and Fairmount Avenue) 	Yes 	NP 
14 (a/k/a 3) 	352 Central Avenue 	Yes 	NP 
15 (a/k/a 4) 	388 Central Avenue 	Yes 	NP 
16 (a/k/a 12) 	Hoboken Ave. & Cook Street (LEASED) 	No 	No 
 
C.  To the extent applicable, the regulations set forth in Section 332-58 (Parking Restrictions in Residential Zones) shall also apply to Parking Permits for Municipal Lots.  
§ 332-59. - Display of permits. 
[Amended 11-12-2014 by Ord. No. 14-017 ] 
The permit as issued by the Division of Parking Enforcement shall be placed unobstructed on the rear driver's side of the subject vehicle, e.g., driver's side rear window or driver's side rear bumper.  
§ 332-60. - Permit parking exemptions. 
A.  A resident motor vehicle, employee vehicle or transient motor vehicle on which is displayed a valid parking permit as provided for herein shall be permitted to stand or be parked in the residential permit parking zone for which the permit has been issued without being limited by time restrictions or area prohibitions established pursuant to this section. Said resident motor vehicle, employee vehicle or transient motor vehicle shall not be exempt from parking restrictions or prohibitions established pursuant to authority other than this section. All other motor vehicles other than vehicles where the operator or the passenger being transported by said vehicle is physically disabled and the vehicle displays a license issued under provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-205, parked within a residential permit parking zone shall be subject to the time restrictions or area prohibitions adopted in this section. 
B.  A resident parking permit shall not guarantee or reserve to the holder thereof an on-street parking space within the designated residential permit parking zone.  
§ 332-61. - Temporary residential parking permits for fire stations. 
[Amended 11-12-2014 by Ord. No. 14-017 ] 
Upon the request of the Fire Chief, the Director of the Division of Parking Enforcement (hereinafter "Director") or his or her designee shall issue to the officer in charge of a fire station within a residential permit parking zone, not more the five (5) temporary parking permits for the use of members transferred to the unit on an emergency basis. The Fire Chief may issue rules and regulations on the use of said temporary permits not inconsistent with this Article.  
§ 332-62. - Application for and duration of permit. 
[Amended 11-12-2014 by Ord. No. 14-017 ] 
Each parking permit issued by the Director of the Division of Parking Enforcement (hereinafter "Director") or his/her designee shall be valid for not more than one (1) year. Permits shall be renewed annually on a date to be determined by the Director. Each application or reapplication for a parking permit shall contain information sufficient to identify the applicant, his residence address or address of real property owned or leased within a residential permit parking and the license number of the motor vehicle for which application is made and such other information that may be deemed relevant by the Director.  
§ 332-63. - Permit fees. 
The fee for a residential parking permit, temporary residential parking permit and transfer charge shall be as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges.  
§ 332-64. - Criteria for determination of residential permit parking areas. 
A.  A residential area shall be deemed eligible for consideration as a residential permit parking zone if, based on surveys and studies prepared by or at the direction of the Municipal Engineer or the Director of the Division of Parking Enforcement (hereinafter "Director"), objective criteria establish that the residential area is impacted by commuter vehicles for any extended period. [Amended 11-12-2014 by Ord. No. 14-017 ] 
B.  In determining whether a residential area is eligible for designation as a residential permit parking zone, the factors to be considered shall include but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  The extent of the desire and need of the residents for residential permit parking and their willingness to bear the administrative costs in connection therewith. 
(2)  Ninety (90) percent of the legal on-street parking spaces are occupied by motor vehicles during the period proposed for parking restriction. 
(3)  Twenty (20) percent of the vehicles parking in the area during the period proposed for parking restrictions are commuter vehicles rather than resident vehicles. 
(4)  The extent to which motor vehicles registered to persons residing in the residential area cannot be accommodated by the number of available off-street parking spaces.  
§ 332-65. - Revocation of residential parking permits. 
[Amended 11-12-2014 by Ord. No. 14-017 ] 
The Director of the Division of Parking Enforcement is authorized to revoke the residential parking permit of any person found to be in violation of this Article and, upon written notification thereof, said person shall surrender such permit to the Director of the Division of Parking Enforcement or his designee. Failure when so requested to surrender said permit shall constitute a violation of this Article.  
§ 332-66. - On-street resident only permit parking zones. 
[Amended 6-15-2011 by Ord. No. 11-066; 12-19-2012 by Ord. No. 12-156 ; 3-25-2015 by Ord. No. 15-036 ] 
A.  The Division of Parking Enforcement is hereby authorized to issue one permit per year per vehicle to a bona fide resident or employee of a business located on the streets described below. [Amended 11-12-2014 by Ord. No. 14-017 ] 
B.  Proof of residency of within said on-street resident only permit parking zones shall be required prior to the issuance of a resident only permit parking permit. 
C.  Said permit shall be valid only where authorized On-Street parking is available and within the on-street resident only parking zone designated thereon; all other parking regulations prevailing. 
D.  No person shall park a vehicle without a valid permit on any of the streets designated as follows: 
[Amended 8-11-2012 by Ord. No. 12-098 ; 11-20-2018 by Ord. No. 18-130 ] 
Zone 8 
Street 	Limits 	Days of Week 	Times 
Audubon Av 	Between West Side Av and Bergen Av 	M—F 	3 pm to 9 pm 
Broadman Pkwy 	Between the dead end and Kennedy Blvd 		
Casper Ct 	Entire length 		
College Dr 	Between Audubon Av and Culver Av 		
College St 	Between Audubon Av and Culver Av 		
Culver Av 	Between West Side Av and Kennedy Blvd 		
Fisk St 	Between West Side Av and Mallory Av 		
Fulton Av 	Between Bergen Av and West Side Av 		
Grant Av 	Between Bergen Av and West Side Av 		
Iorio Ct 	Entire length 		
Kennedy Blvd 	West side: between Stegman Pkwy and Audubon Av 		
Kennedy Blvd 	West side: between Culver Av and Broadman Pkwy 		
Kennedy Blvd 	East side: between Stegman St and Grant Av 		
Stegman Ct 	Entire length 		
Stegman Pkwy 	Between West Side Av and Kennedy Blvd 		
Stegman Pl 	Entire length 		
Stegman St 	Between Kennedy Blvd and Bergen Av 		
Stegman Ter 	Entire length 		
Towers St 	Entire length 		
Van Houten Av 	Entire length 		
 
  
Zone 11 
Street 	Limits 	Days of Week 	Times 
Apollo St 	Entire length 	M—F 	3 pm to 9 pm 
Bergen Av 	West Side between Duncan Av and Fairmount 	M—F 	3 pm to 9 pm 
Boland St 	Entire Length 	M—F 	3 pm to 9 pm 
Britton St 	Entire Length 	M—F 	3 pm to 9 pm 
Duncan Av 	Between Bergen Av and West Side Av 	M—F 	3 pm to 9 pm 
Duncan Ct 	Entire length 	M—F 	3 pm to 9 pm 
Fairmount Av 	Between West Side Av and Bereen Av 	M—F 	3 pm to 9 pm 
Fairmount Ter 	Between Montgomery St and Fairmount Av 	M—F 	3 pm to 9 pm 
Glenwood Av 	Between West Side Av and Kennedy Blvd 	M—F 	3 pm to 9 p.m. 
Kennedy Blvd 	East side; Duncan Av to 2622 Kennedy Blvd 	M—F 	3 pm to 9 pm 
	West Side; Duncan Av to 2615 Kennedy Blvd 	M—F 	3 pm to 9 pm 
Montgomery St 	South side between West Side Av and Bergen Av 	M—F 	3 pm to 9 pm 
 
  
Zone 13 
Street 	Limits 	Days of Week 	Times 
Essex St 	North side; between Greene St and Washington St; and between Warren St and Van Vorst St 	Weekdays 
  
F 
through 
M 	5 pm to 8 am 
  
5 pm F 
through 
8 am M 
 
  
Zone 14 
Street 	Limits 	Days of Week 	Times 
Lewis Av 	East side; entire length 	Daily 	9 pm to 5 am 
  
§ 332-67. - Violations and penalties. 
A.  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this Article, unless expressly provided to the contrary herein, for any person to stand or park a motor vehicle for a period exceeding the time limitation or in violation of the zone prohibition established pursuant hereto. Any person who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this Article shall be liable to the fine indicated in Chapter 160. 
B.  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this Article for a person to falsely represent himself eligible for a parking permit or to furnish false information on an application therefor. The Director of the Jersey City Division of Parking Enforcement may refuse to issue a parking permit to any person or persons where he finds that the applicant has furnished false information on an application therefor. 
[Amended 11-12-2014 by Ord. No. 14-017 ] 
C.  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this Article for a person holding a valid parking permit issued pursuant hereto to permit the use or display of such permit on any motor vehicle other than that for which the permit was issued. 
D.  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this Article for a person to copy, reproduce or otherwise bring into existence a facsimile or counterfeit parking permit or permits. It shall further be unlawful and a violation of this Article for a person to knowingly use a duplicate facsimile or counterfeit parking permit in order to evade area prohibitions or time limitations on parking applicable in a residential permit zone. A violation of this subsection shall be a misdemeanor punishable in accordance with the provisions of this Code. 
E.  It shall be unlawful and a separate violation of this Article if any landlord or seller fails to timely file the acknowledgement required by Subsection 332-58.G above with the Division of Parking for any unit offered for sale or rent. The maximum per unit fine shall apply. 
[Added 5-27-2015 by Ord. No. 15-063 ]  
ARTICLE IX - Parking for the Disabled 
 
§ 332-68. - Parking for the disabled. 
No person shall park a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts thereof described below, except those persons with special parking permits as described in this Article. Schedule 25 shall be incorporated within the Chapter 332 Manual—Traffic and Transportation and is available for inspection in the Division of Engineering, Traffic and Transportation and/or the Office of the City Clerk.  
§ 332-69. - Restricted parking zones in front of or near residences of disabled drivers. 
[Amended 5-11-2011 by Ord. No. 11-051; 8-31-2011 by Ord. No. 11-099; 11-09-2011 by Ord. No. 11-139; amended 5-23-2012 by Ord. No. 12-070 ; 9-27-2012 by Ord. No. 12-114 ; 1-9-2013 by Ord. No. 12-165 ; 1-23-2013 by Ord. No. 13-003 ; 4-24-13 by Ord. No. 13-038 ; 5-29-2013 by Ord. No. 13-063 ; 6-19-2013 by Ord. No. 13-076 ; 11-26-2013 by Ord. No. 13-130 ; 3-26-2014 by Ord. No. 14-031 ; 4-9-2014 by Ord. No. 14-035 ; 6-25-2014 by Ord. No. 14-066 ; 9-10-2014 by Ord. No. 14-095 ; 9-23-2014 by Ord. No. 14-113 ; 11-12-2014 by Ord. No. 14-142 ; 11-25-2014 by Ord. No. 14-147 ; 1-14-2015 by Ord. No. 14-169 ; 3-25-2015 by Ord. No. 15-029 ; 9-9-2015 by Ord. No. 15-112 ; 1-27-2016 by Ord. No. 16-006 ; 9-14-2016 by Ord. No. 16-119 ; 2-8-2017 by Ord. No. 17-014 ; 4-12-2017 by Ord. No. 17-034 ; 5-24-2017 by Ord. No. 17-062 ; 7-19-2017 by Ord. No. 17-090 ; 8-16-2017 by Ord. No. 17-106 ; 9-27-2017 by Ord. No. 17-123 ; 12-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-163 ; 5-23-2018 by Ord. No. 18-047 ; 6-27-2018 by Ord. No. 18-063 ; 9-12-2018 by Ord. No. 18-098 ; 9-26-2018 by Ord. No. 18-108 ; 5-22-2019 by Ord. No. 19-051 ] 
A.  The City of Jersey City may, for good cause shown, establish by ordinance restricted parking zones in front of or near residences occupied by disabled drivers, provided that such parking is not otherwise prohibited and does not interfere with the normal flow of traffic. No restricted parking zones will be established for persons who do not transport themselves and who do not possess a valid disabled person identification card and placard or license plate issued by the State of New Jersey, Division of Motor Vehicles, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-205 and 39:4-206 unless the Municipal Council determines that: 
(1)  The nondisabled driver resides in the same household as the disabled person (documentation must be provided). 
(2)  The disabled person needs to be transported at least five (5) days per week to work, school or other educational or gainful activity (documentation must be provided detailing where, when and why the disabled person is transported). 
(3)  The disabled person's disability is such that it would preclude the disabled person from waiting on the sidewalk until the nondisabled driver arrives with the car or finds parking (documentation must be provided detailing the extent of the disability). 
(4)  The parking conditions in the disabled person's immediate neighborhood warrant this exception; and 
(5)  A reasonable person would deem it highly unusual and unjust to deny a restricted parking zone even in light of the competing demands for parking spaces within a given neighborhood. 
B.  No restricted parking zones will be established for applicants who have a driveway, carport, garage or off-street space available for their use unless the Municipal Council determines that: 
(1)  Such driveway, garage or space cannot accommodate the driver's vehicle; or 
(2)  The driver has need of a specially equipped vehicle which cannot be reasonable accommodated by such carport, garage or space. 
C.  The term "disabled" means a condition wherein a person has lost the use of one (1) or more lower limbs as a consequence of paralysis, amputation or other permanent disability or who is permanently disabled as to be unable to ambulate without the aid of an assisting device or whose ambulation is otherwise severely limited. In any case, the severity of the mobility disability shall be similar to or approximate disablement by reason of amputation. 
D.  Notarized applications for the establishment of restricted parking zones shall be filed with the Jersey City Division of Engineering, Traffic and Transportation, which shall investigate each application for compliance with Subsection A. The application shall be accompanied by a medical evaluation form completed by the applicant's personal physician. The personal physician shall include a certification stating that the applicant has a mobility disability as described in Subsection 332-69 C. Application forms and medical evaluation forms can be obtained from the Division. Thereafter, the Division shall notify the applicant when and where to report for a medical examination or, in the alternative, shall notify the applicant of the person to contact to arrange such medical examination. The examining physicians shall be selected by the Municipal Council Committee on Parking for the Disabled. The cost of examination shall be borne completely by the applicant. The applicant shall bring to the examination any and all medical or other documentation which he or she believes relevant to the applicant's medical condition. Such documentation may include, but will not be limited to X-ray reports, C.T. scan reports, cardiograms, hospital and surgical records and attending physicians' reports. If the examining physician does not possess adequate documentation to verify the applicant's eligibility under Section 332-69 C and cannot by application alone verify such eligibility, the applicant shall be rejected. An application filed by a tenant shall also be served upon the landlord. 
E.  If the City Council so approves, the Municipal Engineer shall establish a restricted parking zone in front of or near the residence of the applicant and shall issue a permit which complies with N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.7. Only the motor vehicle for which a valid permit has been issued shall be parked in such zone and only when the permit is properly displayed. Only one (1) permit shall be issued to the applicant. No restricted parking zones, other than those granted by the Department of Public Safety in emergencies, shall be approved except in the manner provided in this section. [Amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] 
F.  No more than one (1) restricted parking space shall be granted at any one (1) building address where the building is comprised of six (6) dwelling units or less, and no more than two (2) disabled parking space shall be granted at any one (1) building address where the building is comprised of seven (7) dwelling units or more. At any address from which a disabled parking space or spaces have already been granted, any additional permits approved for that address shall bear the same permit number as exists for the space already granted. Such space or spaces may be used by anyone possessing the corresponding numbered permit on a first come, first served, basis. This provision shall apply only to applications approved or denied after the effective date of this amendment. 
G.  Restricted parking spaces and permits shall be valid for two (2) years and shall be renewed thereafter in accordance with the requirements of this Article. A permit may be reviewed earlier if conditions concerning the applicant change. 
H.  Any party denied a restricted parking zone shall have the opportunity to request reconsideration of such decision. A letter requesting reconsideration must be received by the Division of Engineering, Traffic and Transportation within twenty (20) days of the date of the notice of denial. The applicant will then be instructed to report for a reexamination with an examining physician and/or in appropriate cases, the committee, or its designee, may hold a hearing to reconsider any relevant evidence pertaining to the applicant's eligibility. As in the initial medical examination, costs for this reexamination shall be borne by the applicant. It shall be the applicant's responsibility to bring to the examination any and all documentation in support of his or her condition. The applicant will be notified by mail of the decision on reconsideration. No more than one (1) reconsideration will be given each applicant. Thereafter, the applicant may reapply after one (1) year has elapsed from the date of the notice of denial. 
I.  Any party willfully presenting false information or documentation to the Committee or found to be abusing any parking privileges granted under this Article shall be subject to loss and/or denial of such privileges.  
§ 332-70. - Existing restricted parking zones. 
All persons with existing restricted parking zones which do not comply with this Article are hereby canceled six (6) months after the effective date of this article. The Municipal Engineer shall establish fair and uniform procedures to assure that each holder of an existing permit is afforded an opportunity to present evidence of compliance. Such procedures shall provide that notice of cancellation be sent to all persons with existing restricted parking zones at least forty-five (45) days before the cancellation of such permit.  
§ 332-71. - Municipal Engineer to issue regulations establishing restricted parking spaces. 
A.  The Municipal Engineer may, by regulation, establish restricted parking zones in front of schools, hospitals and other public buildings and in public parking facilities and in shopping and business districts for use by persons who have been issued special vehicle identification cards by the Division of Motor Vehicles pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-205 when using a motor vehicle on which is displayed a certificate for which a special vehicle identification card has been issued. 
B.  All regulations establishing restricted disabled parking spaces pursuant to Subsection A above and the location of such spaces are available for review in the Office of the City Clerk and in the Division of Engineering, Traffic and Transportation.  
§ 332-71.1. - Restricted parking; spaces for the disabled. 
[Amended 11-16-2017 by Ord. No. 17-149 ] 
The parking spaces below are hereby designated as reserved for vehicles transporting the disabled. Vehicles parked in the reserved parking space must display the Special Vehicle Identification (hang tag) issued by the Motor Vehicle Commission on Wheelchair License Plates. 
Name of Street 	Side 	Parking Spaces 
Robinson Dr 	Counterclockwise Robinson Dr to Lee Ct 	2—90 degree/angle spaces 
 
Regulatory, parking and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to affect the above designated regulatory and parking prohibitions and restrictions pursuant to New Jersey State Statutes and Amendments and the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
Tow away zones. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exit ways, loading zones, oil fill, any grassy area, pedestrian walkway, or present in an way a safety or traffic hazard may be removed by towing the vehicle at the owners or operators expense. 
The Provisions of Title 39, Subtitle 1 are hereby made applicable to Society Hill at Droyers Point, including all roads, streets, driveways, terraces, parking areas and other roadways with the area commonly known as Society Hill at Droyers Point, and open to or used by the public, tenants and employees for the purpose of vehicular traffic. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-149 , adopted November 16, 2017, amended the Code by adding a new § 332-71. In order to prevent duplication of section numbers, the provisions have been renumbered as § 332-71.1 at the discretion of the editor.  
ARTICLE X - Impounding and Booting Vehicles 
 
§ 332-72. - Abandonment of motor vehicles prohibited; violations and penalties. 
A.  The following acts are unlawful: 
(1)  Abandoning a vehicle on a street or on public property. 
(2)  Parking a vehicle on a street or on public property without license plates. 
(3)  Parking a vehicle on private property for forty-eight (48) hours or more without the consent of the owner or for any period without license plates. A vehicle which is parked on a street or on public property for forty-eight (48) hours or more may be presumed to have been abandoned under this subsection.  
§ 332-73. - Impounding and booting motor vehicles. 
[Amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] 
A.  The Department of Public Safety may tow away and impound or boot any vehicle under the following circumstances: 
(1)  The vehicle has been abandoned as provided in the preceding section. 
(2)  The vehicle is parked in violation of any provision of this chapter or of Title 39 of the New Jersey Statutes. 
(3)  The vehicle constitutes a danger or impediment to traffic or a danger to public safety. 
(4)  There exists outstanding warrants against the owner of the vehicle issued in connection with parking offenses involving that specific vehicle. 
B.  Neither the city nor its agents or employees shall be liable for the loss of any vehicle or for damage to any vehicle which is booted or impounded and stored by the city or by an agent of the city, nor shall the city be liable for the disposal of any impounded vehicle. 
C.  The Department of Public Safety may use the services of a private tower to enforce any of the provisions of this Article.  
§ 332-74. - Notification of owners; procedure where owners not known. 
A.  When a police officer removes a vehicle from a street or other public way, as authorized in this Article, and the officer knows or is able to ascertain from the registration records in the vehicle or in some other way the name and address of the owner thereof, the officer shall immediately give or cause to be given notice in writing by registered mail to such owner of the fact of such removal, the reasons therefor and the place to which the vehicle has been removed. In the event the vehicle is stored in a public garage, a copy of such notice shall be given to the proprietor of the garage. 
B.  When a police officer removes a vehicle from a street under this Article and does not know and is not able to ascertain the name of the owner, or for any other reason is unable to give the notice to the owner as herein provided, and in the event the vehicle is not returned to the owner within a period of three (3) days, the officer shall immediately send or cause to be sent a written report of such removal by mail to the New Jersey State Division of Motor Vehicles, and shall file a copy of such notice with the proprietor of any public garage in which the vehicle may be stored. Such notice shall include a complete description of the vehicle, the date, time and place from which removed, the reasons for such removal, and the name of the garage or place where the vehicle is stored.  
§ 332-75. - Charges for taking, removing, towing and storing. 
A.  Should any person abandon any motor vehicle on any street in the city or on property other than his own, without the consent of the owner of said property, for a period longer than forty-eight (48) hours, or upon discovery of any motor vehicle apparently abandoned in the city, or of any motor vehicle that apparently has been involved in an accident and is a menace to traffic, the police may take such motor vehicle into its custody and cause the same to be taken to, stored or impounded in the place or places designated as a motor vehicle pound. 
B.  There shall be no liability attached to the police for taking or impounding the motor vehicle or for any damages to it while in the custody of the police. 
C.  The motor vehicle shall not be released or removed from the pound except upon the payment to the city of the charges set forth herein for the taking, removal, towing and storage. 
D.  There shall be no charge for impounding motor vehicles which are not insured for theft, towing and storage when such vehicle has been taken without the consent of the owner or stolen within the city and then subsequently recovered within the city. However, the charges will not be waived when the vehicle is stolen or taken at some point outside the city and then recovered within the city. 
E.  The charges for taking, removing or towing and storage of any impounded motor vehicle shall be as indicated in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges.  
§ 332-76. - Towing of illegally parked vehicles. 
A.  The Department of Public Safety is hereby authorized to tow away, or have towed away by a commercial towing service, any vehicle which [Amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ] : 
(1)  Is illegally parked within any parking meter zone or parking space within an off-street metered parking zone. 
(2)  Is illegally parked in any place where such vehicle constitutes a traffic hazard, blocks the use of a fire hydrant or a driveway or obstructs or may obstruct the movement of any emergency vehicle. 
B.  Vehicles towed away for illegal parking shall be stored away in a safe place and shall be restored to the owner or operator of such vehicle upon payment of fees indicated in Chapter 160 Fees and Charges.  
§ 332-77. - Violations. 
A.  The following acts are unlawful: 
(1)  Removing or attempting to remove an impounded vehicle without paying all of the storage charges; 
(2)  Removing or attempting to remove a boot fastened to a vehicle; 
(3)  Tampering with a boot, damaging or attempting to damage a boot fastened to a vehicle.  
ARTICLE XI. - Titles 39, 40 Private Property 
 
§ 332-78. - Parking restrictions in shopping areas. 
A.  The following parking restrictions shall apply in the shopping areas designated: 
(1)  Hudson Mall (Block 1751, Lots 10J, M and N; Block 1746.5, Lot H-4.) 
(a)  Within sixty (60) feet of the curbline in front of the business places therein. 
(b)  At the rear of such business places. 
(c)  At any other area not within the area designated by white parking place lines. 
(2)  Stadium Shopping Plaza (Block 1288-A, Lot 1-L/1-M). No person shall park a vehicle: 
(a)  Within thirty-five (35) feet of the curbline in front of the business places. 
(b)  At the rear of such business places. 
(c)  At any other area not within the area designated by white parking place lines. 
B.  No person shall park any truck or bus within the following described areas unless the truck or bus is in the process of delivering or picking up materials or passengers, in the case of public utilities, while performing necessary functions thereon: 
(1)  Hudson Mall area known as Block 1751, Lots 10J, M and N; Block 1746.5, Lot H-4, containing approximately 48.98 acres and located on Route 440 in Jersey City and situated immediately west of lands and buildings of Jersey City Leasing Corporation, commonly referred as "Hudson Mall." 
(2)  Stadium Shopping Plaza, known as Block 1288-A, Lot 1-L/1-M, containing approximately 19.00 acres and located on Route 440 in Jersey City.  
§ 332-79. - Title 39 made applicable to Newport. 
A.  The provisions of Title 39, Subtitle I, are hereby made applicable to Newport, including all roads, streets, driveways, terraces, parkways, parking areas and other roadways within the area commonly known as Newport, and open to or used by the public, tenants and employees for the purpose of vehicular traffic. 
B.  The Newport Associates Development Company is hereby authorized to install and maintain a traffic signal system at the public-private intersection of Washington Boulevard and the main entrance to Target. The traffic signal shall conform to the same specifications as those regulating other local intersections.  
§ 332-80. - Title 39 made applicable to Port Liberte. 
The provisions of Title 39, Subtitle I, are hereby made applicable to Port Liberte, including all roads, streets, driveways, terraces, parkways, parking areas and other roadways within the area commonly known as Port Liberte, and open to or used by the public, tenants and employees for the purpose of vehicular traffic.  
§ 332-81. - Title 39 made applicable to Society Hill II. 
[Added 8-16-2006 by Ord. No. 06-094 ] 
The provisions of Title 39, Subtitle I, are hereby made applicable to Society Hill II, including all roads, streets, driveways, terraces, parkways, parking areas and other roadways within the area commonly known as Society Hill II, and open to or used by the public, tenants and employees for the purpose of vehicular traffic.  
§ 332-81.1. - Title 39 made applicable to Society Hill at Droyers Point. 
[Added 11-16-2017 by Ord. No. 17-149 ] 
1.  General Parking. All vehicles must park in designated areas and between the lines provided. 
2.  Reserved Parking. All vehicles that are granted specialty parking in this section such as Reserved Parking for the Disabled, Resident Only and Visitors, etc., must be properly identified and the spaces must be shown on the attached plan. 
Resident/Visitor Parking 
Name of Street 	Side 	Parking Spaces 
Alexander Ct 	East 	3—90 degree/angle spaces 
Frances Ct 	South 	8—90 degree/angle spaces 
Hudson Ct 	West 	7—90 degree/angle spaces 
Lee Ct 	East 	4—90 degree/angle spaces 
Lyon Ct (N/S) 	West 	6—90 degree/angle spaces 
Lyon Ct (E/W) 	Both 	6—90 degree/angle spaces 
McMartin Ct 	West 	2—90 degree/angle spaces 
Robinson Dr 	Counterclockwise Robinson Dr to Lee Ct 	15—90 degree/angle spaces 
Smit Ct 	North 	12—90 degree/angle spaces 
Roosevelt Stadium Ct 	East 	10—90 degree/angle spaces 
Swan Ct 	West 	4—90 degree/angle spaces 
Tottenham Ct 	South 	20—90 degree/angle spaces 
  
§ 332-82. - Parking in front of private driveways. 
A.  Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-138.4, the Municipal Engineer may issue to owners of private driveways and to members of the same household permits authorizing the parking of private passenger vehicles in front of the owner's driveway. The Director may require an owner to file a completed application for such a permit on a form provided by the Director. An owner of a private driveway shall be eligible to apply for up to three permits for his or her own motor vehicles or for use by other parties authorized by the owner to park in front of the private driveway. Each member of the owner's household who owns a motor vehicle shall also be eligible to apply for a permit issued under this section. There shall be a fee of $5 for each vehicle authorized to park in front of a private driveway. The Director may require an applicant to provide evidence that the driveway was legally established in accordance with the Jersey City Construction Code. 
B.  The permit shall identify the location of the driveway and the vehicle authorized to park in front of the driveway. The permit shall be five and one-half (5½) by eight and one-half (8½) inches in size, shall bear an appropriate certification of authenticity and shall be displayed prominently within the vehicle when it is parked so as to be seen from the middle of the street. 
C.  Provided that such parking is not otherwise prohibited and does not interfere with a normal flow of traffic, it is an affirmative defense to prosecution for violation of N.J.S.A. 39:4-138(d) if: 
(1)  The parked vehicle and driveway where the vehicle is parked are owned by the same person; or 
(2)  The parked vehicle is owned by a member of the same household as the owner of the private driveway; or 
(3)  The owner of the private driveway authorized the parking of the parked vehicle in front of the private driveway. 
D.  This defense may be presented by form of affidavit as provided for in the New Jersey Court Rule 7:6-6(a). 
E.  No owner may permit any vehicle to park in front of the owner's driveway other than a vehicle registered in the name of the owner or a member of the owner's household residing with the owner. 
F.  No owner may charge a fee for permitting anyone to park a vehicle in front of the owner's driveway. 
G.  The rights conferred upon an owner under Subsection C shall extend only to the street in front of the driveway parallel to the curb. 
H.  This section confers no rights to park a vehicle on any part of the driveway which lies across the sidewalk nor does it confer upon an owner the exclusive right to park a vehicle adjacent to any part of the curb beyond the width of the driveway.  
§ 332-83. - Parking within designated properties of the Jersey City Housing Authority. 
A.  No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the properties of the Jersey City Housing Authority, or part thereof, listed below. 
(1)  Parking prohibited at all times. In accordance with the provisions of this section, parking is prohibited on the following Housing Authority streets or parts thereof: 
Name of Housing Authority 
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON PROJECT 
(a)  The area on Colden Street adjacent to the south end of Building No. 8, from a point 50 feet west of the Lehigh Valley Railroad overpass to a point 75 feet west. 
(b)  Fremont Street: east side, from a point 225 feet north of Colden Street to a point 250 feet north. 
CURRIE WOODS PROJECT 
(a)  North driveway: north side, from a point 80 feet south of Pamrapo Avenue to a point 90 feet south. 
(b)  North driveway: south side, from a point 765 feet west of Old Bergen Road to a point 755 feet west. 
(c)  North driveway: south side, from a point 555 feet west of Old Bergen Road to a point 545 feet west. 
(d)  North driveway: south side, from a point 330 feet west of Old Bergen Road to a point 320 feet west. 
(e)  North driveway: south side, from a point 70 feet west of Old Bergen Road to a point 60 feet west. 
(f)  Parking Area No. 1; south side, from a point 45 feet north of Merritt Street to a point 100 feet north. 
A. HARRY MOORE PROJECT 
(a)  West driveway: east side, from a point 260 feet north of Duncan Avenue to a point 330 feet north. 
(b)  East driveway: east side, from Duncan Avenue to a point 465 feet north. 
(c)  West driveway: west side, from Duncan Avenue to a point 285 feet north. 
HOLLAND GARDENS 
(a)  South driveway: north side, from its intersection with Erie Street to a point 90 feet west of Erie Street. 
HUDSON GARDENS 
(a)  In the small horseshoe shaped area adjacent to Parking Area No. 1, at the south end of McPherson Place. 
LAFAYETTE GARDENS 
(a)  Parking area No. 3: east end on Carbon Street between Van Horne Street and Halladay Street 
MARION GARDENS 
(a)  South driveway: north side, from Dales Avenue to a point 70 feet west. 
(b)  South driveway: north side, from a point 330 feet west of Dales Avenue to a point 370 feet west. 
(c)  North driveway: south side, from Dales Avenue to a point 625 feet west. 
MONTGOMERY GARDENS 
(a)  Bright Street: north side, from Florence Street to a point 40 feet west. 
(b)  Florence Street: west side, from a point 55 feet north of Bright Street to a point 100 feet north. 
(2)  Parking prohibited for street cleaning. Parking is prohibited on the following Housing Authority streets or parts thereof for street cleaning purposes during the hours listed: 
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON PROJECT 
(a)  All of Parking Area No. 1 on Colden Street. Monday and Thursday, 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. 
(b)  All of Parking Area No. 2 on Fremont Street. Tuesday and Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. 
(c)  All of Parking Area No. 3 on Bright Street. Tuesday and Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. 
CURRIE WOODS PROJECT 
(a)  The north side of the north driveway from a point 40 feet west of Old Bergen Road to a point 945 feet west. 
(b)  The north side of the south driveway from a point 290 feet west of Old Bergen Road to a point 740 feet west. Monday and Thursday 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. 
(c)  The south side of the south driveway from a point 40 feet west of Avenue C to a point 565 feet west. Tuesday and Friday 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. 
(d)  The south side of the north driveway from a point 50 feet west of Old Bergen Road to a point 930 feet west. Tuesday and Friday 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. 
A. HARRY MOORE PROJECT 
(a)  Monday and Thursday east side of east driveway. 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m. 
(b)  Tuesday and Friday south side of north driveway. 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m. 
(c)  Tuesday and Friday both sides of west driveway. 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m. 
(d)  Monday and Thursday entire lot of east parking lot. 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m. 
HOLLAND GARDENS 
(a)  The north side of the south driveway from Jersey Avenue to a point 300 feet east. Monday and Thursday 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. 
(b)  The south side of the south driveway from Jersey Avenue to Erie Street. Tuesday and Friday 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. 
MONTGOMERY GARDENS 
(a)  All of parking area west of Florence Street. Tuesday and Friday 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. 
(b)  All of parking area north of Bright Street. Monday and Thursday 6:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m. 
HUDSON GARDENS 
(a)  The east side of McPherson Place from Washburn Street to a point 240 feet south. Monday and Thursday, 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. 
LAFAYETTE GARDENS 
(a)  All of Parking Area No. 1 at the intersection of Carbon Street and Woodward Street. Monday and Thursday, 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. 
(b)  All of Parking Area No. 2 on the north side of Carbon Street at Van Horne Street. Tuesday and Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. 
(c)  All of Parking Area No. 3 on the north side of Carbon Street, 40 feet east of Van Horne Street. Tuesday and Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. 
(d)  All of Parking Area No. 4, at the intersection of Grand Street and Barbara Place. Tuesday and Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. 
MARION GARDENS 
(a)  Both side of the south driveway from Dales Avenue to a point 625 feet west of Dales Avenue. Monday and Thursday, 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. 
(b)  The north side of the north driveway, from Dales Avenue to a point 600 feet west. Tuesday and Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. 
(c)  All of Parking Area No. 1, adjacent to Route 1. Tuesday and Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. 
(3)  One-way streets. Vehicles may proceed only one-way at the following locations as designated: 
HOLLAND GARDENS 
(a)  South driveway: one-way west. 
A. HARRY MOORE PROJECT 
(a)  East driveway: one-way north. 
(b)  North driveway: one-way west. 
(c)  West driveway: one-way south. 
B.  Parking in all designated parking areas within the Jersey City Housing properties will be restricted to tenants of their respective Housing Unit and only at their respective Housing Unit. Enforcement will be accompanied by the issuance of identification decals to bona fide tenants. These decals will be displayed in the left rear window of the tenant's auto. Decals are to be rectangular in shape and bear the following "J.C.H.A. Tenant" and will be serially numbered. The Jersey City Housing Authority shall maintain a record of serial numbers and to whom each was issued.  
ARTICLE XII - Permissible Parking Distances 
[Added 3-22-2017 by Ord. No. 17-028 ] 
 
§ 332-84. - Definitions. 
[Added 3-22-2017 by Ord. No. 17-028 ] 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
SCHOOL ZONE — That portion of a highway which is either contiguous to territory occupied by a school building or is where school crossings are established in the vicinity of a school, upon which are maintained appropriate "school signs" in accordance with specifications adopted by the chief administrator and in accordance with law.  
§ 332-85. - General provisions. 
[Added 3-22-2017 by Ord. No. 17-028 ] 
A.  Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-138.6, the permissible distance a person may park a motor vehicle from a "stop" sign is twenty-five (25) feet except when the intersection is located in a school zone, in which case the mandated parking distance is fifty (50) feet, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-138(h). All intersections otherwise posted prior to the adoption of this chapter shall remain in effect. Only the Municipal Engineer, or his designee, shall reserve the right to modify the distance at any of these locations. 
B.  Vehicles shall at all times comply with all other parking regulations, including but not limited to regulations on parking permits, street cleaning, and parking along emergency snow routes. 
C.  The City of Jersey City shall not be required to install or maintain any markings, signs or other indications for permissible parking distances; it shall be incumbent upon the driver to ensure that no vehicle is parked within the permissible parking distances at any time. 
D.  All other provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-138 shall apply.  
Chapter 337 - WATER 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City 5-4-1971 as Ch. 27 of the 1971 Jersey City Code, as readopted 9-19-1978 by Ord. No. S-128. Amendments noted where applicable.] 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Certificates of occupancy — See Ch. 119. 	Sewers — See Ch. 281. 
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 131. 	Subdivision of land — See Ch. 299. 
Fees and charges — See Ch. 160. 	
 
 
§ 337-1. - Standards adopted and approved. 
The Council hereby enacts and establishes rules and regulations affecting the water supply and plumbing connections therewith for the preservation of the city's water mains and regulating the use of water for air conditioning and refrigeration and plumbing connections therewith and the enforcement thereof in the form of a code enTitled "Code Pertaining to Water Supply and Plumbing Connections Therewith." The code, as filed in triplicate in the office of the City Clerk, is hereby adopted and approved.  
§ 337-2. - Copies of standards on file. [Amended 5-10-1984 by Ord. No. MC-599; 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
There shall remain on file in the office of the City Clerk three copies, reproduced in book form, of the above-mentioned code, similarly marked for the use and the examination of the public. Three copies, similar in all respects, shall be placed on file, and shall so remain on file, in the office of the Department of Administration.  
§ 337-3. - Administration and enforcement; standards enumerated. [Amended 10-2-1979 by Ord. No. S-292; 5-10-1984 by Ord. No. MC-599; 9-25-1991 by Ord. No. McC-355; 7-22-1992 by Ord. No. 92-091; 10-28-1992 by Ord. No. 92-143; 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050; 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052; 4-27-05 by Ord. No. 05-045] 
The Department of Administration shall administer and enforce the Code Pertaining to Water Supply and Plumbing Connections therewith, as herein provided for: 
Code Pertaining to Water Supply and Plumbing Connections Therewith 
City of Jersey City, New Jersey 
CHAPTER 1 
Sec. 1. Short title. This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Water Supply Code" hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
Sec. 2. Matter covered. The administration and enforcement of this code shall be vested under the authority of the Department of Administration, and the jurisdiction of said Department of Administration shall embrace control of all connections to the water mains of the City of Jersey City and the installations of meters and all matters connected therewith and the use of water for air conditioning and refrigerating systems for the purpose of conserving and protecting the city's water supply system.* 
* Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. 
Sec. 3. Ordinance remedial. This code is hereby declared to be remedial and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof, which are public safety, health and welfare and the protection of the city's water supply system and service. 
CHAPTER 2 
Definitions. For the purpose of this code the terms and wording herein contained shall be construed and confined to this section as follows: 
APPROVED — As applied to material or device or mode of construction under this code, that the material, device or method has received the approval and authorization of the Department of Administration or the Board of Health, under the terms of the Board of Health. Approval by the Board of Health shall be by virtue of the terms of the Plumbing Code of the City of Jersey City, 1951. 
CITY WATER SUPPLY — The municipally owned and operated potable water supply system of the City of Jersey City. 
CHIEF ENGINEER — The engineer in charge of the operation and maintenance of the Jersey City Water Supply System or his or her representative. [1] 
DEPARTMENT - The various municipal departments of the City of Jersey City or their subdivisions having jurisdiction. 
INDIRECT CONNECTION (FOR WATER SUPPLY) - A connection in which there is a break in a line of pipe through which the water may be discharged from one pipe to another by gravity and open to the atmosphere for a sufficient altitude to permit visibility of such discharge and to prevent a backflow into the pipe above the connection. 
INSPECTOR - An inspector or any authorized employee of the Department of Administration. 
OWNER - The owner or owners of the freehold of the premises or of a lesser estate therein, a vendee in possession or the lessee or joint lessees of the whole thereof. 
PATENT SLEEVE AND VALVE CONNECTION - All wet connections over and above the two-inch size made to city water mains under pressure and shall consist of a sleeve installed on this main to which a valve of a given size is attached and to which the service pipe is connected. 
PERSON - Any individual, association, corporation (municipal or private) or firm acting either directly or through a duly authorized agent. 
PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT - Any dwelling, shop, store, factory or other building or place in which one or more persons are employed for hire or wage. 
PLUMBERS: 
A.  MASTER PLUMBER - A person duly certified as such and authorized to engage in the installation of plumbing, through contract or otherwise, and also in planning, engineering, superintending, installation, maintenance and repair with respect to plumbing in all its branches and as such master plumber is authorized to employ journeymen plumbers and plumbers' apprentices and other persons necessary for the proper installation of plumbing work in accordance with the plumbing regulations and provisions of this code. 
B.  JOURNEYMAN PLUMBER - A person duly certified as such and authorized to engage in the plumbing business only as an employee of a licensed master plumber, authorized to engage in the plumbing business and under the general supervision of a licensed master plumber. 
C.  PLUMBER'S APPRENTICE - A person other than a master or journeyman plumber holding a certificate of registration and authorized to engage in the employment of learning the plumbing trade. 
PLUMBING - Includes the practice, materials and fixtures used in the installation, maintenance, extension and alteration of all piping, fixtures, appliances and appurtenances in connection with any of the following: sanitary drainage or storm drainage facilities, the venting system and the public or private water-supply systems, within or adjacent to any building, structure or conveyance; also the practice and materials used in the installation, maintenance, extension or alteration of the stormwater, liquid waste or sewerage and water-supply systems of any premises to their connection with any point of public disposal or other acceptable terminal, except minor repairs by a person upon his or her own premises wherein he actually resides. 
PREMISES - Wherever used in this code, includes a lot or part of a lot, a building or part of a building or any parcel or tract of land whatever. 
TAP - The bronze fitting installed by tapper in city water main also referred to as "corporation cock" for the purpose of connecting service pipe to the city water main. 
TAPPER - Title of employee of the Department whose duty it is to install the tap in city water main. 
WATER MAINS - The pipes through which potable water from the Jersey City Water Supply System is transported and distributed to any and all service pipes, fire hydrants and fire service sprinkler systems. 
WATER METER - The mechanical instrument of a type approved by the Department of Administration required to be used on both domestic and fire service lines for measuring the quantity of water passing a given point. 
WATER SERVICE PIPE - All that section of the pipe located between the city water main and the inlet side of the water meter. 
WATER SUPPLY PIPE - All pipes or risers located between house side of the water meter and the various fixtures and appurtenances throughout the building. 
WET CONNECTION — See "patent sleeve and valve connections." 
Sec. 3. Inspections. 
A.  It shall be the duty of the Department of Administration to inspect the installation of, extension to or any alterations in all water service, water supply or water distribution piping system to all new buildings, structures and premises having service from the water supply system of Jersey City. 
B.  The officers and employees of the Department of Public Affairs or anyone authorized to act for it shall have free entry and access to any new building, structure or premises or part thereof, whether completed or in the process of erection, for the purpose of determining whether the building provisions of this code are complied with. Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to apply to any extension or alteration which does not conform, and it shall be his or her duty to serve written notice to owner, occupant, agent or person in possession of such building, structure or premises of such noncompliance to make such alterations or repairs as are necessary to eliminate the cause or causes of nonconformity, and in case of failure to do so within 10 days from the date of such notice, the head of the Office of Utility Management may cause the water supply from the Jersey City Water Supply System to be shut off until the requirements in the building provisions of this code are complied with. 
Sec. 4. The officers of the Department of Administration and any employee delegated or authorized by the head of the Office of Utility Management shall have free entry and access to every part of any building, structure or premises whenever such entry or access is deemed necessary or advisable. Whenever any person, in possession, charge or control of any such building, structure or premises, into which any such officer or person shall desire entry or access, shall refuse to permit such entry or access, or shall do or cause to be done any act or thing for the purpose of preventing such entry or access, the head of the Office of Utility Management or his or her authorized agent may turn off the water service from said building, structure or premises until notice shall have been given the commissioner in writing that entry or access will be permitted or provided, and until such entry or access shall have been accomplished. 
Sec. 5. All applications for the use of water through a service pipe, and all applications for the introduction of service pipes or for the inserting of corporation cocks for service pipes shall be made at the office of the Permit Clerk, in the Department of Administration, by a duly licensed master plumber of the City of Jersey City, in writing, which permit shall be witnessed by the owner of the premises for whom the application is being made and filed with said Permit Clerk. 
Sec. 6. Applicants shall state in fall detail the purposes for which the supply is required, with correct street address, lot and block number of the premises. 
Sec. 7. All expenses incurred by reason of incorrect information given in an application shall be charged to and paid by the owner of the premises. 
Sec. 8. Installation of the service pipes from the city main to the meter shall consist of tapping the city main, inserting corporation cock with proper couplings and laying service pipes from the city main to the meter, as hereinafter provided. 
Sec. 9. In all cases where any unusual attachments, fixtures or alterations are desired, or which shall require the supply of an unusually large quantity of water, application shall be made to the Permit Clerk upon blanks to be furnished by him or her. The application shall be subject to the approval of the Chief Engineer, Department of Administration, before any special permit is granted. 
Sec. 10. The applicant shall be liable for the amount of water used in conformity with the schedule of rates or tariffs as provided for by city ordinance. 
STREET OPENINGS 
Sec. 11. No street, alley or other public place shall be opened for the purpose of laying down any service pipe or doing any work or making repairs in or about any service pipes or meters without obtaining written permission from the Permit Clerk authorizing the same. Permits shall be issued in accordance with Chapter 296 (Streets and Sidewalks) Article VII (Excavations). 
Sec. 12. 
[Repealed 6-13-01 by Ord. No. 01-059] 
Sec. 13. 
[Repealed 6-13-01 by Ord. No. 01-059] 
Sec. 14. 
[Repealed 6-13-01 by Ord. No. 01-059] 
Sec. 15. 
[Repealed 4-27-05 by Ord. No. 05-045] 
Sec. 16. 
[Repealed 6-13-01 by Ord. No. 01-059] 
Sec. 17. The trench over and about the pipe for the accommodation of the tapper shall be dug in accordance with the size of the tap to be installed and in no instance shall be less than four feet square and not less than six inches below the bottom of the city main, and all of the pipe required in each case shall be laid and the trench left open for inspection by the Administration Department before the tap is inserted. 
Sec. 18. 
[Repealed 4-27-05 by Ord. No. 05-045] 
Sec. 19. 
[Repealed 4-27-05 by Ord. No. 05-045 
Sec. 20. Plumbers taking out permits for tapping water or for opening streets shall be charged in accordance with the rates established by the Department of Administration. 
INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF SERVICE PIPES 
Sec. 21. Every person who shall construct, enter, alter or use any part of the Jersey City Water Supply system and every consumer of water and owner, occupant or person in possession, charge or control of any building, structure or premises having service therefrom, shall be governed by and subject to the provisions of this code governing the use of water and also such other rules and regulations governing the use of water as may from time to time be adopted and approved by the City Commission. It is hereby made the duty of the Department of Administration to enforce the provisions of this code governing the use of water and also any rules and regulations that may be adopted as aforesaid. 
Sec. 22. No permit for the installation of any pipe or system of piping taking water from the Jersey City Water Supply System for distribution to any building or structure shall be granted until plan of such water supply or distribution system has been examined and approved by the Department of Administration. Such plan or plans shall be presented with the application for permit to the Department of Administration in duplicate, and shall clearly show the complete water supply piping system from the service to the plumbing fixtures and other appliances to which such water supply piping system is connected, together with detail drawings of connections to surge tanks, storage tanks, pressure tanks, filter, swimming pools, bathing and display pools, sterilizers, condensers, compressors, reservoirs and washers. Said plans shall be drawn to a scale of not less than 1/8 inch to the foot; provided, however, that detailed plans shall be drawn to a scale and may be presented in either horizontal or vertical plane or isometric form. 
Sec. 23. Wherever a continuous supply of water is deemed indispensable by owner or occupant in any building, structure or premises the owner or occupant shall provide a tank or other receptacle of capacity which he deems sufficient to supply the needs of such building, structure or premises during the period that the pipe section to which the service pipe is connected is shut off for repairs, connections, extensions or testing purposes; or else provide for the water supply through an auxiliary or emergency connection and service pipe with separate meter control taken from distribution system so that each service pipe shall have an independent source of supply so arranged as to ensure a continuous supply of water in case of such contingency. 
Sec. 24. Each new service pipe put in service for supplying water for all purposes shall be equipped with a meter. Thereafter all charges for the use of water through such service shall be based upon the meter rates prescribed. 
Sec. 25. Each new service pipe shall be laid in a straight line from the main to the property line or to within the building line at right angles to the street mains to which it is connected, except that where the subsurface conditions make it impracticable the service pipe may be otherwise laid upon the approval of the Chief Engineer, Department of Administration, of the plans submitted by plumber showing the proposed location of the service pipe. 
Sec. 26. The services shall be laid at a depth of at least four feet below grade. Where the service pipe has less than four feet of cover, because of subway ducts or other subsurface condition preventing the service being laid at this depth, it shall be protected by a covering of one inch of felt cover and tar paper or other suitable waterproof material. Where constant exposure to frost exists, the service shall be further protected by additional covering of felt and protected with a metal sleeve or wooden box at the direction of the Chief Engineer, Department of Administration. 
Sec. 27. When a service pipe has been laid to the meter, it must not be used to supply other premises than the particular premises applied for, except as hereinafter provided. 
Sec. 28. No standpipes or other appliances for any purpose shall be allowed to be attached to the service pipe where use of water is desired. The service pipe shall be extended to the meter before any attachment shall be made. 
Sec. 29. All inside connections between houses or other buildings are strictly prohibited. 
Sec. 30. Valves or stop cocks at the inlet side of meter shall be left closed, and in no case shall the water be turned on except by any employee of the Department of Administration, or by licensed plumber upon a written permit to do so. 
Sec. 31. Plumbers shall not leave any valve or stop cock at inlet side of the meter location open, nor water turned on in the premises after connection with the service pipe, longer than is required to test their work, without a permit therefore. 
Sec. 32. Service and supply pipes in buildings shall be located in such parts thereof as are best protected from frosts. 
Sec. 33. In all exposed locations the service pipes, supply pipes, fixtures and meters shall be properly wrapped or packed with felt, mineral wool or other nonconducting material or substance, if necessary, to protect said service, etc., from freezing. 
Sec. 34. It shall be the duty of the plumber performing labor in and about any water service pipe to protect the same from frost. He shall not be released from the responsibility thereof by having the owner of the premises or others do the work for him. 
Sec. 35. The owner of the property, into which water is introduced by a service pipe, shall be required to maintain in perfect order at his or her own expense said service pipe from the main to his or her premises, including all fixtures therein provided for delivering or supplying water for any purpose. 
Sec. 36. No person shall tap or connect to any water main or insert a tap therein excepting employees of the Department of Administration duly authorized to do so. 
Sec. 37. No person other than an employee of the Department shall open or close any valves in the public main or molest or interfere with any valve or valve-box cover. 
Sec. 38. Where a service line has been previously installed from the city main to the curb, and water is desired therefrom, an application for an extension permit must be signed by the owner and a licensed master plumber of the City of Jersey City, authorized by the owner of premises. 
MATERIALS FOR SERVICE PIPE INSTALLATIONS 
Sec. 39. All new service pipes two inches in diameter or less shall be of lead, galvanized lead lined, extra heavy seamless drawn brass or soft tempered Class K copper water tube to conform to the ASTM standard specifications for copper water tube. 
Sec. 40. Service pipes larger than two inches in diameter shall be cast iron pipe (Class B Corporation). 
Sec. 41. The material and diameter of service pipes must be the same (excepting size of gooseneck) from the tap to the building, or to a point where the service is fully metered. 
Sec. 42. Dimensions and weights of cast iron pipe, lead and Class K copper water tube to be used under these rules are as follows: 
Cast Iron Pipe (Class B Corporation) 
Size (inches) 	Wall Thickness (inches) 	Weight Per Foot 	12-foot Length 
3 	.42 	16.2 	194 
4 	.45 	21.7 	260 
6 	.48 	33.3 	400 
8 	.51 	47.5 	570 
10 	.57 	63.8 	765 
12 	.62 	82.1 	985 
 
Cut iron pipe shall be lined inside with cement and a sealing coat and on the outside coated with coal tar pitch in accordance with the specifications of the Department of Administration. 
AA Lead Pipe 
For use where city pressure does not exceed 50 pounds per square inch. 
Inside Thickness (inches) 	Caliber 	Pounds Per Linear Foot 
¾ 	.231 	3 ½ 
1 	.246 	4 ¾ 
1 ¼ 	.258 	6 
1 ½ 	.288 	8 
2 	.376 	13 ¾ 
 
AAA Lead Pipe 
For use where city pressure exceeds 50 pounds per square inch. 
Inside Thickness (inches) 	Caliber 	Pounds Per Linear Foot 
¾ 	.293 	4 ¾ 
1 	.298 	6 
1 ¼ 	.320 	7 ¾ 
1 ½ 	.386 	11 ¼ 
2 	.504 	19 ½ 
 
All lead pipe shall conform to Federal Specifications W.W.P.-325. 
K - Class Copper Tubing 
Inside Thickness (inches) 	Caliber 	Pounds Per Linear Foot 
¾ 	.065 	.641 
1 	.065 	.839 
1 ¼ 	.065 	1.04 
1 ½ 	.072 	1.36 
2 	.083 	2.06 
 
Sec. 43. Only lead pipe, lead lined pipe, extra heavy brass pipe, Class K copper tubing or corporation cast iron pipe shall be permitted outside the building and up to the meter. If galvanized iron pipe is used inside the building it shall be one size larger in diameter than the street service pipe. Galvanized lead lined pipe, lead pipe, extra heavy brass pipe or Class K copper tubing of the same interior diameter as the service pipe may be used inside the building. 
Sec. 44. Service pipes up to two inches in diameter may be of brass with extra heavy brass fittings. The brass pipe shall be best quality, extra heavy, seamless drawn, semi-annealed and shall be free from surface defects inside and outside, clean and of uniform color and quality and true to gauge and shall conform to the ASTM Standard Specifications for Brass Pipe Standard sizes. 
Sec. 45. All copper tubing shall conform to the ASTM Standard Specifications for Copper Water Tube (Serial Designation B88-33). All sizes two inches and smaller from the city main to the meter shall be Class K. 
Sec. 46. All cast-iron water pipe shall conform to the American Waterworks Association, Class B cast iron pipe of the bell-and-spigot type and shall be cement lined and seal coated internally and coated externally with asphaltum or coal tar pitch and shall conform to the Department of Administration specification for cast-iron water pipe and special castings. 
Sec. 47. When a premises is to be supplied through a service of two inches or less in diameter from a main in which the pressure is over 50 pounds, the service pipe shall be 3A lead, extra heavy brass seamless pipe or Class K copper tubing to withstand the high pressure. 
Sec. 48. All connections between lead and iron pipes shall be made with brass soldering nipples and wiped joints. All connections between lead pipe and lead and brass shall be made by means of wiped, soldered joints not less than two inches in length, prepared, tinned and fused. All joints shall be uniform and of the size known to the plumbing trade as "heavy." The solder used shall be of the grade known as "extra fine" and the outside diameter of the wiped joint at the center shall be at least ¾ inch in excess of the outside diameter of the lead or brass pipe. Soldering nipples shall be of extra heavy cast brass or thoroughly annealed seamless drawn extra heavy brass pipe tubing of standard iron pipe gauge. Fittings for Class K copper water tube service pipe shall be of the extra heavy brass compression type. 
Sec. 49. The caulked joints for cast iron service pipes shall be made as follows: the inner portion of the annular space between the spigot and the hub shall be first packed with clean, sound jute packing yarn, free from tar, or preformed rubber gaskets that will meet the specifications of the Department of Administration. The remaining space in the hub shall then be run full of lead at one pouring and joints shall be well caulked with proper tools and made watertight. In pouring joints sufficient metal shall be provided so that when the joint is caulked the lead shall be flush with the face of the hub. The lead used shall be of the best quality pure soft lead practically free from all impurities. No cold lead shall be used for caulking or filling in. The depth of lead joints up to eight-inch pipe shall be not less than 2½ inches, and for larger pipe it shall be not less than three inches. 
Sec. 50. All valves in service pipes shall be of the gate-type nonrising stem and may be constructed with iron body or all brass. Inverted key-type round tee handles stopcocks may be used up to one inch. Services of a larger diameter than one inch shall be controlled by the gate type nonrising stem. All valves shall be so located as to be accessible at all times. All valves and stopcocks shall be of the 300 pounds test class as specified in the manufacturer's catalog and shall have a clear waterway equal in area to that of the service pipe which it controls. 
Sec. 51. Every device for heating water or for storing heated water in tanks or boilers shall be so designed and constructed and shall be installed in such manner in any building or structure that any condition which would cause or contribute to the cause of any excess pressure, strain, stress or explosions therein, or leakage in any pipe or system of piping connected thereto, shall be eliminated. No water in any plumbing system shall be heated to a higher temperature than 200° F. in any water heating device or shall be stored in any tank, boiler or reservoir or shall be discharged into or conveyed in any heated water supply pipe or system of heated water supply piping to any plumbing fixture. See Section 134 of Plumbing Code. 
Sec. 52. A stopcock located at the curb fitted with a one-half-inch galvanized iron rod and protected by an extension, tar-coated cast iron box with cover at the level of the sidewalk, may, at the discretion of the consumer, be placed upon the service pipes of two inches or less in diameter. It is not, however, a requirement of the Department of Administration. 
Sec. 53. On all service lines up to two inches diameter valves shall be installed inside of the building as close to the front wall as may be possible in order to provide for the shutting off of water, in case of accident or mishap to the inside service or supply pipe. 
Sec. 54. All lead pipes and K copper tubing shall have an excess of three feet of pipe formed into a gooseneck at the connection to the tap and laid to the right hand, facing the tap. The nonrigid swing section shall be installed in such a manner as will completely absorb all strain to service pipe and main which may be caused by any shock, strain or vibration to which said service pipe or main may be subjected. Brass services installed up to two inches in diameter shall have a swing joint composed of the necessary pipe fittings to absorb all strain or shock to both the service and the city main. 
Sec. 55. The minimum diameter of a service pipe shall be ¾ inch and the service pipe shall be not less than the diameter of the tap controlling it. 
The maximum sizes of services allowed are as follows: 
Diameter of Tap (inches) 	Diameter of Service Pipe (inches) 
¾ 	1 ½ 
1 	2 
1 ½ 	2 
2 	2 
4, wet connection 	4 
6, wet connection 	6 
8, wet connection 	8 
 
Sec. 56. For the installation of wet connections larger than those listed here, complete plans of the piping system that will receive its water supply from the Jersey City Water Supply System shall be submitted to the Department of Administration for approval in conformity to Section 18, Plumbing Code. 
Sec. 57. Where the service pipe is larger than the controlling tap the minimum size of the gooseneck between the service pipe and the tap shall be as follows: 
Size of Tap (inches) 	Size of Service (inches) 	Minimum Size of Gooseneck (inches) 
¾ 	1 	¾ 
¾ 	1 ¼ 	1 
¾ 	1 ½ 	1 ¼ 
1 	1 ¼ 	1 
1 	1 ½ 	1 ¼ 
1 	2 	1 ½ 
1 ½ 	2 	1 ½ 
2 	2 	2 
 
Sec. 58. In any building, structure or premises where the consumption of water requires a larger service than can be supplied by the existing tap or connection, a new tap or connection shall be made with the city water main to correspond to the size of the service desired. The joining of two or more smaller service pipes for the purpose of connection to one larger service is prohibited. The size of such service pipe shall be determined by the head of the Office of Utility Management and it shall be supplied from the mains of the Jersey City Water Supply System through a single tap and a single service pipe of a size listed in Section 55, and shall extend from the water main to the inlet valve of the meter before any connections for appurtenances are permitted. The old or original tap is to be shut off at the main after the new connection has been installed. 
Sec. 59. In buildings occupied for domestic purposes the minimum size service shall be regulated by the number of families supplied as follows: 
Number of Families 	Minimum Size Service (inches) 
1 to 2 	¾ 
3 to 5 	1 
6 to 10 	1 ¼ 
11 to 20 	1 ½ 
21 to 30 	2 
 
Sec. 60. Buildings housing families in excess of those listed above shall be supplied with services in proportion. Plans will have to be submitted to the Department of Administration, in accordance with Section 18 of this code for dwellings housing the number of families in excess of Section 59. 
Sec. 61. No building, structure or premises shall be permanently abandoned, wrecked or destroyed without first giving notification, in writing, to the head of the Office of Utility Management of such abandonment, wrecking or destroying in order that the water service may be shut off and leaking or wasting water shall be eliminated or prevented. Such notification shall be given by the person in charge of the wrecking or destroying of the building or by owner of the building, structure or premises. 
SURGE, SUCTION, GRAVITY AND COMPRESSION TANKS 
Sec. 62. Whenever in any building, structure or premise a water system is maintained which is supplied with other than city water, or is equipped for service other than from the city mains or which is supplied with city water which has been previously used for any purpose, or city water which is stored in a gravity tank or tanks, each service from the city water system shall enter through a receiving reservoir or so-called surge tank for the purpose of preventing water from the secondary system flowing back into the city mains; provided, however, that a receiving reservoir shall not be required where only city water is available and stored without previous use in an approved covered gravity tank, and further provided this tank is so located as to be adequately protected against external pollution and is kept locked, except when opened for inspection or repairs. 
Sec. 63. Each surge tank shall be provided with a sludge drainpipe which shall be connected thereto at the lowest level of the bottom section thereof and shall not extend above such level. Such drain shall be provided with a control valve with a clear waterway equal in area to that of the sludge drainpipe and shall discharge through an indirect connection into the drainage system of the building. 
Sec. 64. When a pump is used a surge or suction tank shall be installed if required to prevent undue lowering of the street main pressure and as directed by the Chief Engineer of the Department. To minimize water hammer a service pipe directly supplying the surge or suction tank or other similar appliance which is controlled by a quick-closing device shall be connected to an air chamber of approved type placed where and as directed by the Chief Engineer of the Department. 
Sec. 65. All buildings that exceed four stories or 55 feet in height in various areas throughout the city, and where pressure from the city main is insufficient to furnish an adequate supply above 55 feet, shall be equipped with either an automatic compression pressure-increasing device or a high level gravity storage tank may be installed. Each such compression device or high level gravity tank shall be provided with all the regulating and control appurtenances and devices which are necessary to ensure complete automatic operation. 
Sec. 66. Wherever any pipe which is a part of the water supply system of any building or structure receives its service from a gravity storage tank, it shall be connected thereto in such a manner as will prevent any water stored within four inches of the bottom of such tank from entering such water supply pipe. Every gravity storage tank shall be provided with an overflow pipe of a cross area of not less than twice that of the pipe which supplies water to such tank. Said overflow pipe shall discharge through an open connection into the drainage system. Every gravity storage tank shall be supplied with water through an approved slow-acting automatic control valve or control cock, the discharge outlet of which shall be installed at a distance not less than six inches above the top of the overflow pipe connection to such gravity storage tank. 
Sec. 67. Each gravity storage tank shall be provided with a sludge drainpipe which shall be connected thereto at the lowest level of the bottom section thereof, and shall not extend above such level. Such drainpipe shall be provided with a control valve with a clear waterway equal in area to that of the sludge drainpipe and shall discharge through an indirect connection into the drainage system of the building. 
Sec. 68. Every house storage tank shall be so located and shall be housed in a manner which shall prevent contamination of the water therein. Such tank shall be protected with a cover sufficiently tight to exclude dust. Approval of the proposed support for a new tank shall be obtained from the Department of Housing, Economic Development and Commerce before the permit for its installation shall be issued. 
Sec. 69. Each compression tank shall be so constructed and connected that the air content thereof shall be not less than 25% of its total capacity. Each compression tank shall be provided with a sludge drainpipe which shall be connected to such tank at the lowest level of the bottom section thereof and shall discharge through an open connection into the drainage system of the building. Each sludge drainpipe shall be provided with a control valve with a clear waterway equal in area to that of the sludge drainpipe. No water shall enter into any water supply pipe at a lower level than four inches above the bottom of such compression tank. 
Sec. 70. Any water pipe connection to any pump or other appliance through which any vibration, shock, strain, stress or pulsation which may originate or develop a water hammer or any excess noises or sounds in the water supply system of any building or structure and which may be communicated through such connection or service pipe of the Jersey City Water Supply System is prohibited. 
CHECK VALVES 
Sec. 71. Check valves which are noiseless in their operation and air chambers of sufficient air cushion capacity shall be installed in the suction pipe and the discharge pipe of each house pump or fire pump or other water pressure increasing device; provided, however, that where such check valves are of the slow-acting type, and the operation thereof entirely eliminates the shocks, strains, stresses and excess noises caused by the operation of such pump or device, the installation of air chambers may be dispensed with. No check valve shall be installed as herein provided unless the design and construction thereof shall first have been approved by the head of the Office of Utility Management. 
Sec. 72. A fire line service shall be check-valved at the outlet side of the meter to prevent a backflow of water through the meter. A check valve shall be provided at the outlet side of a domestic meter where an automatic compression device or high level gravity storage tank is installed. Where a service supplying a hot water or steam boiler is check-valved, an approved relief valve which will open when the temperature in the system reaches a predetermined maximum temperature shall be installed at the outlet side of the check valve. 
Sec. 73. All outlet connections from any of the potable water supply lines, on steamship piers, wharves, docks or bulkheads adjacent to or projecting into any of the streams or navigable waters bordering Jersey City that may be used or are available for use as a ship or boat supply, including fire line connections, that are receiving their water supply from the Jersey City Water Supply System, shall be equipped with approved check valves to prevent the possible backflow of water from a secondary source of supply, contaminating the city water supply. 
Sec. 74. Where more than one service pipe supplies a building and the services are supplied from different mains, the services shall be check-valved at the outlet side of the house valve with an approved check valve. 
FIRE AND SPRINKLER SYSTEMS 
Sec. 75. The largest size connection for fire and sprinkler systems allowed shall be of eight-inch diameter, and the street main for such connection shall be of ten-inch diameter or larger. Larger connections may be made by agreement with the Bureau. For a six-inch main no connections larger than four-inch shall be allowed. 
Sec. 76. All street main connections for fire and sprinkler systems or for any other purposes shall be provided with valves inside the building line, in order that the same may be shut off in case of a leak or bursting of pipe or other cause. Said valves shall be set in conspicuous places, easily accessible, and left entirely open for fire purposes. If required by the fire insurance representatives, the same may be sealed. 
Sec. 77. All fire protective equipment that is supplied with water from the Jersey City Water Supply System shall be drained and flushed at least every six months and kept free from accumulations of sand, silt and stagnant water which would nullify the action of the chlorine content of city water. 
Sec. 78. No city water pipelines in any building, premises, material or storage yard on railroad property which receives service from the Jersey City Water Supply System shall have for fire-extinguishing purposes a Siamese or other connection that is or has been installed near any river or waterway where a city fire boat or city fire engine or pump may pump river water into the city water pipes through a cross-connection of any kind. A check-valve or any other kind or type of valve on any cross-connection is prohibited. No stationary pump or privately owned fire equipment shall be maintained for emergency use as described above in any premises adjacent to the rivers, nor shall they use cisterns or wells adjacent to the rivers for cross-connections to city water supplied pipes for emergency fire-extinguishing purposes. 
METERS 
Sec. 79. Where this code or the rules or regulations of the Department providing for the installation of a water service for the purpose of supplying water from the Jersey City Water Supply System to any building, structure or premises, such service pipe shall be metered and the meter shall be considered a part of such service pipe. The location of such meter, either inside or outside of any building or structure, shall be determined by the Chief Engineer of the Department. The installation of any water meter at any location other than that determined by said Chief Engineer of the Department is prohibited. 
Sec. 80. All meters (whether placed on new or old services) from 5/8 inch in diameter to and including two inches in diameter shall be set by employees of the Department. 
Sec. 81. Meters furnished by applicant shall be of a style approved by the Department and subject to test by the same Department. 
Sec. 82. The applicant shall forward the meter to the meter laboratory for testing purposes without any unnecessary delay after paying a fee to and receiving a permit from the Department. 
Sec. 83. Meters shall be set with meter couplings and gate valves on each side, and waste close to the outlet shall be placed in a conspicuous place, easy of access and located so as to control the entire supply. For fire service meters, the installation shall be approved by the Chief Engineer of the Department before the same is made. 
Sec. 84. All meters four inches and over in diameter shall, when set up, have bypass connection with testing corporation valve two inches in diameter and be set in accordance with installation bypass plan on file in the office of the Chief Engineer of the Department. 
Sec. 85. All meters shall be put in under the supervision of the Department and at the expense of the owner of the property. 
Sec. 86. Care shall be exercised to keep the inside of the meters free and clear of white and red lead, dirt, gravel and all other foreign matter. 
Sec. 87. The removal of all meters shall be done only by employees of the Department or by licensed master plumbers and shall be delivered to the meter laboratory of the Department within 24 hours from the time of the removal of the same. 
Sec. 88. Notice to the Department of any stoppage or other irregularity of the meter shall be given immediately by the owner or his or her agent when a closing nipple shall be temporarily substituted by the Bureau or a master plumber until such defect may be remedied. 
Sec. 89. The owner of any premises where a meter is installed shall be held responsible for its care and protection from freezing and from injury of interference by any person or persons. 
Sec. 90. Payment for meters shall be made in advance, and only those makes or meters approved by the Department shall be allowed. 
Sec. 91. Meters shall be tested on application to the Department. A testing charge as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges, shall be made for meters up to and including one inch in capacity. For taking out, testing and replacing meters of larger capacity than one inch, estimate shall be given upon request but the actual cost shall be charged and in case of nonpayment shall become a lien upon the property. 
Sec. 92. When a meter is found to be not registering, repairs shall be made by the Department and the meter put in accurate condition. The actual cost of the repair shall be charged to the consumer on the subsequent billing period. To estimate the consumption of water during the time of nonregistration a daily average shall be obtained from the readings taken at least one month after repairs have been made, and this figure shall be used as a basis on which to charge for water used during the period in which meter failed to show any registration. 
Sec. 93. Meters shall be considered correct if found upon test to be registering within 2%, plus or minus, that is 98% to 102%. When an error of more than 2%, plus or minus, is found to exist the customer shall be charged or abated for the same dating back to time of last test made by the Department. Where percent of inaccuracy is found to be either plus or minus, the same shall be figured from 100%. 
Sec. 94. Water service shall be discontinued or turned off from any premises upon the written order of the owner. 
REGULATIONS AND TESTS 
Sec. 95. The city is divided into districts coextensive with the boundary lines of the 12 wards of Jersey City. These districts are subdivided into blocks and lots, each of said lots having a twenty-five-foot frontage and each twenty-five-foot frontage being assigned a serial number; all premises to be metered in the order of serial number in the districts. 
Sec. 96. When trenches are opened and service pipes laid, the plumber shall give notice to the Permit Clerk fixing the time when the trench shall be ready for tapper and inspector. Such notice shall be given at least 24 hours in advance of the time fixed, and pipes therein shall be inspected before trench is filled. 
Sec. 97. Each new service or repair to a service shall be subjected by the plumber to a water test under the main pressure for a period of 10 minutes. All pipes and appurtenances shall remain uncovered for the duration of the test and shall show no sign of leakage and may be subject to the inspection of the Department inspector. 
Sec. 98. The Department shall refuse to supply water to premises wherein the plumbing work has not been done in accordance with the provisions of the Plumbing Code. 
Sec. 99. When buildings are being torn down or demolished, an inspection shall be made by a representative of the Department of all water pipes and connections and supply shall be shut off at the main at the expense of the owner. 
Sec. 100. Officers of the Department, and their authorized agents, may enter the premises of any water consumer at any reasonable time and examine the pipes and fixtures, the quantities of water used and the manner of its use. All such officers and authorized agents shall be provided by the Department with a badge and certificate as evidence of their authority. 
Sec. 101. Readings for water bills shall be taken from recorded and recognized account meters only; special readings at the request of the owners or agents from meters shall be made upon the payment of a fee as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges, for each such reading and report thereof. 
Sec. 102. No rebate shall be allowed for metered vacant premises. Owners shall be held responsible for all charges accruing for water service, until written notice has been given to the Department to discontinue the supply. 
Sec. 102.1. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued upon any building or structure which requires an approved metering system to be installed thereon unless the approved water metering system or systems required are installed and are in proper working order. No inspector of any department, division or administrative unit of this city shall recommend that a certificate of occupancy may issue unless the required approved metering system or systems are installed as provided in this code. 
Sec. 102.2. It shall be the duty of the owner of any property required to be metered for water and in which there is no such approved metering system to report such fact to the Administration Department of the city. It shall be the duty of any inspector, official or employee of the city, upon ascertaining that there is no approved metering system on property required to be metered for water, to report to the Department of Administration such fact promptly upon ascertaining the same. 
Sec. 102.3. Access to metering system. 
A.  It shall be the duty of every owner of property to provide unhampered and unimpeded access to the approved metering system. Refusal, without good cause, to provide such unhampered, unimpeded access to authorized Administration Department inspectors, meter readers, installers or plumbers shall be a violation of this code. 
B.  Failure to reply to or comply with requests from the Administration Department for such access, when such requests are made through certified or first class mail and properly addressed to the legal owner of the property, shall be construed as denial of such access and shall be punishable as a violation of this code. 
Sec. 102.4. Approved metering systems. [Added 10-2-1979 by Ord. No. S-292; amended 5-10-1984 by Ord. No. MC-599] 
A.  Owners of properties required to be metered for water shall obtain the approved metering systems from the city's Water Meter Shop only. Payment for such systems, when payments are required by the Administration Department, must be made to the city official or employee designated to accept such payment. Owners may contract with private, licensed plumbers to install such systems but only if the systems are obtained from the city's Water Meter Shop as required herein. All permits required by the city pertaining to the installation of the approved metering systems must be applied for and secured by the owner or his or her agent before any such systems are released from the Water Meter Shop. 
B.  Approved metering systems, obtained from the city by owners or their agents, must be installed within five business days from the date of the release of the metering systems by the city to the owner or agent. Waiver of the five-business-day deadline may be granted by the Business Administrator. 
C.  Failure of the owner or his or her agent to install approved metering systems within the five business days prescribed shall be a violation of this code. Each business day beyond the five-business-day deadline shall be a separate violation until the system or systems are installed. 
Sec. 102.5. It shall be no defense on the part of the owner for payment of water consumed that there is no approved metering system installed on the premises of the owner. It shall be the duty of the owner that an approved metering system be installed on said premises before any water is consumed. 
Sec. 102.6. Unlawful acts. 
A.  It shall be a violation of this code and otherwise unlawful for any owner to cause or allow water to be consumed without any approved metering system to register the amount of water consumed. 
B.  In addition to any fines imposed under this code, the head of the Office of Utility Management may rebill an owner in whose building unmetered water has been consumed. Such rebilling shall be for the unmetered water consumed in the building. 
C.  Bypass lines on approved metering systems of less than three inches capacity are strictly forbidden. Such bypass lines, and any valves controlling the flow of water through such bypass lines, must be removed forthwith. The resultant openings in "tee" fittings must be capped or plugged immediately after removal of the lines and valves. 
Sec. 102.7. Anyone violating any provisions contained in Sections 79 through 102.7 of this code pertaining to water supply and plumbing connections therewith shall be liable to a fine as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25. Each day of such violation shall be deemed and considered to be a separate and distinct offense and shall be punishable as such. 
PRIVATE MAINS 
Sec. 103. Private mains supplying premises on a city street in which no city water main exists shall be not less than one inch in diameter and may be of AAA lead, galvanized lead lined pipe, extra heavy seamless drawn brass or soft tempered Class K copper water tube, for that portion of the main that takes the place of the city main. The type of pipe used shall be in accordance with specifications set forth in Section 42. The connection of the private main to the city main shall be equipped at the connection to the tap with a gooseneck or offset swing joint as specified in Section 54. Private mains shall be controlled by a gate valve, placed in the private main on the projected building line of the street in which the city main exists, and a cast-iron extension street valve box shall be placed over the valve. 
Sec. 104. Private mains and all connections thereto and branches therefrom shall be installed only under permit from and inspection by the Department. 
Sec. 105. Owners of the premises supplied from private mains shall maintain such mains in good order and be responsible for the plugging of the controlling tap when replaced by a city main. 
Sec. 106. No permits will be issued to alter or repair a private water main supplying buildings facing on a street in which a city main is in service. Notices shall be sent to the owners of such property to disconnect from the private main, separately connect to the city main and plug the tap controlling the private main. 
AIR CONDITIONING, REFRIGERATION AND CROSS-CONNECTIONS 
Sec. 107. The installation of new service pipes or the use of the present service pipes for water cooled air-conditioning units, refrigeration machinery and compressor installations may be permitted upon the approval of the Department of Administration, of plans submitted by a licensed master plumber showing the proposed location and size of the service pipe, the capacity of each unit to be installed, the number of units to be installed, the manufacturer's rating for water consumption per unit and the size of the waste pipe to sanitary sewer, provided that the installation will comply with Section 108 of this code. 
Sec. 108. Air-conditioning and refrigeration equipment. 
A.  All water cooled air-conditioning equipment, refrigeration machinery and compressor installations discharging water into the city sewerage system shall be subject to the city's inspection and approval. Such installations shall be free of any possibility of cross-connections or back siphonage in case of low pressure in the city water main, and the connection of the installation with water and waste pipes shall be done by a licensed plumber of the City of Jersey City. A written permit will be required from the Office of Permit Clerk for each installation for which a charge, as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges, will be made, which charge will include the expense of regular inspection. Extra charges will be made for additional inspections required on account of condemnation of work or for premature request for inspection. 
B.  Applications for permits for units heretofore or hereafter installed shall be signed by both the licensed master plumber and the owner of the premises where the installation will take place. The application will further specify the type of dwelling, store, commercial establishment or industrial plant to be served, and the maximum rating as to capacity of the unit in tons of refrigeration and the horsepower required under maximum summer operating conditions, the number of units to be installed, the manufacturer's rating for water consumption per unit, the type of water conservation equipment to be installed and such additional information regarding the proposed installation as may be required by the Department. In no case shall the rated capacity of the refrigeration unit in tons be considered less than the nameplate horsepower of the driving equipment for the purpose of this code. In the absence of the required manufacturer's maximum rating as to capacity of the unit in tons of refrigeration for the purpose of this code, the Department may specify the tonnage of the refrigeration unit by using the nameplate horsepower of the driving unit. In case water conservation devices are required to comply with Subsection C, the name of the manufacturer and the guarantee on the water conservation device are to be given for maximum anticipated summer operating conditions, together with the manufacturer's identifying data on the equipment. Approval must be obtained before installation of the equipment is started. 
C.  No permit shall be issued for the installation and/or use of any air-conditioning units unless: 
(1)  Any such installation consisting of one unit or a group of units, with a total capacity exceeding five tons or requiring more than five horsepower to drive the compressor, shall be equipped with an approved type of economizer, evaporate condenser, water cooling tower or other similar apparatus. These water conservation devices shall be such that under maximum summer temperature they will not require water from the city water supply system at a rate greater than 0.12 gallons per minute per ton of refrigeration. Units of five-ton capacity and under which do not have water conservation devices shall be provided with an automatic water regulating device so as to limit the use of water under maximum summer conditions to not more than two gallons per minute per ton of refrigeration. 
(2)  Makeup water connections to a water conservation device are to be so arranged that the supply has a physical break between the city water main and said device so it will be impossible for water to siphon back in case of low pressure in the city water main. 
D.  Water from any such installation shall not be discharged into the city's sewerage system at a rate in excess of the foregoing, and discharged wastewater shall be in strict accordance with Plumbing Code of Jersey City and any other department having jurisdiction. 
E.  The Chief Engineer of the Department shall be satisfied that the system can be operated without adversely affecting the flow to other uses of water in the area or becoming detrimental to public safety. The city reserves the right to restrict or prohibit the use of water that is not considered essential to the health and welfare of the people during any water emergency period that may be caused by depleted storage reservoirs due to drought periods or other adverse conditions of nature, breaks in transmission mains or any part of the water system causing a water shortage or threatened water shortage. The city reserves the right to restrict or prohibit extraordinary use of water if water supply conditions so require. The city is not required to maintain any minimum pressure other than that required to deliver water into the basement of any premises. 
F.  All water cooled air-conditioning equipment, refrigeration machinery and compressor installations using water from the city main or discharging water into the city sewerage system, installed or in operation prior to the adoption of this code, shall be required to make such water cooled air-conditioning equipment, refrigeration machinery or air compressor installations conform to the terms of this code, and the owner or operator of said equipment shall have one year from the adoption of this code to comply with the provisions hereto provided for. 
G.  In the event that an owner or occupant fails to make the water cooled air-conditioning equipment, refrigeration machinery or compressor installations conform with the terms of this code and specifically in violation of Section 6 hereof, then the city shall have the right to discontinue the water service to the property in accordance with Section 129 of this code. 
H.  Licensed plumbers guilty of violating any of the sections of this code shall be prohibited from securing further permits from this Bureau and where willful violations warrant, the head of the Office of Utility Management may prefer charges to the Board of Health for the revocation of a master plumber's license. 
Sec. 109. No person or corporation shall install, own or operate a physical connection of any type between an approved public potable water supply and a secondary or unapproved water supply. A "physical connection" means any cross-connection, bypass, valve, pipeline, auxiliary intake or any device which permits or may permit any flow of water into an approved public potable water supply from an unapproved water supply. 
SECONDARY WATER 
Sec. 110. Secondary water is any water from a private water system of pipes or piping which receives its water supply from the rivers or bays or streams bounding the shoreline of Jersey City, or from any well or cistern or any groundwater or rainwater reservoirs. Secondary water is also water from the mains of the Jersey City Water Supply System which has been used for any purpose within any building, structure or premises or which has been discharged from any type of condenser coils, or cooling systems, drinking fountains, hydraulic lifts, boilers, Linotype machines, dye casting machines, metal rolling, pressing, crushing machines or apparatus or water which has been stored in such a manner as to expose it to possible contamination. 
Sec. 111. No secondary water shall overflow into or be discharged into any surge tank, storage tank or reservoir or shall in any way be piped or conveyed into the water supply system of any building, structure or premises to become a part of or be mixed with the fresh water supply from the mains of the Jersey City Water Supply System either inside of the premises or in the water service pipe. Secondary water shall not be piped to or used for cooling crushers, rollers or mixers where foods, candies, liquids or materials are manufactured for human or animal consumption. No connection, tap or opening shall be made in a water distribution system other than an approved water distribution system which will permit such water being used for drinking. Wherever the fire protective equipment in any building, structure or premises has service from the Jersey City Water Supply System, no pipe or other conduit which conveys secondary water shall be cross-connected to the fire protective equipment. All fire protective equipment connected to the Jersey City Water Supply System shall be constructed in such manner that all tanks, pipes, pumps, surge tanks and fire hydrants can be thoroughly drained, flushed and cleaned by the owners of such equipment and premises, and there shall be no direct connections from the tanks, pipes and other equipment to any drainage pipes or sewers. 
Sec. 112. Every pump or hydrant for providing drinking water supply shall be protected from surface water and contamination. 
Sec. 113. No pipe or system of piping which receives its supply from the Jersey City Water Supply System shall be directly connected to any processing tank, vat, mixer, heater, cooker, washer, pump appliance or equipment used for storing, holding or conveying fluids or materials or for manufacturing or food processing or washing purposes. Such appliances and equipment shall be supplied from the Jersey City Water Supply System through an open funnel connection or an open tank which shall be located not less than six inches above the overflow rim of such container, appliance or equipment. No pipe or system of piping in any building, structure or premises, which receives its supply from the Jersey City Water Supply System, shall be directly connected to any device, appliance or apparatus in which such water supply is used to provide power through a water jet or other device to create vacuum or partial vacuum with which to operate any aspirator, siphon, cellar drainer, ejector, cleaner, sweeper, conveyer or washer of any kind or description. 
Sec. 114. No plumbing fixture shall be installed unless the water supply enters said fixture at least two inches above any overflow connections. All submerged water supply inlet connections are hereby prohibited, and no tanks, vats, utensils or other water supply devices used for other than drinking purposes and having submerged water supply inlets shall be directly connected to city water supply; except any water heating device or heated water storage tank or low pressure boiler. 
MISCELLANEOUS 
Sec. 115. Use of fire hydrants. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person other than an employee of the Departments of Administration and Public Works and employees of the Jersey City Fire and Police Departments or other duly authorized personnel or representatives to open or otherwise operate, use or take water from any fire hydrant owned by the City of Jersey City without first obtaining a permit from the Permit Clerk. The charges for the use of fire hydrants shall be fixed from time to time by the Department of Administration. In operating a hydrant, a wrench of a design approved by the Department of Administration shall be used. The use of any other type of wrench or operating device will not be permitted. The use of the large nozzle is restricted to the Fire Department only. No specially designated hydrant shall be opened or used except by the Department of Administration or Fire Department. Regular nozzle caps shall be replaced after use of hydrant. The use of a defective hydrant is prohibited. Access to hydrants shall not be obstructed. Connections with hydrants shall be of a type that can easily and quickly be detached. Hydrants shall be protected by the user from freezing or other damage, and if damage to a hydrant results from the use thereof, repairs shall be made at the expense of the user. To prevent freezing, hydrants used at any time during the period from November 1 to April 1 shall in every instance be pumped out immediately after use. No hydrant shall be used when the temperature is less than 32° F. except in emergency and under special permission from the Department of Administration. 
B.  When the use of a hydrant is authorized for construction or other purposes, the permittee shall assume the obligation for the payment of wages of the inspector designated by the Department of Administration to supervise its use during the period covered by the permits. The permittee shall also be obliged to provide Workman's Compensation Insurance in a form satisfactory to the Department of Administration. 
C.  Any person violating Section 115 shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or imprisonment not exceeding 90 days, or both, pursuant to Jersey City Code § 1-25. The City of Jersey City shall further have the right to take other appropriate actions pursuant to Jersey City Code § 1-25. 
D.  In addition to the above penalties, the City of Jersey City may take other appropriate action to secure reimbursement for any damage to fire hydrants, water mains, other property or equipment, loss of water and/or cost of sewerage caused directly or indirectly by a violation. 
Sec. 116. When tests made by the Department indicate a leak on a service pipe, a written notice to repair will be served upon the owner or occupant specifying a reasonable time in which to engage a licensed master plumber to make the necessary repairs. If the notice is not complied with, the Department will shut off the tap controlling the service pipe at the expense of the owner. 
A.  When it is necessary for the department to shut off a tap because of a leaking service, nonpayment of a bill or noncompliance with the Department regulations, the owner will be charged with all costs incidental thereto. 
B.  When the tap of a leaking service pipe is shut by Department force, the owner will be afforded reasonable time in which to engage a licensed plumber to take over the street excavation and make the necessary repairs. If the owner fails to engage a licensed plumber, the tap will be left closed, the house control valve will be shut and the excavation backfilled immediately; after which a ten-day notice to repair the service will be served on the owner or occupant. 
Sec. 116.1. The City Council may from time to time enter into agreements for the repair of water service lines and sewer lines with qualifying residential owners whenever the health officer certifies that immediate repairs are necessary to protect the health or safety of occupants or tenants and the owner provides satisfactory evidence of his or her inability to finance the entire cost of repair or replacement of the water service line or sewer line. Applications for such agreements shall be made to the Business Administrator and shall include such information as the Business Administrator considers relevant, including evidence of the owner's inability to obtain funds for the cost of repairs. The Business Administrator shall forward the application to the council with a recommendation together with a proposed resolution and payment schedule prepared in accordance with N.J.S.A. 54:5-19. The Administration Department shall not commence repair or replacement of any water service line or sewer line until the council has approved and the owner has signed an agreement for the payment of the assessed costs of repair or replacement. 
Sec. 117. No person shall attach, alter or extend any water pipe or make any alteration in any tapcock or other fixture, nor do any work calculated to increase the facilities for using the water, nor turn on or off the stopcock on the main or at the curb, unless registered as a licensed master plumber by the city and who has made application to and received a permit from the Permit Clerk. 
Sec. 118. In repairing old service pipes the sections of this code governing installation of new service pipes must be complied with. If repairs require the replacement of ½ or more of the line an entire new service must be installed. 
Sec. 119. When a repair is found to be necessary on a service and such repair requires the rewiping of the joint immediately adjacent to the tap or replacement of the connection in galvanized iron, brass or K Copper Tubing at the tap, the service between the tap and the service pipe shall be equipped with a gooseneck or swing joint offset. 
Sec. 120. All water service pipes or supply pipes that are installed in the ground in any public street or thoroughfare or in buildings, structures or privately owned premises, where the service pipe or supply pipe has been damaged by electrolysis, galvanic action or other local conditions shall be repaired and protected to the satisfaction of the Department by a licensed master plumber engaged by the owner. 
Sec. 121. No company or individual shall undertake the thawing of water service pipes or mains by the use of electric current unless an inspector of the Department supervises the work. The services of the inspector shall be paid for by the company or individual to whose work he is assigned. 
Sec. 122. The grounding of electric circuits or systems to any water service pipe or water supply pipe shall conform to the provisions of the electrical section of the code. The Chief Engineer shall reserve the right to order the removal of the grounding of an electrical circuit to a water supply pipe when it has been demonstrated that such grounding is having a deleterious effect on the potable water supply. Such order shall be served on the owner of the premises involved or on his or her legal representative or other responsible person, either through the City Electrical Inspector or by the Chief Engineer or his or her authorized representative. 
Sec. 123. Any service substituted by another shall be shut off at the corporation stop on the city main by the licensed master plumber engaged by the owner of the premises when the installation of the new service has been completed and while the excavation is still open. 
Sec. 124. Hydrants, hose bibs and other fixtures shall be placed where the same shall not be readily accessible to persons occupying the adjoining premises. 
Sec. 125. Where water has been turned off or disconnected for any reason, it shall be so recorded and the charge ceases from that date; but where water which is recorded as turned off or disconnected is at any time found to be connected and turned on without the authority of the Bureau, the Bureau shall charge for use of the water from the recorded date of turning off. 
Sec. 126. Service shall be renewed under a proper application when the conditions under which such service was discontinued are corrected and upon the payment of all proper charges provided for in the schedule of rates or tariff of the Department which may be due. 
Sec. 127. Where water service has been discontinued or shut off by a licensed master plumber for immediate repairs, no person shall connect or turn it on unless properly authorized by the Department. 
Sec. 128. All paraphernalia, including credentials, books, documents, papers and miscellaneous property derived from or received from the Department, at all times are and shall remain the property of the Department of Administration of the City of Jersey City. 
Sec. 129. Service of water may be discontinued for any of the following reasons: 
A.  For the use of water for any other property or purpose than that described in the application. 
B.  For willful waste of water through improper or imperfect pipes, fixtures or otherwise. 
C.  For failure to maintain in good order connections, service pipes or fixtures owned by the applicant. 
D.  For molesting any service, pipe, meter, curb stopcock or seal or any other appliance of the Department. 
E.  For nonpayment of water service or any other charge accruing under the application. 
F.  For refusal of reasonable access to property for purposes of inspecting or for reading, caring for or removing meters. 
G.  For supplying any person or families other than those for which the service was installed. 
H.  For making or causing to be made a cross-connection of any form or type or the installation of any fitting for a potential cross-connection between the potable water supplied by the Bureau and any secondary water supply. 
I.  For installing, attaching or permitting the use of any type of ground connection for electric circuits or systems to any water main, service pipe or supply pipe that does not conform to the provisions of the electrical section of the code. 
J.  Where air-conditioning equipment, refrigeration machinery and compressor installations using water from the city mains are in violation of the provisions of Section 108 of this code. 
Sec. 130. Taps, wet connections or other connections to a city main shall be made only by Department employees. No tap or wet connection shall be inserted within 24 inches of a hub, other connection, special casting, hydrant branch or dead end. The minimum spacing interval for taps and wet connections shall be 18 inches for three-fourths-inch and one-inch taps, and 24 inches for one-and-one-half-inch and two-inch taps and wet connections. No tap or wet connection shall be installed below the horizontal plane of the city main. 
Sec. 131. The charges for a tap or wet connection will be for the furnishing, delivering and inserting of the tap or the furnishing and setting of the wet connection sleeve and valve complete and ready for connection of the service pipe. These charges will be fixed by the Department and will be subject without notice to such occasional revisions as may be required by changes in the cost of labor and material. 
Sec. 132. No person shall in the City of Jersey City add or engage in or by a sign or otherwise advertise or hold himself out as engaged in the business of adding any chemical or other substance to the water supply within a building without first obtaining the approval of the Department of Administration and the Board of Health. Such addition of chemicals shall be for anticorrosion or antiscaling purposes only, and shall be performed in conformity with terms and conditions of the regulations of the Department of Administration and the Board of Health. No owner, lessee, occupant, tenant or other person in charge of a building shall cause, permit, allow or suffer any chemical or other substance to be added to the water supply in such building which water supply is subsequently furnished to any guest, customer, occupant, tenant or other person for domestic use of human consumption unless such addition or treatment is performed by the holder of a permit from the Board of Health in accordance with the regulations of said Board. 
The provisions of this section shall not apply to the treatment of water for industrial purposes, swimming pools, for air-conditioning systems or for any use which does not include human consumption, but in all such cases proper precaution shall be taken to preclude the possibility that the treated water may come in contact with or contaminate the potable water supply distribution system of the building, and provisions satisfactory to the Office of Utility Management shall be made to preclude the possibility that the treated water may come into contact with or contaminate the public water supply. 
No chemicals that are approved by the Board of Health and the Department of Administration for anticorrosion or anti-scaling purposes shall be added in such a manner as to increase the total alkalinity, total hardness or total silica content of the water by more than 50 parts per million as determined by the methods of water analysis contained in the latest edition of Standard Methods of Water Analysis, approved by the American Public Health Association and the American Waterworks Association. 
Sec. 133. The installation of underground telephone conduits, electric and power conduits, cables, gas mains, steam mains, sewers or any other conduit, pipe or underground structures of any nature in public streets or thoroughfares where city water mains are located shall maintain a minimum clearance of 12 inches in crossing under or paralleling the city water main. No other underground utility of any type shall be constructed parallel to and directly above the vertical center line of any city water main or parallel to and in the same plane as the horizontal center line of the water main that may prevent future connections being made to the city main. All persons or corporations shall be required to submit plans in triplicate to the Department of Administration for approval of all underground structures prior to their installation in public streets or thoroughfares. 
CHAPTER 3 
Sec. 134. The master plumber or journeyman plumber, as defined herein, in order to do work under this code shall be duly licensed pursuant to the terms of the Plumbing Code of the City of Jersey City, adopted November 20, 1951. 
Sec. 135. All materials to be used for plumbing connections, unless expressly provided for in this code, shall comply with the standards set forth in said Plumbing Code of the City of Jersey City, adopted November 20, 1951. 
Sec. 136. Any persons violating any provision whatsoever of this code or failing to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or unlawfully making a plumbing connection into the city water mains, water meter or the cross-connections thereof; or misusing the water supply system for air conditioning or refrigeration, contrary to provisions of this code or parts thereof, in violation of the provisions of said code or without a permit as herein provided for or in accordance therewith shall, upon conviction, be punishable by a fine or penalty as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's Note: The former definition of "Commissioner," which immediately followed this definition, was repealed pursuant to Ord. No. 97-052, adopted 8-13-1997. 
 
§ 337-4. - Metered water rates. [Amended 11-12-1980 by Ord. No. S-527; 2-24-1981 by Ord. No. S-582; 4-14-1981 by Ord. No. S-600; 12-23-1981 by Ord. No. MC-89; 9-12-1985 by Ord. No. C-2; 4-23-1986 by Ord. No. C-218; 4-14-1988 by Ord. No. C-709; 9-13-1989 by Ord. No. McC-16; 12-22-1992 by Ord. No. 92-188; 4-28-1993 by Ord. No. 93-041; 6-9-1993 by Ord. No. 93-055; 10-27-1993 by Ord. No. 93-121; 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050] 
A.  Subject to Subsection C, the charge to retail customers, both within and outside the City of Jersey City, and which customers are nonmunicipal and nonprivate water system customers for water consumption, shall be at the rates as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges. 
B.  Nonprofit charitable organizations which prior to July 1, 1986, had been determined to be exempt from charges for water under the standards previously prescribed by the governing body shall continue to be exempt from charges for water until October 31, 1993, but, thereafter, all such previously granted exemptions shall cease. Any nonprofit charitable organization exempt from charges for water prior to July 1, 1986, which paid for water from July 1, 1986, to October 31, 1993, shall receive a credit without interest to be applied to future charges. 
C.  Effective November 1, 1993, water metered to buildings that are primarily used by private, nonprofit educational organizations as accredited elementary and secondary schools shall pay a rate as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges. The Business Administrator shall require satisfactory evidence that a private, nonprofit educational organization qualifies for this rate. 
[Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052]  
§ 337-5. - Bulk water rates. [Added 12-22-1992 by Ord. No. 92-188; amended 4-28-1993 by Ord. No. 93-041; 6-9-1993 by Ord. No. 93-055; 10-27-1993 by Ord. No. 93-121; 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050] 
The rate charged to municipal and private water systems and other customers which enter into contracts having a term of five years or more shall be as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges.  
§ 337-6. - Payments for metered water; interest and penalties. [Amended 11-12-1980 by Ord. No. S-527; 12-23-1980 by Ord. No. MC-89; 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-048] 
A.  Every water meter shall be charged and billed separately. Payments for metered water shall not be received unless all arrears and miscellaneous charges have been paid. 
B.  Interest and penalties at the rate of 18% per annum shall be added to all metered water bills if not paid within 30 days, including Sundays and holidays, from due date. 
C.  Waiver of interest and penalties. 
(1)  [Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] Criteria. The Business Administrator is hereby authorized to waive the interest and penalties on metered water bills not paid within 30 days if the terms and conditions established herein are complied with and if any of the following criteria are applicable: 
(a)  Due to no fault of the customer, the customer has received estimated bills for nine months or more and the estimated bill differs from the actual bill by 25% or more for an industrial account or 25% or more for a residential account. 
(b)  Due to no fault of the customer, the customer has not been billed for the preceding 12 months. 
(c)  In the case of a customer whose meter is read by remote reading devices, the customer has received an incorrect bill, provided that the customer notifies the Department of Administration no later than 30 days from the mailing date on the bill. 
(d)  A customer did not receive water bills with invoice dates May 29, 1996, June 12, 1996, and June 30, 1996, and did not have a prior account balance. 
(2)  A customer must agree to pay in full all principal charges due and owing within a time period deemed acceptable by the Business Administrator but no later than nine months after a bill is sent. The customer must agree to a full inspection allowing access to meter and remote. The customer must also keep current bills current. 
(3)  After reviewing the billing account history and such other evidence that the Business Administrator deems relevant, the Business Administrator is authorized to waive all or a portion of the interest and penalty charges as he/she deems appropriate. The Business Administrator shall prepare a written statement to be filed with the City Tax Collector and the appropriate designee of United Water indicating the reason or reasons for the waiver of all or a portion of the interest and penalty charges. The authority granted herein to the Business Administrator to waive interest and penalty charges on metered water bills shall expire on December 31, 1997. 
(4)  Once every two weeks, the Business Administrator shall provide a schedule to the governing body which shall include the following information for all metered water accounts for which the Business Administrator waived interest and penalties during the preceding two weeks: address of property which received waiver, name of property owner who received waiver, total amount due without interest and penalties added, total amount of interest and penalties due before waiver and total amount of interest and penalties waived.  
§ 337-7. - Charges to become lien. 
Water charges shall be a lien against the premises served.  
§ 337-8. - Fire hydrant charge. 
A.  The City of Jersey City shall pay to the water account the sum as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges, for each and every fire hydrant belonging to the City of Jersey City as a charge for water usage from said hydrants and maintenance thereof. 
[Amended 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050] 
B.  Hereafter, the governing body shall appropriate sufficient moneys in each annual budget to pay for said hydrant charges. 
C.  The annual charges for privately owned fire hydrants shall be as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges. 
[Added 12-23-1981 by Ord. No. MC-89; amended 9-12-1985 by Ord. No. C-2; 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050]  
§ 337-9. - Enforcement. [Added 11-9-1979 by Ord. No. S-301; amended 5-10-1984 by Ord. No. MC-599; 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050] 
The following personnel are hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this chapter pertaining to water meters: 
A.  The Business Administrator. 
[Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
B.  (Reserved).* 
* Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, which listed the Director of the Water Department, was removed pursuant to Ord. No. 97-052, adopted 8-13-1997. The responsibilities of the Director of the Water Department now rest with the Business Administrator. 
C.  The head of the Office of Utility Management. 
[Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
D.  The Supervisor of water meter readers. 
E.  All water meter readers. 
F.  The Supervisor of the Water Meter Shop. 
G.  Any personnel authorized and directed to perform inspections by the Business Administrator, the head of the Office of Utility Management, the Supervisor of the water meter readers or the Supervisor of the Water Meter Shop. 
[Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052]  
§ 337-10. - Charges collected by Office of Utility Management. [Added 12-23-1981 by Ord. No. MC-89; amended 2-11-1987 by Ord. No. C-369; 11-23-1988 by Ord. No. C-855; 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050; 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
A.  The charges for services rendered shall be collected by the Office of Utility Management, Department of Administration, as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges. 
B.  The fee for water meter tests listed in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges, may be waived if the meter tested proves to register incorrectly.  
§ 337-11. - Water permit fees. [Added 12-23-1981 by Ord. No. MC-89; amended 2-11-1987 by Ord. No. C-369; 10-8-1987 by Ord. No. C-555; 4-27-1989 by Ord. No. C-937; 8-16-1989 by Ord. No. McC-16; 2-26-1992 by Ord. No. McC-422; 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050; 7-19-2006 by Ord. No. 06-085] 
A.  The fees as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges, shall be charged upon the issuance of the water meter permit, water tap permit or fire hydrant permit. 
B.  There will be a fifty (50) percent reduction in the connection fee or tapping fee assessed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:14B-21 for new connections to the water system and a fifty (50) percent reduction in the connection fee or the tapping fee assessed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:14B-22 for new connections to the sewerage system which are to be charged to public housing authorities and to non-profit organizations building affordable housing projects.  
§ 337-12. - Jersey City Water Laboratory fees. [Added 1-10-1985 by Ord. No. MC-770; amended 2-13-1991 by Ord. No. McC-253; 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050] 
Jersey City Water Laboratory fees shall be as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges.  
§ 337-13. - Water emergencies. [Added 9-27-1989 by Ord. No. McC-38] 
A.  Whenever the Mayor finds that a water emergency exists in the city, he or she may issue an executive order declaring the existence of a water emergency in the municipality. The executive order shall identify that portion of the city affected by the water emergency, which may include the entire city, and shall specify which of the water use regulations referred to below is being imposed, as well as any exemptions as may be authorized. The executive order shall be effective immediately upon promulgation by the Mayor and shall continue in effect for 90 days, unless extended or repealed as set forth in this chapter. For the purpose of this subsection, a water emergency shall exist for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  The Jersey City Administration Department has adopted water use restrictions, has notified the city, the New Jersey Board of Public Utilities and the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, as well as any other state, county or local agency entitled to notice of such restrictions, and such restrictions are not overruled or declared invalid by any state, county or local agency having the jurisdiction and power to do so. 
[Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
(2)  The Mayor is otherwise satisfied that a water emergency exists in the municipality. 
B.  Upon issuance of an executive order declaring a water emergency in accordance with this chapter, all citizens shall be urged to observe voluntary indoor conservation measures, and any of the following water use restrictions shall be imposed and shall be applicable to all residents and tenants, except where a bona fide health emergency exists, and to exempt businesses as specified herein during the water emergency. 
(1)  The complete ban and prohibition of outside water usage, including the watering of lawns and plants, the filling of pools and the washing of any vehicles. 
(2)  Outside water usage on alternate days allowing outside water usage by persons or businesses having even house or box numbers on even days and those having odd house or box numbers on odd days, with outside water usage being completely banned and prohibited on the 31st day of any month during the water emergency. 
(3)  Any other water use restriction specified by the Mayor which is reasonable under the circumstances considering the nature and extent of the water emergency. Any water restriction imposed pursuant to this subsection shall be limited in application to that portion of the city, which may include the entire city, identified as being affected by the water emergency in the executive order in accordance with this chapter. 
C.  The Mayor shall, in addition to complying with the other provisions of this section, provide a period of time during which the water use restrictions imposed shall be applicable and which shall be no longer than reasonably necessary to abate the water emergency under the circumstances considering the nature and extent of the water emergency. At the expiration of the time period specified in the executive order, the water use restriction shall lapse and be inapplicable and unenforceable. If the mayor shall be satisfied that the water emergency has been abated prior to the expiration of the time period specified in the resolution, he shall issue an executive order declaring the water emergency ended and the water use restrictions inapplicable. If, at the expiration of the time period specified in the executive order, the Mayor shall be satisfied that the water emergency continues to exist, he may issue an executive order in accordance with the requirements of this chapter continuing the water use restrictions. 
D.  The water use restrictions imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be enforced during a water emergency by the Business Administrator or his or her designee. Whenever the Business Administrator shall find a violation of the water use restrictions, he shall give the violator a written warning and explain the penalties for a second and third offense as provided by this chapter. The Business Administrator shall keep such records as may be reasonable and necessary for the purpose of determining the persons and businesses who have been warned upon a first offense. The Business Administrator and his or her designees may write summonses for the violation of the water use restrictions imposed pursuant to this section. 
[Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052] 
E.  After a first offense in accordance with this section, any person or business who thereafter violates the water use restrictions imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be fined or imprisoned in accordance with Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25. 
[Amended 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050]  
Chapter 340 - WATERFRONT 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City 1-4-1977 by Ord. No. J-818 as Ch. 22, Art. VI, of the 1971 Jersey City Code, as readopted 9-19-1978 by Ord. No. S-128. Amendments noted where applicable.] 
 
§ 340-1. - Definitions and word usage. 
A.  Unless otherwise provided or expressly stated, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them in this section. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future and words used in the singular shall include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
B.  As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
CITY - The City of Jersey City. 
DEBRIS - Any loose material not attached to the land or to any structure and which is capable of becoming drift. 
DIRECTOR - The Municipal Engineer of the city as appointed by the Mayor, and who may appoint, with the approval of the Mayor, an authorized agent to act in his or her behalf. [1] 
DRIFT - Any floatable material which may cause damage to vessels or craft. 
FINAL ORDER - Either the order of the Director after the time to request a review thereof has lapsed or the order of the Director issued as a result of the review requested in § 340-6 of this chapter. 
NAVIGABLE WATERS - The waterways which are capable of carrying interstate commerce, and the tributaries thereto, within the geographical limits of the city. 
PERSON - Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
PREMISES - The land, building, wharf, pier, dolphin, boom, weir, breakwater, bulkhead, jetty, derelict vessel, ship, barge, raft or other structure or floating craft of any kind and shall include all or any as may be necessary. 
WATERFRONT, SHORE or BANK - That portion of the land which borders navigable waters and which lies shoreward of the established harbor lines or low water mark within the corporate limits of the City of Jersey City. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. 
 
§ 340-2. - Purpose. 
The general purpose of this chapter is the elimination of sources of drift and debris which constitute possible obstacles or hazards to navigation on the navigable waters of this city by the removal and disposal of debris and deteriorated structures on the shores of such waters and liable to be washed into such waters.  
§ 340-3. - Sources of drift; prevention. 
Whenever the Director has reasonable grounds to believe that debris placed or deposited on the banks of any navigable water is liable to be washed into such navigable water by any cause whatsoever and thereby be or become a source of drift likely to hinder, impede or otherwise obstruct navigation; or the condition of any wharf, pier, dolphin, boom, weir, breakwater, bulkhead, jetty, derelict vessel, ship, barge, raft or other structure or floating craft of any kind on or bordering on the shores of any navigable water is so dilapidated and deteriorated as to be or become a source of drift or debris liable to be washed into such navigable waters by any cause whatsoever and thereby likely to hinder, impede or otherwise obstruct navigation, the Director may declare the same to be public nuisance and thereupon order that the same be removed, abated, altered or repaired as such order may specify.  
§ 340-4. - Orders of Director. 
The order of the Director issued pursuant to § 340-3 of this chapter shall be in writing, directed to the occupant, and last known owner of record if not such occupant, of the premises which are the subject of the complaint and shall be specify whether the condition complained of shall be removed, abated, altered or repaired.  
§ 340-5. - Service of orders.[2] 
The order of the Director issued pursuant to § 340-3 of this chapter shall be served upon the occupant, and the last known owner of record if not such occupant, of the premises which are the subject of the complaint either by personally delivering a copy of such order to such occupant and last known owner of record or by certified mail (return receipt requested) addressed to such persons at their last known address. 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. 
 
§ 340-6. - Review of orders. 
Within fifteen (15) days after service of the order of the Director issued pursuant to § 340-3 of this chapter or, under emergency, within such shorter time as the Director may prescribe, the person to whom such order is directed, or any person aggrieved thereby, may appeal to the Director to review the same. The Director or his or her agent, after such review, at which all interested parties shall be afforded the opportunity to be heard, may affirm, modify or reverse the order of the Director as the facts may warrant. Unless the same is declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be arbitrary, capricious or not supported by substantial evidence, the order of the Director after review thereof shall be final and conclusive.  
§ 340-7. - Compliance with orders. 
In the event that the persons to whom the order of the Director is directed fail or refuse to comply with the terms of such order within thirty (30) days after such order has become final, the Director may, without further notice to any person, take or cause to be taken the necessary action to remove, abate, alter or repair the nuisance as specified in the order of the Director. The costs and expenses incident thereto shall be a personal charge against the occupant, and last owner of record if not such occupant, of the premises and in addition shall be a lien against the property or premises affected and all appurtenances thereto.  
Chapter 345 - ZONING[1] 
_____
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
History— Adopted by the Jersey City Municipal Council on April 11, 2001 by Ord. No. 01-042. Amendments noted where applicable. 
Cross reference— Animals, Ch. 90; Construction Codes, Uniform, Ch. 131. 
 
ARTICLE I - General Provisions 
 
§ 345-1. - Title. 
The short form by which this Chapter may be known shall be the "Land Development Ordinance of the Jersey City, Hudson County, New Jersey."  
§ 345-2. - Statutory authority; purpose. 
This Chapter is adopted pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law (MLUL), (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.), in order to promote and protect the public health, safety, morals and general welfare. The purposes of this Chapter are as follows: 
A.  To plan and guide the appropriate use or development of all land in a manner which will promote the public health, safety, morals and general welfare by means including the following: 
1.  By regulating the location of buildings and establishing standards of development; establishing setback lines of buildings designed for residential, commercial, industrial, office or other uses; and by fixing reasonable standards to which buildings or structures shall conform. 
2.  By prohibiting incompatible uses and prohibiting uses, buildings or structures which are incompatible with the character of development of the permitted uses within specified zoning districts and surrounding areas. 
3.  By regulating alterations of existing buildings and preventing such additions to and alterations or remodeling of existing buildings or structures that would not comply with the restrictions and limitations imposed hereunder. 
4.  By conserving the value of land and buildings throughout the City. 
B.  To secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other natural and man-made disasters. 
C.  To provide adequate light, air and open space. 
D.  To ensure that land development does not conflict with the development and general welfare of neighboring municipalities, the county and the state as a whole. 
E.  To promote the establishment of appropriate population densities and concentrations that will contribute to the well-being of persons, maintenance of the character of the neighborhoods, preservation of the environment and quality of life. 
F.  To encourage the appropriate and efficient expenditure of public funds by the coordination of public development with land use policies. 
G.  To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for a variety of residential, recreational, commercial and industrial uses and open space, both public and private, according to their respective environmental requirements. 
H.  To encourage the location and design of transportation routes which will promote the free flow of traffic while discouraging the location of such facilities and routes which will result in congestion or blight. 
I.  To promote a desirable visual environment through creative development techniques and good civic design and arrangements. 
J.  To promote the conservation of open space and valuable natural resources and to prevent urban sprawl and degradation of the environment through improper land use. 
K.  To encourage coordination of various public and private procedures and activities shaping land development with a view of lessening the cost of such development and to the more efficient use of land. 
L.  To provide, within the community's resources, for the future housing needs of the citizens of the City of Jersey City. 
M.  To encourage senior citizen community housing construction. 
N.  To promote utilization of renewable energy sources. 
O.  To promote the maximum practicable recovery and recycling of recyclable materials from municipal solid waste through the use of planning practices designed to incorporate the state recycling plan goals and to compliment municipal recycling programs. 
P.  To promote sustainable development which will protect within the carrying capacity of the natural environment and satisfy basic human needs.  
§ 345-3. - Interpretation of provisions. 
A.  Where the provisions of this Chapter impose greater restrictions than those imposed by any other law, ordinance, regulation or resolution, the provisions of this Chapter shall control. Where the provisions of any other law, ordinance, regulation or resolution impose a greater restriction than this Chapter, the provisions of such other law, ordinance, regulation or resolution shall control. 
B.  Matters not regulated herein shall be governed by applicable provisions of the MLUL. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this ordinance and the MLUL, the MLUL shall control. 
C.  The requirements of this Chapter shall be held paramount to any less restrictive provisions or requirements established by deed restriction, private covenant or agreement. Without limiting the foregoing, where this Chapter imposes a greater restriction or limitation upon the use of buildings or premises or upon the height of buildings or lot coverage, or requires greater lot areas or larger yards, courts or other open spaces than are required by covenants or restrictions imposed by deed or private agreement, the provisions of this Chapter shall control.  
§ 345-4. - Prohibited uses. 
The establishment of any use not expressly permitted by this Chapter shall be prohibited. All uses not expressly permitted in any given use district are expressly prohibited in such district. No structure or addition thereto shall be built, moved or remodeled, and no land shall be used, occupied, reoccupied, designed or improved for use or occupancy except for a use that is permitted within the zone in which the structure or land is located.  
§ 345-5. - Word usage. 
For the purposes of this Chapter: 
A.  The present tense shall include the future. 
B.  The singular number shall include the plural and the plural the singular. 
C.  The word "shall" is always mandatory; the word "may" is discretionary. 
D.  The words "zone" and "district" are synonymous, and whenever the term "structure" is used, it shall be construed to mean and include the term "building."  
§ 345-6. - Definitions. 
[Amended 11-10-2010 by Ord. No. 10-135; 4-27-2011 by Ord. No. 11-045; 2-13-2013 BY Ord. No. 13-008 ] 
Definitions And Usages. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the purpose of this Chapter, have the meanings herein defined. Whenever a term is used in this Chapter which is defined in the MLUL, such term shall have the same meaning as the MLUL. Any word or term not defined below or in the MLUL, shall be used with a meaning as defined in Webster's Third New International Dictionary of the English Language, unabridged (or the latest edition). 
ACCESS — A physical entrance to property. 
ACCESSORY BUILDING. STRUCTURE OR USE — A building, structure or use which is customarily associated with and is subordinate and incidental to the principal building, structure or use and which is located on the same lot therewith. 
ADAPTIVE REUSE — The development of a new use for an older building or for a building originally designed for a different purpose. This action may involve changes to the façade, and the interior floor plan may be changed to accommodate the new use. 
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The Zoning Officer, Construction Code Official, Historic Preservation Specialist or other municipal official designated by ordinance by the City of Jersey City. 
AGRICULTURE, COMMERCIAL — Land that is used for cultivation and harvesting of herbs, fruit, flowers, vegetables, and soil in which plants are raised outdoors in planters, in greenhouses, in buildings or on rooftops. Plants may be grown hydroponically or in soil, for sale either as food, use in landscaping, or ornamental purposes. Cultivation and harvesting of illegal and controlled substances shall not be permitted. 
AGRICULTURE, COMMUNITY GARDENING — Land that is held publicly or privately and is used collectively for the cultivation and harvesting of herbs, fruit, flowers, and vegetables, including the cultivation and tillage of soil. Cultivation can be done in outdoor raised planters or greenhouses, hydroponically or in soil. Cultivation and harvesting of illegal and controlled substances shall not be permitted. 
AIR RIGHTS — The interest in the use of the space above the land or above structures or improvements affixed to the land. 
AISLE — The traveled way by which cars enter and depart parking spaces. 
ALLEY — A minor way which is used primarily for vehicular access to the back or the side of properties otherwise abutting a street. 
ALTERATION OR ADDITIONS, STRUCTURAL — Any additions, change or rearrangement in the supporting members of a building such as walls, foundations, columns, beams, girders, posts or piers; or additions to or enlargements of an existing structure requiring walls, foundations, columns, beams, girders, posts or piers; or the moving from one location or position to another. Within historic districts, any addition, change or modification, for a building, structure, object, site or landscape feature or the service equipment thereof, that affects safety, health or structure and the addition, change or modification of which is not classified as a minor alteration or ordinary repair. 
ALTERATION, MINOR — Replacement or renewal of existing work, requiring a permit, of a building, structure, object, site or landscape feature or part of the service equipment therein, within the same or equivalent materials or equipment parts, that are made in the ordinary course of maintenance and that do not in any way affect health, fire or structural safety of the building, structure, object, site or landscape feature or affect the design or integrity of the historic fabric of the building, structure, object, site or landscape feature. 
AMBULATORY CARE FACILITY — A health care facility or a distinct part of a health care facility which provides preventive, diagnostic and treatment services to persons who come to the facility to receive services and depart from the facility on the same day. The facility shall not be open before 5:00 AM nor after midnight. 
ANTENNA — A metallic device such as a rod or wire for radiating or receiving radio waves. See also Wireless Communication Antennas. 
APARTMENT — One or more rooms comprising a dwelling unit in a multifamily dwelling or serving as the home or residence of an individual or a family or a household. "Apartments" may include buildings in cooperative, rental, or condominium ownership. 
APPLICANT — A person or entity submitting an application for development. 
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — The filled-out current edition of the application form ("General Development Application") and all accompanying documents including signed and sealed site plans, or subdivision plats, and all items on the corresponding Checklist required by ordinance for approval of a subdivision plan, site plan, planned development, conditional use, zoning variance, or direction of the issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 and/or N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36. 
APPURTENANCE — Any accessory or subordinate building, object or structure or landscape feature. 
ARCHITECTURAL — Relating or conforming to the rules of architecture; having or conceived of as having a single unified overall design, form or structure. 
ARCHITECTURAL MAST — A vertical finial used for aesthetic, decorative or functional purposes which is integral to the design of a building and does not incorporate or include a logo, mascot, symbol, or signage. 
ARCADE —A covered passage or alleyway, which may have an arched roof, located in front of or through a building, and which is used exclusively for pedestrian use. 
AREA — A specific geographic division of the City of Jersey City. 
ART GALLERY — Space for the display, appreciation, and sale of objects of art. 
[Added 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. 15-132 ] 
ARTIST — A person regularly engaged in the fine arts as a career and not as a hobby. This does not mean that the art the artist creates generates the artist's main source of income, nor does it require that the creation of art occupies the greatest portion of the artist's day. An artist is committed to his or her work, has a body of work that demonstrates the development of that art and intends to pursue that work for the foreseeable future. As used herein, the "fine arts" shall include, but not be limited to, painting, sculpture, choreography and the composition of music. 
ARTIST, CERTIFIED — A person who has been certified by the Planning Board as an artist pursuant to the Jersey City Land Development Ordinance. 
ARTIST STUDIO WORKSPACE — A room or rooms for which the principal use is the making of art by an artist, and from which the artist may sell art as an accessory use to the studio, but which shall not be considered a principal retail use. 
ARTIST WORK-ONLY STUDIO — See ARTIST STUDIO WORKSPACE. 
ASSISTED LIVING RESIDENCE — A facility which is licensed by the State Department of Health to provide housing and congregate dining and to assure that assisted living services are available when needed for four or more adult persons unrelated to the proprietor. 
ATRIUM — A courtyard located in an interior area of a building or between buildings which is covered with a curved glass roof and completely enclosed in glass except where it is bordered by the walls of the adjacent buildings. 
ATTACHED HOME — See TOWNHOME. 
ATTIC — The open non-habitable space between the ceiling beams of the top habitable story and the roof rafters in any building. 
AUTO BODY SHOP — An establishment primarily engaged in repairing or customizing automotive vehicles including the painting of automotive vehicles and may include the replacement, repair and/or tinting of automotive vehicle glass. 
AUTO REPAIR GARAGE — Any building, premises, and land in which or upon which a business, service, or industry involving the maintenance, servicing, repair of vehicles, but no painting or body repair, no motor fuels are sold, and no junked or unregistered vehicles are kept or stored. 
AUTO SALES — The use of any building, land area, or other premise for the display and sale of new or used automobiles generally but may include light trucks or vans, trailers, or recreation vehicles and including any vehicle preparation or repair work conducted as an accessory use. 
AWNING — An angled, flexible cover, of fabric, used for the purpose of shielding a doorway or window from the elements and may be stationary or periodically retracted into the face of the building. 
AUTO/AUTOMOTIVE SERVICES — See AUTO REPAIR GARAGE. 
BALCONY — A roofless platform that projects beyond the wall of a building, is surrounded by a railing, balustrade, or parapet, and is suspended from and supported solely by the principal structure, with no additional independent supports. 
BANQUET FACILITY — A large room or space in a restaurant or hotel suitable for banquets 
BAR — A place of business, or a defined area accessory to a principal restaurant or nightclub use, primarily devoted to for the sale and on-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
BASEMENT — A portion of the building having more than one-half of its clear height above finished grade. A basement shall be counted as a story in determining the height of a building. 
[Amended 7-18-2018 by Ord. No. 18-074 ] 
BED AND BREAKFAST — Overnight accommodations and a morning meal in a dwelling unit provided to transients for compensation. The owner of a dwelling resides on the premises and guest stays are limited to fourteen (14) consecutive days. 
BEDROCK — Continuous solid rock that underlies regolith. 
BELT COURSING — A change or variation in the placement or orientation of the building material (i.e., brick, stone, etc.) used to emphasize a particular height or portion of a building. 
BICYCLE LANE — A reserved lane within a roadway marked for the exclusive use of bicycles. 
BICYCLE PATH — A pathway, often paved and separated from streets and sidewalks, designed to be used by bicycles. 
BILLBOARD — An off-site sign advertising an occupant, product or service pertaining to a lot other than the lot upon which the billboard is located. 
BOARD — The City of Jersey City Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment when acting within its scope of its jurisdiction under this Chapter and/or the Act. 
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT — The board established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69. 
BOARDER — A person other than a member of a family occupying a part of any dwelling unit who, for a consideration, is furnished sleeping accommodations in such dwelling unit and may be furnished meals as part of this consideration. 
BOARDING HOUSE — A building, other than a hotel, motel or group home, occupied by more than one person not living together as a family unit where meals may be served to occupants, including a rooming house and single room occupancy unit and that is governed by the "Rooming and Boarding House Act of 1979," N.J.S.A. 55:13B-1 et seq. 
BOLLARD — A vertical, freestanding short post used as a barrier to vehicles. 
BUFFER — A strip of land containing planted screening materials and/or fencing used to physically separate and screen one use or property from another so as to minimize adverse impacts. No building, structure, parking area, driveway (except to provide access to the property and which is perpendicular to the buffer area) street, sign (except directional sign) or storage of materials shall be permitted in such buffer. 
BUILD-TO LINE — a line along which the lower floors of the primary façade of a building must be located. 
BUILDING — Any structure, part of a structure, extension thereof, or addition thereto having a roof supported by columns, posts, piers, or walls and intended for the shelter, business, housing or enclosing of persons, or property. 
BUILDING COVERAGE — The ratio of the horizontal area of all principal and accessory buildings, measured from the exterior surface of the exterior walls of the ground floor on a lot, to the total lot area. "Building coverage" is expressed as a percentage and shall mean the percentage of a lot or assemblage of lots occupied by one or more buildings. 
BUILDING ENVELOPE — The three dimensional space within which a principal structure is permitted and/or proposed to be built on a lot as defined by yard setbacks, stepbacks, and height. 
BUILDING FOOTPRINT — The two dimensional space within which any building (principal or accessory) is permitted and/or proposed to be built on a lot and which is defined by yard setbacks. 
BUILDING LINE — The line parallel to the street line or other lot line which touches that part of a building's principal façade closest to the other lot line. Cantilevers and appurtenances are not counted toward the building line. 
BULKHEAD — (1) A boxlike structure on the roof of a building covering a stairwell, elevator, or mechanical equipment; (2) A low wall, sometimes paneled, beneath a storefront display window; (3) A retaining wall, often located at the high-tide line, that protects waterfront property. 
BUSINESS, TECHNICAL AND ARTS SCHOOLS — An institution offering training without academic programs. 
BUSINESS INCUBATOR - A place where services, space, education, and assistance are provided to new businesses. Incubators include, but are not limited to, office type environments, scientific and research laboratories, kitchens, computer laboratories, and workshops. Incubators are often affiliated with an institution or organization able to provide access to instruction, advice, research facilities, or funding. Sharing of services, spaces, and equipment provides greater economies of scale for the incubator, and creates an entrepreneurial community among its users. [Amended 3-11-2015 by Ord. No. 15-025 ] 
CALIPER — The diameter of a tree trunk measured in inches six (6) inches above ground level for trees up to four (4) inches in diameter and measured twelve (12) inches above ground level for trees over four (4) inches in diameter. 
CANOPY — A permanent, non-retractable roof-like projection with or without support poles permanently affixed and perpendicular to the wall of an entrance of a building used for providing overhead protection from the weather and shall be construed to be a part of the building to which it is affixed. 
CAR SALES — See AUTO SALES. 
CAR WASH, AUTOMATIC — A building or place of business where the washing of motor vehicles is carried on with the use of a chain or conveyor, blower and water and/or steam cleaning device. 
CAR WASH, HANDWASH — A vehicle washing that does not include mechanized automatic washing. 
CAR WASH, ROLL OVER — A car wash in which the vehicle remains stationary while automatic washing occurs. 
CARPORT — A roofed structure providing space for the parking or storage of motor vehicles and enclosed on not more than three sides. 
CARRIAGE WAY — see CARTWAY. 
CARTWAY — The hard or paved area of a street between the curbs, including travel lanes and parking areas but not including curbs, sidewalks or swales. 
CATERING SERVICES — a place where the preparation and delivery of food and beverages occurs for offsite consumption, without the provision for on-site pick-up or consumption. 
CELLAR — A portion of the building having one-half or more than one-half of its clear height below finished grade. A cellar shall not be counted as a story in determining the height of a building. 
[Amended 7-18-2018 by Ord. No. 18-074 ] 
CEMETERY — Any site which contains at least one burial, marked or previously marked, dedicated to and used or intended to be used for the permanent internment of the human dead, to include perpetual-care and non-perpetual-care cemeteries, even though suffering neglect or abuse. 
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS — A document attesting that proposed work within a historic district or affecting a landmark building, structure, object, site or landscape feature has been reviewed and deemed appropriate and consistent with the purpose of this Chapter by the Jersey City Historic Preservation Commission. 
CERTIFICATE OF NO EFFECT — A document attesting that proposed work within a historic district or affecting a landmark building, structure, object, site or landscape feature has been reviewed by the Historic Preservation Officer and the Division of City Planning and is not detrimental to the historic district or landmark on which the work is to be done or neighboring buildings, structures, objects, sites or landscape features. 
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY (CO) — A document issued by the Construction Official allowing the occupancy or use of a building or structure and certifying that the building or structure or use has been constructed and/or renovated according to, and in compliance with all the applicable state codes and municipal ordinances and resolutions. 
CHANGE OF USE — Any change from a permitted principal use to another permitted principal use or to a non permitted principal use, or any change from a non permitted use to a non permitted principal use, or to a permitted principal use. 
CHILD CARE CENTER — An establishment providing for the care, supervision, and protection of children that is licensed by the State of New Jersey pursuant to P.L 1983, c. 492 (C. 30:5B-1 et seq.). 
CITY — City of Jersey City, Hudson County, New Jersey. 
CITY COUNCIL — The legislative body of the City of Jersey City. 
CIVIC — Premises available for operation by organizations dedicated to serving socially based public purposes such as: religion, arts and culture, education, government, performance, social service and the like. Including: house of worship, meeting hall, school, community center, and recreation facilities. 
CIVIC SPACE — An area that is occupied and active on most days of the year and is dedicated to serving socially based public purposes and civic uses. Plazas, parks, and paseos may be considered civic spaces. 
CLIFF FACE — A sheer, nearly vertical slope of exposed bedrock. 
CLUSTER — A group of cultural resources with compatible buildings, objects or structures geographically or thematically relating to and reinforcing one another through design, setting, materials, workmanship, congruency and association. 
COLONNADE — a linear series of columns which support a continuous lintel. 
COLOCATION — Use of a common wireless telecommunication tower or a common site by two or more wireless license holders or by one wireless license holder for more than one type of communications technology and/or placement or a wireless telecommunication tower on a structure owned or operated by a utility or other public entity. 
COMMON PROPERTY or OWNERSHIP — A parcel or parcels of land, together with the improvements thereon, in which the ownership, use and enjoyment of the same are shared by the owners and tenants of the individual dwelling units in the development. 
COMMUNITY FACILITY/CENTER — Municipal, county, state, or not-for-profit enterprises that serve the public interest. Community Facility shall include, but not be limited to, the following services: adult day care, art education, child care, fire, health care, job training, library, police, recreation, school, or teen center. Community Facility shall not include prisons, or drug and narcotic rehabilitation centers. 
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE FOR THE DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED — Any community residential facility licensed pursuant to P.L 1977, c. 448 (C. 30:1lB-1 et seq.) providing food, shelter, and personal guidance, under such supervision as required, to not more than fifteen (15) developmentally disabled or mentally ill persons, who require assistance, temporarily or permanently, in order to live in the community, and shall include, but not be limited to: group homes, half-way houses, intermediate care facilities, supervised apartment living arrangements, and hostels. Such a residence shall not be considered a health care facility within the meaning of the "Health Care Facilities Planning Act" (P.L. 1971, c. 136; c. 26:2H-1 et seq.). In the case of such community residence housing mentally ill persons, such residence shall have been approved for a purchase of service contract or an affiliation agreement pursuant to such procedures as shall be established by regulation of the Division of Mental Health and Hospitals of the Department of Human Services. 
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE FOR PERSONS WITH HEAD INJURIES — A community residential facility licensed pursuant to P.L 1977, c. 448 providing food, shelter and personal guidance, under such supervision as required, to not more than fifteen (15) persons with head injuries, who require assistance, temporarily or permanently, in order to live in the community, and shall include, but not be limited to, group homes, halfway houses, supervised apartment living arrangements and hostels. Such a residence shall not be considered a health care facility within the meaning of the "Health Care Facilities Planning Act," 1971, c. 136. 
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE FOR THE TERMINALLY ILL — Any community residential facility operated as a hospice program providing food, shelter, personal guidance and health care services, under such supervision as required, for not more than fifteen (15) terminally ill persons. 
COMMUNITY SHELTER FOR VICTIMS OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE — Any shelter approved for a purchase of service contract and certified pursuant to standards and procedures established by regulation of the Department of Human Services pursuant to P.L. 1979, C. 337 (C. 30:14-1 et seq.) providing food, shelter, medical care, legal assistance, personal guidance, and other services to not more than fifteen (15) persons who have been victims of domestic violence, including any children of such victims, who temporarily require shelter and assistance in order to protect their physical or psychological welfare. 
COMPATIBLE PROPERTY — A resource in a historic district or cluster distinguished by its scale, material, compositional treatment and other features that provide the setting for more important resources and add to the character of the scene. 
COMPLETE APPLICATION — Any and all materials required by this Chapter to review any application for development (application form, affidavit of ownership, boundary descriptions, plat maps in accordance with ordinance specifications, etc.) 
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district only upon showing that such use in a specified location will comply with the conditions and standards for the location and operation of such use as contained in the zoning ordinance and upon the issuance of an authorization therefore by the Planning Board. 
CONDOMINIUM — The form of ownership of real property under a master deed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 46:8B-1 et seq. 
CONDOMINIUM ASSOCIATION — The entity responsible for the administration of a condominium, which entity may be incorporated or unincorporated. Also known as Condo Association. 
CONFERENCE CENTER — A facility used for conferences and seminars, which may include accommodations for sleeping, food preparation and eating, recreation, resource facilities and meeting rooms. Conference centers may be commercial ventures providing space for corporate, government, social or other types of meetings, or they may be maintained by large institutions, such as universities or corporations. 
CONSTRUCTION — The erection of a new principal or accessory building or structure on a lot or property; alterations and the act of creating an addition to an existing building or structure. 
CONSTRUCTION OFFICIAL — The Construction Official of the City of Jersey City. 
CONTINUING CARE RETIREMENT COMMUNITY — The provisions of lodging and nursing, medical or other health related services at the same or another location to an individual pursuant to an agreement effective for the life of the individual or for a period greater than one year, including mutually terminable contracts, and in consideration of the payment of an entrance fee with or without other periodic charges. A fee which is less than the sum of the regular periodic charges for one year of residency is not considered an entrance fee. 
CONTRACTOR'S WORKSHOP — A place where a licensed contractor may store and utilize tools, equipment and materials that are used in the trade for which the contractor is licensed. Storage of hazardous materials, junk, inoperable vehicles, or equipment or materials that are not used in the trade shall not be permitted. Outdoor storage and use of tools or equipment shall not be permitted. 
CONTRIBUTING PROPERTY — A resource in a historic district or cluster that contributes to the district's or clusters historical significance through location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling and association and which shall be afforded the same considerations as landmarks. 
CONVENTIONAL — Development other than planned development. 
CORNICE — Projecting ornamental molding along the top of a building, wall or storefront. 
COUNTY MASTER PLAN — A composite of the plan elements for the physical development of Hudson County, with the accompanying maps, plats, charts and descriptive and explanatory matter adopted by the County Planning Board. 
COUNTY PLANNING BOARD — The Hudson County Planning Board. 
COURTYARD — An open space which is designed and used for passive recreational purposes. 
CRAFTSPERSON —A person who practices a trade or handicraft as an artisan, and who engages in the production of their work, design or objects as a career. 
CULTURAL — Activities or acts related to the past or present social and material traits of a group or groups of people. 
CURB CUT — The opening along the curb line at which point vehicles may enter or leave the roadway. 
CUT AND FILL — The excavating of rock fragments and mineral grains, including soil, in one place and depositing of it as fill in adjacent place. 
CREDITABLE SQUARE FOOT — A term used in providing a basis for bonuses for buildings and those areas improved by the owners beyond those required by any city ordinance and are accessible, unobstructed, improved, usable areas for their intended purpose. 
CYBERHOTELS/TECHOTELS/SERVERFARMS/TELECOMMUNICATION CENTERS — See Data Centers. 
DATA CENTERS — A facility used to house computer systems and associated components, such as telecommunications and storage systems. 
DAYCARE CENTER — A facility providing for the care, supervision, and protection of preschool children. 
DAYCARE CENTER, ADULT — a facility for the supervised care of adults with physical or mental limitations, providing activities such as meals and socialization one or more days a week during specified daytime hours, and which may also include care by ancillary medical staff. 
DAYS — Calendar days. 
DEAD-END STREET — A street or portion of a street which is accessible by a single means of ingress and egress. 
DECK — A raised accessory structure more than one and one-half feet above finished grade, supported by either pillars or posts or walls . 
DEMOLITION — The dismantling or razing of all or part of a building, structure, object, site or landscape feature including interior spaces and all operations incidental thereto. 
DENSITY — The permitted number of dwelling units per gross area of land to be developed. 
DESIGNATED REPRESENTATIVE — That person or office so named by the reviewing board to dispense, receive and classify any development applications. 
DETACHED SINGLE-FAMILY — A dwelling for one family that is not attached to any other dwelling by any means and which is occupied or is intended to be occupied for residence purposes by one housekeeping unit. 
DEVELOPABLE AREAS — Upland areas or pier areas not dedicated to public rights-of way. 
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any land included in a proposed development, including the holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having an enforceable proprietary interest in such land. 
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels; the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation or enlargement of any building or other structure; any mining, excavation, landfill or land disturbances and any use, change in use or extension of use of land for which permission may be required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. 
DEVIATION — Used in Redevelopment Plans; identical to a variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70.c. 
DIRECTOR, DIVISION OF CITY PLANNING — The person holding the above title, or the acting director during an interim period of filling the position, or such other licensed professional planner on the staff of the Division of City Planning who has received written authority from the Director to carry out specified duties on behalf of the Director. 
DISTRICT — A geographically definable area, possessing a significant concentration, linkage or continuity of buildings, objects, sites, structures or landscape features united by past events or aesthetically by plan or physical development which may also comprise individual elements separated geographically but thematically linked by association or history. 
DORMITORY — A building to provide sleeping and living accommodations with sanitary and general living facilities designed and used to accommodate students of a university or college. 
DRAINAGE — The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by drains, grading or other means and includes control of runoff during and after construction, or development to minimize erosion and sedimentation, to assure the adequacy of existing and proposed culverts and bridges, to induce water recharge into the ground where practical, to lessen non-point pollution, to maintain the integrity of stream channels for their biological functions as well as for drainage, and the means necessary for water supply preservation or prevention or alleviation of flooding. 
DRAINAGE RIGHT-OF-WAY — The lands required for the installation of stormwater sewers or drainage ditches or required along a natural stream or watercourse for preserving the channel and providing for the flow of water therein to safeguard the public against flood damage. 
DRIVEWAY — A paved or unpaved area used for ingress or egress of vehicles and allowing access from a street to a lot, building or other structure or facility. 
DWELLING — A building that is designed or used exclusively as the living quarters for one or more housekeeping units. 
DWELLING UNIT — A room or series of connected rooms containing living, cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities for one housekeeping unit. The "dwelling unit" shall be self-contained and shall not require passing through another dwelling unit or other indirect route to get to any portion of the dwelling unit, nor shall one dwelling unit require shared facilities with another dwelling unit. Hotel facilities or other facilities providing temporary accommodations shall not be considered dwelling units. 
EASEMENT — A grant of one or more of the property rights by the property owner to and/or of rote use by the public or another person, entity, or property. 
EFFECT — A change in the quality of the historical, architectural, archaeological or cultural significance of a resource or in the characteristics that qualify the resource as historically important. 
EFFECT, ADVERSE — A negative change in the quality of the historical, architectural, archaeological or cultural significance of a landmark or historic district or in the characteristics of a landmark or historic district that are historically important. 
ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT — Any electronic device used to send or receive information. 
EMBANKMENT — A man-made or natural deposit of soil, rock or other materials. 
ENCROACHMENT — An area beyond the build to line into which certain building elements protrude. Typical encroachments may include overhangs, bays, or other elements that commonly protrude over the main façade of the building. 
ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION — A municipal advisory body created pursuant to P.L. 1968, c. 245 (C. 40:56A-1 et seq.). 
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — Services and utilities needed for the health, safety, and general welfare of the community, such as underground, surface, or overhead electrical, gas, telephone, steam, water, sewerage, and other utilities and the equipment and appurtenances necessary for such system to furnish an adequate level of service for the area in which it is located. 
EXISTING ARCHITECTURAL FEATURES — The architectural features existing at the time of designation or architectural features which have been changed subsequent to designation pursuant to a Certificate of Appropriateness/No Effect issued by the Historic Preservation Commission. 
FAÇADE — (1.) A building's front or any of its exterior walls; (2.) A prominent side of a building or structure that has been given special architectural or design treatment to make it more attractive. 
FAÇADE, FRONT PRIMARY — The streetfront building façade which runs roughly parallel to the front lot line. For the purposes of yard calculations, projecting accessory structures including decks, porches, balconies, fencing, stoops, and/or stairs are excluded. 
FAÇADE, FRONT SECONDARY — In the case of a corner lot, the streetfront building façade which runs roughly parallel to the side lot line. 
FAÇADE, REAR — The building façade which is opposite the primary façade and roughly faces the rear lot line. In the case of two Front Primary Façades, there will be no rear façade but rather two side façades. See Façade, Secondary. 
FAÇADE, SECONDARY — A façade that does not face a street or a public thoroughfare and that does not possess significant architectural features. 
FAÇADE, SIDE — The building façade(s) which run roughly parallel to the side lot lines but does not face a street. In the case of two Front Primary Façades, there will be two side façades and no rear façade. See Façade, Secondary. 
FAMILY — A group of individuals not necessarily related by blood, marriage, adoption, or guardianship living together in a dwelling unit as a single housekeeping unit under a common housekeeping management plan based on an intentionally structured relationship providing organization and stability. 
FAMILY DAY CARE HOME — Any private residence approved by the Division of Youth and Family Services or an organization with which the division contracts for family day care in which child care services are regularly provided to no less than three and no more than five children for no less than fifteen (15) hours per week. A child being cared for under the following circumstances is not included in the total number of children receiving childcare services: 
A.  The child being cared for is legally related to the provider, or 
B.  The child is being cared for as part of a cooperative agreement between parents for the care of their children by one or more of the parents, where no payment for the care is being provided. 
FENCE — A barrier intended to prevent escape or intrusion; or to mark a boundary, enclose, screen, or separate areas. 
FENCE LINE — The established line of existing fences on a street, more or less parallel to the curb line. The fence line may be within the public right-of-way. 
FENESTRATION — The arrangement and design of windows, doors, or other openings in a building or building façade. 
FERRY — A boat or ship that carries passengers across relatively short spans of water. 
FINAL PLAT — The final map of all or a portion of the subdivision which is presented to the Planning Board for approval in accordance with these regulations and which, if approved, shall be filed with the county recording officer. 
FINANCIAL SERVICES FACILITY — A retail service facility that provides diversified financial and brokerage services to the general public in person and on a walk in basis; offers amenities to encourage pedestrian traffic, such as retail banking services, computer access to brokerage accounts, ATM access to cash accounts, and visible screens with financial information and stock reports. The facility shall be utilized for financial consultation meetings with clients. 
FINISH — The visual characteristics, including color, texture and reflectivity of all exterior materials. 
FLOOR AREA RATIO — The sum of the gross area of all floors of buildings or structures compared to the total area of the site. 
FOOTCANDLE — A unit for measuring illumination equaling the amount of direct light on a surface. 
Editor's note— The definition of "Formula business" was removed at the discretion of the editor. The ordinance from which the definition derived, Ord. No. 15-052 , was repealed by 19-038 , adopted May 8, 2019. 
FRONTAGE — See LOT FRONTAGE 
GARAGE, PARKING — Buildings or building areas used exclusively for the parking or storing of motor vehicles and which may include manual car washing. 
GARAGE, PRIVATE — An accessory building, structure, or use, for the parking of passenger motor vehicles, in which no occupation, business or services for profit is conducted. 
GOVERNING BODY — The City Council of the City of Jersey City. 
GOVERNMENT AGENCY — Any department, commission, independent agency or instrumentality of the United States, the State of New Jersey, and/or any county, municipal or other governmental unit. 
GOVERNMENTAL USES — Public institutions and uses, such as schools, community centers and government-owned or operated buildings, structures or land used for public purposes,. 
GRADE, EXISTING — The vertical location of the ground surface at any given point prior to excavating or filling, or the percent of rise or descent of a slope. 
[Amended 7-18-2018 by Ord. No. 18-074 ] 
GRADE, FINISHED — For buildings adjoining one street only, elevation of the established curb at the center of the wall adjoining the street. For buildings adjoining more than one street, the average of the elevations of the established curbs at the center of all walls adjoining the streets. For buildings having no wall adjoining the street, the average level of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the buildings. All walls approximately parallel to and not more than 15 feet from the street line are to be considered as adjoining a street. 
[Amended 7-18-2018 by Ord. No. 18-074 ] 
GREEN ROOF — A vegetated roof system used in place of a conventional roof which typically involves a water proof membrane and root repellant system, a drainage system, filter cloth, a lightweight growing medium and species appropriate plants. 
GROSS FLOOR AREA — In residences, shall be measured by using the outside dimension of the building. Only those portions of floor areas in residential structures which are at or above grade and have a ceiling height above them of seven and one-half feet or more or those floor areas on the top story which meet the definitions of a half story shall be included in the "gross floor area." In non residential structures, the "gross floor area" of any use sharing a common wall with another use shall be measured from the center of interior walls and the outside of exterior walls. 
GROUND FLOOR — The floor closest to, but not below, grade. 
GROUND FLOOR STREET FRONTAGE (GFSF) — The sum of the horizontal lengths of all exterior walls of a building at ground floor level, inclusive of all windows and doors, and excepting where there is another property between the wall and the street. 
GYM — See HEALTH CLUB. 
HEALTH CLUB — A meeting place for groups of people for the purpose of engaging in exercise and conditioning of the body for the benefit of physical fitness. All health clubs that are 4,000 square feet or less shall be permitted as Retail Services. 
[Amended 1-24-2018 by Ord. No. 18-001 ] 
HEIGHT, BUILDING — The vertical distance measured to the highest point of a building from the finished grade. A building's highest point shall be determined in accordance with height exceptions, Section 345-60. 
[Amended 7-18-2018 by Ord. No. 18-074 ] 
HELISTOP — Area for landings and takeoffs of helicopters, but shall not include any servicing or parking functions for such crafts. Also known as Heliport. 
HIGH-CUBE WAREHOUSING — Facilities used for the receipt, storage and handling of goods, bulk products and materials prior to their distribution to other recipients. These facilities consist of buildings with large floor plates, often subdivided for individual tenants, with a typical ceiling height of thirty (30) feet or more; they are also characterized by a low employee parking requirement due to a high level of mechanization, truck activities frequently outside of the peak hour of the adjacent street system, and good highway access. 
HIGH-RISE APARTMENT BUILDING — A multi-family residential building with nine (9) stories or more. 
HISTORIC — A building, structure, object, site or landscape feature having a degree of significance or importance over or at a period of time. 
HISTORIC ARCHITECTURAL FEATURES — Architectural features installed or built at the time of construction of the building; architectural features of a type installed or built at the time of construction of similar buildings in similar periods and styles; or architectural features installed or built at the time of a major façade alteration thirty (30) or more years ago. 
HISTORIC/CULTURAL RESOURCE — Those buildings, objects, sites, structures or landscape features of historical, cultural, architectural or archaeological importance and the demolition, destruction or alteration of which would constitute an irreplaceable loss to the quality and character of Jersey City; inventoried interior spaces designed or intended to be occupied as part of the structure or which are accessible to the public; such buildings, objects, sites, structures or landscape features, their appurtenances and the property on which they are located are considered historic as defined in this Chapter. 
HISTORIC DISTRICT — An area defined as a historic district by City Council, state or federal authority and which may contain within definable geographic boundaries one or more landmarks or clusters, including their accessory buildings, fences and other appurtenances, and natural resources having historical, cultural and archaeological significance and which district may have within its boundaries other buildings or structures, that while not of such historical, cultural, architectural or archaeological significance as to be designated landmarks, nevertheless contribute to the overall visual characteristics of the landmark or landmarks located within the district. 
HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION — The Jersey City Historic Preservation Commission. Also referred to as the "Commission." 
HISTORIC SITE — Any real property, man-made structure, natural object or configuration or any portion or group of the foregoing of historical, archaeological, cultural, scenic or architectural significance. 
HOME OCCUPATION — An occupation or activity carried out for gain by a resident and conducted as a customary, incidental and accessory use in the resident's dwelling unit or accessory structure located on the lot and is in accordance with Supplementary Zoning Regulations § 345-60(1.2(a)). 
HOSPITAL — An institution providing primary health services and medical or surgical care to persons, primarily inpatients, suffering from illness, disease, injury, deformity, and other abnormal physical or mental conditions and including, as an integral part of the institution, related facilities, such as laboratories, outpatient facilities, training facilities, medical offices, and staff residences. 
HOTEL — A building designed for occupancy as the more or less temporary place of abode for individuals who are lodged with or without meals, in which there are ten (10) or more guest rooms or suites and in which there may be kitchens in any individual room or suite. 
HOUSEKEEPING UNIT — One or more persons living together in one dwelling unit on a nonseasonal basis and sharing living, sleeping, cooking and sanitary facilities on a nonprofit basis. 
HOUSE OF WORSHIP — A building used for the assembly of members of a designated faith for religious instruction and worship of a deity such as a church, synagogue, mosque or temple. 
IMPROVEMENT PARCEL — A unit of real property that includes a landmark designated under this Chapter and is treated as a single entity for the purpose of levying real estate taxes within the historic district. 
INCUBATOR — See BUSINESS INCUBATOR. 
INDEPENDENT LIVING — A residential facility where individualized support is provided to residents in forms such as a community director, a social director, and daily on-site assistance. 
INDUSTRIAL PARK — An area wherein one or more buildings are erected for industrial purposes in relation to one another as part of an integrated and comprehensively planned total unit, whether or not the buildings are erected simultaneously or over a period of time. 
INFILL HOUSING — The construction of a housing unit that resembles in proportion, scale, height, style and bulk the adjacent dwelling units. 
INTERIM USE — A use approved by the Planning Board applied on a temporary basis as prescribed while permanent plans for the area are formulated or implemented. 
INTRUSION — A building, object, site, structure or landscape feature which detracts from a landmark, historic district or cluster of historical significance because of its incompatibility with the historic district's or cluster's sense of time and place and historical development; or its incompatibility of scale, height, materials, texture or color, or whose integrity has been irretrievably lost. 
INVENTORY, HISTORIC — A systematic listing of cultural, historical, architectural or archaeological resources prepared by the city, state or federal government or a recognized local historic authority, following standards set forth by federal, state and city regulations for evaluation of cultural properties. 
JUNKYARD — Any area, lot, land or parcel with or without structures used for the storage, collection, processing, purchase, sale, salvage or disposal of scrap, waste, reclaimable material or debris. Any site with 3 or more unregistered vehicles shall constitute a junkyard. 
KIOSK — A small, freestanding structure with one or more open sides such as a newsstand, information booth or telephone booth. 
LAND — Including improvements and fixtures on, above or below the surface. 
LAND AREA — The area contained within the lot lines of a lot, not including any portion of a street right- of-way. 
LANDMARK — Any building, object, site, structure or landscape feature, any part of which is fifty (50) years old or older, which has a special character or special historic or aesthetic interest or value as part of the development, heritage or cultural characteristics of the city, state or nation and which has been designated as a "landmark" pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter. 
LANDSCAPE FEATURE — Any grade, body of water, stream, rock, plant, shrub, tree, path, walkway, road, plaza, fountain, wall, sculpture or other form of natural or artificial landscaping. 
LAUNDROMAT — An establishment providing washing and drying machines on the premises for rental use to the general public and may include wash and fold or drop off dry cleaning as an accessory use, but shall not include on-site dry cleaning processing. 
LIGHT ASSEMBLY — Flexible space suitable for final assembly of finished products for distribution. No manufacturing shall be associated with this use. 
LIGHT INDUSTRIAL — Warehousing, wholesaling, shipping and receiving, manufacturing, assembly, processing, research, laboratory testing service, professional and governmental offices, public and quasi-public uses and other operations which do not include the production of petroleum into fuel, oil or other products or chemical processing and storage. Light Industrial uses shall not produce any corrosive, toxic, noxious fumes, glare, electromagnetic disturbances, radiation, smoke, cinders, odors, dust or waste, undue noise or vibration, or other objectionable features so as to be detrimental to the public health, safety, or general welfare, provided however that existing activities not in violation of City, State or Federal law are exempt. 
LIGHT RAIL TRANSIT (LRT) — Rail service employing energy efficient light rail vehicles (LRVs) at least partly on shared or semi-exclusive rights-of-way, designed so that other traffic can mingle safely with the LRT operation where desired. 
LIVE/WORK UNIT — See WORK/LIVE UNIT. 
LOADING SPACE — An off-street space or berth on the same lot with a building or group of buildings for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading or unloading. 
LOGGIA — A gallery or breaking in the façade that can be open to the air on at least one side. Loggias create breaks in the vertical scale of a building and are surrounded by columns or created by a setback or overhang within the façade. The interior of these spaces can be used as common space for these vertical neighborhoods, live work offices, mechanical equipment space, or any number of other uses. 
LONG TERM CARE FACILITY/NURSING FACILITY/NURSING HOME — A facility that is licensed by the Department of Health to provide health care under medical supervision and continuous nursing care for twenty-four (24) or more consecutive hours to two or more patients who do not require the degree of care and treatment which a hospital provides and who, because of their physical or mental condition, require continuous nursing care and services above the level of room and board. 
LOT — A tract or parcel of land established by a plat, deed, or otherwise, but not including any portion of a street, which tract or parcel of land is legally separate from any other tract or parcel of land. Contiguous undersized lots under common ownership and fronting on the same street are considered one lot. 
LOT, CORNER — A lot on the junction of and abutting two or more intersecting streets where the interior angle of intersection is less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. For additional corner lot regulations, see § 345-60.C(6). 
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot. 
LOT, THROUGH — A lot that fronts upon two parallel streets or that fronts upon two streets that do not intersect at the boundaries of the lot. 
LOT AREA — The total area within the lot lines of a lot but not including any street rights-of-way. 
LOT CONSOLIDATION — An action eliminating lot lines from contiguous lots. 
LOT COVERAGE — The square footage or other area measurements by which all buildings and impervious surfaces occupy a lot as measured on a horizontal plane around the periphery of the foundations and paved areas, and including the areas under the roof of any structure. 
LOT DEPTH —The shortest horizontal distance between the street line and a line drawn parallel to the street line through the midpoint of the rear lot line. The greatest dimension on a corner lot is its "depth." 
LOT FRONTAGE — That portion of a lot extending along a street line. 
LOT LINE — Any line forming a portion of the exterior boundary of a lot and the same line as the street line for that portion of lot abutting a street. "Lot lines" extend vertically in both directions from ground level. 
LOT LINE, FRONT — The lot line separating a lot from a street right-of-way, also referred to as a "street line." In the case of corner lots, the front lot line shall be the street line with lesser frontage. In the case of through lots, there shall be two front lot lines and no rear lot line. 
LOT LINE, REAR — The lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line, or the point at which the side lot lines meet. In the case of through lots, there shall be no rear lot line. 
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. 
LOT WIDTH — The straight and horizontal distance between side lot lines at setback points on each side lot line measured an equal distance back from the street line. The minimum "lot width" shall be measured at the minimum required building setback line. 
MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE — Any security which may be accepted by a municipality for the maintenance of any improvements required by the Municipal Land Use Law, including but not limited to surety bonds and letters of credit under the circumstances specified in Section 16 of P.L. 1991, c. 256 (C. 40:55D-53.5), and cash. 
MARINA — A shorefront development that provides private and commercial pleasure craft mooring, launching and fueling. 
MARINA, FULL SERVICE — A shorefront development that provides private and commercial pleasure craft mooring, launching, fueling, repair, storage and on-shore service facilities. 
MARINA SERVICES — Commercial uses associated with the operation of a marina. These shall include, but not be limited to, bait and tackle shops, yacht clubs, up-land security posts but shall not include boat repair or storage or other similar uses. 
MARQUEE — A metal rooflike, permanent structure often containing a signboard that projects from the wall of a building, over an entrance to a theatre or other building. 
MASS TRANSIT FACILITY — A fixed route and/or station used to facilitate the transportation of people (as opposed to goods) on a fixed route and fixed schedule basis generally on conveyances such as buses, rapid-transit vehicles and commuter rail facilities. 
MATCH — Either an exact or an approximate replication. If not an exact replication, the approximate replication shall be so designed as to achieve a harmonious result which exhibits the color, texture and dimensions of the original feature(s). 
MAY — Permissive action 
MAYOR — The chief executive of the City. 
MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT — Any device below, above, or within a structure or on a lot which provides necessary support service for that structure. Mechanical equipment shall include but not be limited to heating and cooling units, and elevator bulkheads. 
MEZZANINE — An intermediate floor placed in any story or room. For the purposes of zoning, a mezzanine, no matter the size, shall be counted as a story in determining the height of a building. 
[Amended 7-18-2018 by Ord. No. 18-074 ] 
MID-RISE APARTMENT BUILDING — A multi-family residential building with three (3) to eight (8) stories and more than four dwelling units. 
MIXED USE — A lot or structure containing more than one principal zoning use. 
MOBILE FOOD VENDOR — A business that sells food or beverages from a vehicle such as a truck, van or pushcart, whether such food or beverages are prepared on site or prepared elsewhere and transported to the site of the sale. 
[Added 4-22-2015 by Ord. No. 15-048 ] 
MOBILE HOME — A dwelling unit manufactured in one or more sections, designed for long-term occupancy; containing living and sleeping accommodations, a flush toilet, a tub or shower, bath and kitchen facilities with plumbing and electrical connections provided for attachment to outside systems; and designed to be transported after fabrication on its own wheels, or on flatbed or other trailers, arriving at the site where it is to be occupied as a dwelling complete, usually including major appliances and furniture, and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations. Travel trailers and campers are not considered "mobile homes." 
MORTUARY — An establishment with facilities for the preparation of the dead for burial or cremation, for the view of the body, and for funerals. 
MULTI-FAMILY BUILDING — A building containing three or more dwelling units that share common horizontal and vertical separations. 
MUNICIPALITY — City of Jersey City. 
MLUL — The Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. 
MUNICIPAL AGENCY — The Planning Board, Board of Adjustment, or the City Council when acting pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law. 
MUNICIPAL RESIDENT — A person who is domiciled in Jersey City. 
MUNTINS — In windows, doors and storefronts, framing members that subdivide a glazed area into individual panes, lights or panels. 
MURAL — An art installation, visible to the public right-of-way, consisting of paint, and adhered directly to the wall of a building or structure. 
NARCOTIC AND DRUG ABUSE TREATMENT CENTER — Any licensed institution, facility, place, building or agency which supplies care, treatment, services, maintenance, accommodation or board, or any of these services in a group setting primarily or exclusively for individuals having any type of habitation, dependency or addiction to the use of any kind of controlled substance, alcohol, narcotic drug or other type of drug; and which provides guidance, supervision and personal services which enable the drug user, dependent or addict to move into independent living in normal surroundings, but does not provide those services that can be rendered only by a physician or within the confines of a hospital, and does not provide a permanent residence but only a temporary one. 
NAMEPLATE — Identification located on the premises, giving the name or addresses or both of the owner or occupant of a building or premises. 
NET LEASABLE AREA — The square footage of the area as measured from within the inside surface of the outer glass or finished walls of the building to the opposite walls, or, in the case of partial floor leases, to the midpoint of internal dividing walls, excluding only the areas (service areas) within the outside walls used for elevator mechanical rooms, building stairs, elevator shafts, flues, vents, stacks, and vertical ducts, but including all columns within the leased area and any such areas which are for the specific use of the particular tenant such as special stairs or elevators, plus a proportionate allocation of the square footage of the building's elevator mechanical rooms, common areas on the same floor of the leased premises, and the ground floor lobby. 
NEW URBANISM — Interrelated patterns of land use, transportation, and urban forms used to create communities that promote: neighborliness, environmental sustainability, economic efficiency and prosperity, historic preservation, participation in civic processes, and human health. New Urbanism practices apply to all scales of community, from the region to the neighborhood. Communities developed utilizing New Urbanism principals usually take the form of an urban street grid, or modified street grid system, in order to provide a more even distribution of vehicular traffic and a more varied and convenient pedestrian network. 
NIGHTCLUB — An establishment in which music, dancing, and/or live entertainment is conducted and which may also dispense liquor and/or food. 
NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — A building or structure which, in its location upon a lot or in its size, does not conform to the regulations of this Chapter for the district in which it is located. 
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot of record which does not have the minimum width, frontage or depth or contain the minimum area or shape factor requirements for the district in which it is located. 
NONCONFORMING USE — A use or activity which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of a zoning ordinance or redevelopment plan, but which fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning district or redevelopment plan in which it is located by reasons of such adoption, revision or amendment. 
NONCONTRIBUTING — A building, object, site or structure which neither adds to nor detracts from a historic district's or cluster's sense of time and place and historical development. 
NOTICE TO PROCEED — A document attesting that an emergency situation exists, as certified by the Building or Zoning/Administrative Officer, requiring an immediate issuance of a building permit or other permit to commence to stabilize, secure, repair or protect a landmark building, structure, object, site or landscape feature. 
NURSING FACILITY/NURSING HOME — See LONG TERM CARE FACILITY. 
OCCUPATION — Gainful employment in which an individual engages to earn compensation. 
OFFSITE -Located outside the lot lines of the lot in question but within the property of which the lot is a part, which is the subject of a development application or the closest half of the street or right-of- way abutting the property of which the lot is a part. 
OFF-TRACT — Not located on the property which is the subject of a development application nor on the closest half of the abutting street or right-of-way. 
OFFICE — A place for the transaction of business where reports are prepared, records are kept and services rendered, but where no retail sales are offered and where no manufacturing, assembly or fabricating takes place. Office does not include Medical Office. 
OFFICE, MEDICAL — A professional office where the services of one or more practitioner can be obtained and where patients are studied or treated on an outpatient basis and where no overnight accommodations are provided. 
OFFICIAL MAP — A map adopted by ordinance which shall be deemed to be conclusive with respect to the location and width of streets, public parks and playgrounds, and drainage rights-of-way shown thereon ( N.J.S.A. 40:50D-32). 
ON-SITE — Located on the lot in question and excluding any abutting street or right-of-way. 
ON-TRACT — Located on the property that is the subject of a development application or on a contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way. 
OPAQUE SCREENING — Any type of screening that completely obscures that which is to be hidden from view; this may include, but shall not be limited to, solid masonry walls, reflective glass, etc. 
OPEN SPACE — Any parcel or area of land or water set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public or private use or enjoyment, or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of land adjoining or neighboring such open space; such areas may be improved with only those buildings, structures, streets and off-street parking and other improvements that are customary and incidental to the openness of the land and may be designed for either passive or active recreational use. 
ORDINARY REPAIRS — Replacement or renewal of existing fabric of a building or a structure, site, object or landscape feature or of parts of the service equipment therein, with the same material or equipment parts, that are made in the ordinary course of maintenance and that do not in any way affect health, fire or structure safety of the landmark building, structure, site, object or landscape feature; or do not affect the design or integrity of the historic fabric of the landmark building, structure, object, site or landscape feature. 
OUTDOOR STORAGE — The storage of goods and materials outside of any building or structure. 
OWNER — An individual, firm, association, syndicate, co-partnership or corporation having sufficient proprietary interest in the land involved in an Application for Development to commence and maintain proceedings to develop the same under this Chapter. 
PARCEL — A lot or contiguous group of lots in a single ownership or under single control. 
PARK — A form of public open space either publicly or privately owned and available for recreational, educational, cultural or aesthetic use, which may include, but not be limited to, amenities such as landscaping, lighting, benches, fountains, recreational equipment, etc. 
PARKING, COMMERCIAL — Any parking facility open to the public where a fee is charged and where the persons parking therein do not necessarily live or work in a building or development which the parking lot, area, or structure is intended to serve. 
PARKING, COMMUTER — a commercial lot for the parking of personal passenger vehicles or buses, while occupants of the vehicles travel by trolley, train, boat, bus, van, foot, or other means to another destination for purposes of work or pleasure. 
PARKING, PUBLIC — see PARKING, COMMERCIAL. 
PARKING, SHARED — Parking facilities which utilize the same parking spaces to accommodate the parking needs for two or more separate and distinct users. 
PARKING, VALET (ATTENDANT) — Parking facilities in which an attendant parks and retrieves vehicles; aisles between spaces usually do not exist. 
PARKING SPACE — An accommodation for the parking of one licensed motor vehicle. A standard parking space measures 8.5' × 18', exclusive of driveways, access drives, fire lanes, and public rights-of- way. 
PARKING SPACE, COMPACT — An accommodation for the parking of one licensed motor vehicle. A compact parking space measures 8' × 16', exclusive of driveways, access drives, fire lanes, and public rights-of-way. 
PARLOR FLOOR — The first floor above grade in a dwelling with a basement. 
PASEO — An uncovered public walkway or passageway. 
PATIO — A level, surfaced area at or within one and one-half feet of the finished grade, not covered by a permanent roof. It may be of wood or masonry construction. 
PENTHOUSE — The uppermost story of a building. 
[Amended 7-18-2018 by Ord. No. 18-074 ] 
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE — Any security that may be accepted by a municipality to assure that improvements required as part of an application for development will be satisfactorily completed. 
PERMITTED USE — Any use of land or buildings as permitted by this Chapter in the zone in which it is situated. 
PLANNING BOARD — The Jersey City Planning Board established pursuant to the N.J.S.A. (C. 40:55 D- 23). 
PLAT — A map or maps of a subdivision. 
PLAT, PRELIMINARY — The preliminary map indicating the proposed layout of the subdivision which is submitted to the Reviewing Board for approval. 
PLAZA — An open area for the general public's use that may serve as a point of assembly and/or a physical link between two buildings, and which is designed for pedestrian access from the street level(s) which it abuts and which has improved surfacing, sitting areas, landscaping, and public art. 
PORCH — A roofed open area, which may be screened and is attached to or part of a principal structure. 
PREDOMINANT FRONT YARD SETBACK — The most frequently occurring setback on the block frontage. 
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL — Conferral on the applicant the following rights for a three-year period from the date of preliminary approval ( N.J.S.A. 40:55D-46) 
A.  That the general terms and conditions on which the preliminary approval was granted shall not be changed. 
B.  That the applicant may submit for final approval on or before the expiration of this three- year period. 
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — A building in which the principal use of the lot is conducted. 
PRINCIPAL USE — The primary use of land or structures as distinguished from an accessory use. 
PROFESSIONAL REVIEW — Technical review of applications for development by staff or retained consultants, who are considered competent and prepared by virtue of their expertise, training, education and/or licensure to undertake such review for the land use boards of the City of Jersey City. All professional review shall take place under the supervision of New Jersey licensed professional planners, engineers, architects, landscape architects or surveyors. 
PUBLIC AREAS — Public parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas; other public open spaces; scenic and historic sites; and sites for schools and other public buildings and structures. 
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS — Public parks and open space, streets, sidewalks, water and sewer lines and other similar spaces and infrastructure. 
PUBLIC/QUASI-PUBLIC USE — Any use that enables a public or private institution to carry out its functions to preserve or promote public health, safety and welfare and shall include, but not be limited to, religious organizations, public and private schools, civic and fraternal organizations, nursing homes, hospitals, public works and government buildings, daycare facilities and non-profit organizations. 
PUBLIC UTILITY — Any public utility regulated by the Board of Regulatory Commissioners and defined pursuant to C. 48:2-13. 
QUORUM — A majority of the full authorized membership of a municipal agency. 
RECONSTRUCTION — The act or process of reassembling, reproducing or replacing by new construction the form, detail and appearance of a property and its setting as it appeared at a particular period of time by means of the removal of later work, or by the replacement of missing earlier work or by reuse of original materials for historical preservation purposes. 
REDEDICATED (Street or Right-of-Way) — A public right-of-way once having been vacated for private use and returned by ordinance to its previous status as a public right-of-way. 
REHABILITATION — The act or process of returning a building, object, site, structure or landscape feature to a state of utility through repair, remodeling or alteration that makes possible an efficient contemporary use while preserving those portions or features of the building, object, site or structure that are significant to its historical, architectural and cultural values for historical preservation purposes. 
RESTAURANT — Any establishment, however designated, at which food is sold for consumption on premises, normally to patrons seated within an enclosed building. However, a snack bar at a public or community playground, playfield, park, or swimming pool operated solely by the agency or group operating the recreation facilities, and for the convenience of patrons of the facility, shall not be deemed to be a restaurant. 
RESTAURANT, CATEGORY ONE — A restaurant which is designed for and whose primary function and operation is the preparation and service by employees of meals to a customer or customers seated at the table or bar at which the meal is consumed. A category one restaurant operates without substantial carry-out or delivery service; with no drive-thru, drive-in, or service in vehicles. 
[Amended 9-9-2015 by Ord. No. 15-115 ] 
RESTAURANT, CATEGORY TWO — A restaurant or mobile food vendor whose primary function is the preparation and service by employees of food to customers as part of an operation designed to include substantial carry-out service; delivery service; self-service, and which may, but is not required to, include on-premises consumption, except that no drive-in, drive-thru, or service in vehicles is permitted. 
[Amended 4-22-2015 by Ord. No. 15-048 ] 
CAFÉ - RESTAURANT, CATEGORY TWO — A small-scale restaurant, with limited seating, engaged in the selling of light meals and drinks. A café is designed to operate for substantial carry-out service; delivery service; self-service; counter service, and which may, but is not required to, include on-premise consumption. No commercial kitchen or ventilation systems are permitted. 
[Added 9-9-2015 by Ord. No. 15-115 ] 
RESTAURANT, CATEGORY THREE — A restaurant whose primary function is the preparation and service by employees of food to customers as part of an operation which may be designed with carry-out service; delivery service; self-service; on-premise consumption; or customer pick-up service utilizing a vehicular drive-thru. 
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN — An establishment where the majority of the patrons purchase food, soft drinks, ice cream, and similar confections for takeout or consumption on the premises but outside the confines of the principal building, or in automobiles parked upon the premises, regardless of whether or not, in addition thereto, seats or other accommodations are provided for the patrons. 
RESTORATION — The act or process of accurately recovering the form and details of a building, object, site or structure and its setting as it appeared at a particular period of time by means of the removal of later work or by the replacement of missing earlier work. 
RETAIL BROKERAGE — See FINANCIAL SERVICES FACILITY. 
RETAIL SALES — An establishment engaged in selling goods or merchandise to the general public for personal or household consumption and rendering services incidental to the sale of such goods. In no instance shall bars or service stations be considered as retail sales. 
RETAIL SERVICES — An establishment providing services, as opposed to products, to the general public for personal or household use. In no instance shall drug rehabilitation centers be considered as retail services. 
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A strip of land used or intended to be used as a street, lane, alley, pedestrian way, bikeway, railway, or some combination thereof; for the purpose of conveying people and/or goods, whether publicly or privately owned, and as indicated on the municipal tax map or created by subdivision or an easement granted to the City of Jersey City for public access and duly filed and recorded in the office of the Hudson County Registrar. [ Added 7-16-2014 by Ord. No. 14-077 ] 
ROOMING HOUSE — See BOARDING HOUSE. 
ROW HOUSE — see TOWNHOUSE. 
SANITARY LANDFILL — The means by which refuse is deposited, compacted and covered with clean fill and meeting all the standards of the State of New Jersey and the City of Jersey City and the New Jersey Meadowlands Commission in the areas of their jurisdiction. 
SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA — A device or instrument, designed or used for the reception of television or other electronic communications signal broadcast or relayed from an earth satellite. It may be solid, open mesh, or bar-configured structure in the shape of a shallow dish or parabola. 
SATELLITE EARTH STATION — A Satellite Dish Antenna larger than 3 feet in diameter. 
SCHOOL — An institution of academic education which is designed, constructed or used for education of students up to and through the secondary level. 
SCREENING — The decorative fencing, evergreen, or other vegetation maintained for the purpose of concealing from view the area behind such structures, evergreen, or other vegetations. 
SELF STORAGE FACILITY - A facility consisting of individual, self-contained units leased to individuals, organizations, or small businesses for self-service storage of personal property. No commercial warehousing is permitted. Self storage shall not be considered retail sales or service. [Added 3-11-2015 by Ord. No. 15-025 ] 
SENIOR HOUSING — Housing that is located and designed to meet the special needs and accommodate the changing living arrangements of an elderly population, aged 62 and older. 
SERVICE STATION — A place where motor fuel, lubricants and miscellaneous accessories for motor vehicles are sold and dispensed and where services may be rendered for engine and mechanical repairs, but where no automobile painting and bodywork are done and where no junked or unregistered motor vehicles are kept or stored. Service stations may also include retail sales of food and sundry items of convenience to the general public and roll over car washes. 
SETBACK, REQUIRED — a line that is established a minimum horizontal distance from the street line or the lot line and beyond which a building or part of a building is not permitted to extend toward the street line or lot line. 
SETBACK LINE — A line drawn parallel to a street line or lot line and drawn through the point of a building nearest to the street line or lot line. 
SHALL — Mandatory requirement 
SHAPE FACTOR — The perimeter of the lot squared, divided by the lot area. 
SHORT TERM RENTAL — The accessory use of a dwelling unit for occupancy by someone other than the unit's owner or permanent resident for a period of less than thirty (30) consecutive days. 
[Added 10-28-2015 by Ord. No. 15-137 ] 
SIDE SLOPE — The section of a hill that is below the Talus Slope and generally of moderate or lesser gradient than the Talus Slope or cliff face. 
SIGHT TRIANGLE — The area outside the right-of way which is bounded by intersecting street lines and the straight line connecting sight points, one each located on the two intersecting street center lines, the following distance away from the intersecting center lines: primary and secondary arterial streets at one hundred (100) feet; major and minor collector streets at sixty (60) feet; and local streets at forty (40) feet. Where the intersecting streets are both arterial, both collectors or one arterial and one collector, two overlapping sight triangles shall be required, formed by connecting the sight points noted above with a sight point forty (40) feet on the intersecting street. The classification of streets shall be those in the Master Plan of the Jersey City. 
SIGN — Any device, fixture, placard or structure that uses color, form, picture, display, graphic, illumination, symbol or writing to advertise, attract attention to, announce the purpose of, or identify a person, entity or thing, or to communicate any information to the public. 
SIGN, BANNER — Any sign intended to be hung flush with any building wall either with or without frames, possessing characters, letters, illustrations or ornamentations applied to paper, plastic or fabric of any kind. National flags, flags of political subdivision and symbolic flags of political subdivisions and symbolic flags of any institutions or business shall not be considered banners. 
SIGN, BUILDING — Any sign attached below the roofline to any part of a building, as contrasted to a freestanding sign. Building signs include wall signs, window signs, and canopy signs. 
SIGN, CANOPY — Any sign on, or attached to, an awning, marquee, or canopy. 
SIGN, FREESTANDING — Any sign supported by structures or supports that are placed on, or anchored in, the ground, and that are independent from any building or other structure. 
SIGN, HANGING/BLADE — A sign that is wholly or partly dependent upon a building for support and that projects perpendicular more than twelve (12) inches from such building. 
SIGN, INTERNALLY ILLUMINATED — Any sign which has characters, letters, figures, designs or outline illuminated, and where the light source is contained within or directly behind the sign band. 
SIGN, MONUMENT — A sign which the entire bottom is in contract with or is close to the ground and is independent of any other structure. 
SIGN, PYLON/POLE — A sign that is mounted on a freestanding pole or other support so that the bottom edge of the sign face is six feet or more above grade. 
SIGN, WALL — Any sign attached parallel to, but within six inches of a wall, painted on the wall surface, or erected and confined within the limits of an outside wall of any building or structure, which is supported by such wall or building, and which displays only one sign surface and may be made of a fabric material. 
SIGN, WINDOW — Any sign that is placed within a window or upon the window panes or glass and is visible from the exterior of the window. 
SINGLE ROOM OCCUPANCY (SRO) — A housing type consisting of one room with private or shared bathroom facilities, and no cooking facilities are provided. 
SITE — Any plot or parcel of land or combination of contiguous lots or parcels of land. Within historic districts, a site is the location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historic occupation or activity, or a building, structure, object or landscape feature, whether standing, ruined or vanished, where the location itself maintains historical, cultural, architectural or archaeological value regardless of the value of any existing structure. 
SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots on which is shown the proposed conditions of the lot, showing the location of proposed buildings, drives, parking spaces, walkways, means of ingress and egress, and any other information that may be reasonably required in order to make an informed determination pursuant to an ordinance requiring review and approval. 
SITE PLAN, MINOR — A development plan of one or more lots which (1) proposes new development within the scope of development specifically permitted by ordinance as a minor site plan; (2) does not involve planned development, any new street or extension of any off-tract improvement which is to be prorated pursuant to section 30 of P.L. 1975,c.291 (C.40:55D-42); and (3) contains the information reasonably required in order to make an informed determination pursuant to an ordinance requiring review and approval of site plans. 
SITE PLAN REVIEW — The examination of the specific development plans for a lot as per N.J.S.A. 40:55D-37 et seq. 
SOIL CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Hudson-Essex-Passaic Soil Conservation District. 
SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — A plan which indicates necessary land treatment measures, including a schedule for installations, which will effectively minimize soil erosion and sedimentation. Such measures shall be at least equivalent to the standards and specifications as adopted by the Hudson-Essex-Passaic Soil Conservation District. 
STABILIZATION — The act or process of applying measures designed to reestablish a weather-resistant enclosure and the structural stability of an unsafe or deteriorated building, object, site, structure or landscape feature while maintaining the essential form as it exists at present. 
STEEP SLOPE — Shall be defined as an area in which the change in elevation is in excess of thirty percent (30%). 
STEPBACK — The distance the upper floors or portions of a building or structure are setback from the outermost edge of that building or structure as measured from its intersection with grade. (Upper floors may be any floor above the ground level floor.) 
STILTED BUILDING — A structure built above the surface of the grade with the first floor resting on or supported by posts and the grade level exposed. 
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. See definitions for "basement," "cellar," "mezzanine," and "penthouse." 
[Amended 4-22-2015 by Ord. No. 15-048 ; 7-18-2018 by Ord. No. 18-074 ] 
STORY, HALF — A space under a sloping roof that has the line of intersection of the roof decking and wall face not more than three feet above the top floor level and in which space the possible floor area with a headroom of five feet or less occupies at least 40 percent of the total floor area of the story directly beneath. Also known as an attic. 
[Amended 7-18-2018 by Ord. No. 18-074 ] 
STREET — A street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, or drive but not including alleys or rail rights-of-way: 
A.  Which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway; or 
B.  Which is shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law; or 
C.  Which is approved by official action as provided by this Chapter; or 
D.  Which is shown on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the county recording officer prior to the appointment of a planning board and the grant to such board of the power to review plats; 
and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, parking areas and other areas within the street lines. 
[Amended 4-22-2015 by Ord. No. 15-048 ] 
STREET FURNITURE — Above-ground items that are usually found in street rights-of-way including benches, kiosks, plants, canopies, shelters, bicycle racks, lamp posts, and trash cans. 
STREET LINE — The edge of the street right-of-way forming the dividing line between the street and a lot. 
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction for occupancy, use or ornamentation, whether installed on, above or below the surface of a parcel of land. 
STUDIO, FILM PRODUCTION AND PERFORMING ARTS — An area utilized for the production and editing of films and/or rehearsal space for actors, musicians, dancers and other similar performers.. Where this use is permitted within any residential district, no equipment or process shall be used that creates noise, glare, fumes, odors, electrical interference or other nuisance factors detectable to the human senses outside the structure in which the studio is located. In addition, where this use is permitted within a residential district, all studio activities shall be permitted to occur only within an enclosed structure. 
SUBDIVIDER — Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, company, partnership, corporation, trust or other legal entity commencing proceedings under this Chapter to effect a subdivision of land for himself or herself or for another. 
SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for sale or development The following shall not be considered subdivisions within the meaning of this Chapter, if no new streets are created: 
A.  Divisions of property by testamentary or intestate provisions. 
B.  Divisions of property upon court order, including but not limited to judgments of foreclosure. 
C.  Consolidation of existing lots by deed or other recorded instrument. 
D.  The conveyance of one or more adjoining lots, tracts or parcels of land, owned by the same person or persons, and all of which are found and certified by the administrative officer to conform to the requirements of the Municipal Development regulations and are shown and designated as separate lots, tracts or parcels on the Tax Map or Atlas of the City. 
SUBDIVISION, MAJOR — Any subdivision not classified as a minor subdivision. 
SUBDIVISION, MINOR — Any subdivision containing four lots or less and which does not involve: a planned development; any new street; or the extension of any off-tract improvement, the cost of which is to be prorated pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42. Any lot or remaining land approved as a minor subdivision shall not be submitted as a minor subdivision within five years from the date of approval as a minor subdivision. Such lot or tract may be submitted as a major subdivision. 
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure either before the improvement or repair is started or, if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions or any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places. 
SUBSTANTIAL REHABILITATION OR ALTERATION OF A HISTORIC FACADE — Alteration or rehabilitation of fifty percent (50%) or more of any facade along a public right-of-way within a designated historic district. 
TALUS SLOPE — A slope formed by accumulation of debris at the bottom of a cliff. 
THEATER — Space for live or screen performances including movies, plays, and concerts. 
THEMATIC GROUP — A finite group of resources related to one another in a clearly distinguishable way by association with a single historic person, event or development force, as one building type or use, as designed by a single architect, as a single archaeological site form or as a particular set of archaeological research. 
THROUGH LOT — A lot that fronts on two (2) parallel streets or that fronts upon two (2) streets that do not intersect at the boundaries of the lot. Both street frontages shall be considered to be front lot lines and front yard, and front yard setback standards shall apply to both frontages. 
TOP OF CLIFF — The portion of a hill located above the cliff face, overlain with regolith, generally the plateau or hill crest. 
TOWNHOUSE — A residential building in which each building has its own front and rear access to the outside and is separated from adjacent buildings only by vertical fire-resistant building walls. A townhouse building may contain one to four dwelling units in accordance with the density standard of the particular zoning district in which such property is located. 
TOWNHOUSE, BACK-TO-BACK — A townhouse building with individual units that are attached back to back, but in no case shall individual units be located above or below another unit. Each individual unit shall have its own entrance from the exterior. Each building cluster shall have two building front facades and two side facades. 
TOWNHOUSE, STACKED — A townhouse building with units that are stacked one on top of the other. Each individual unit shall have its own entrance from the exterior. Stacked Townhouses may also qualify as Back-to-Back Townhouses. 
TRANSCRIPT — A typed or printed verbatim record of the proceedings or reproduction thereof. 
TRANSIT-WAY — That roadway, easement, rail, trench route, etc. on which a mass transit vehicle travels. 
TRANSIT VILLAGE — An urban community well served by mass transit system(s). Transit Villages make it easy for residents to live without a car by allowing for the convenient ability to ride transit and walking within pleasant urban environments. Typically, they have active, vibrant, and strong neighborhood centers providing convenient access to commercial services focused around transit. 
TRANSOM — A small window above a door or other window. 
TWO-FAMILY — A building on a single lot containing two dwelling units, each of which is separated from the other by an unpierced wall extending from ground to roof or an unpierced vertical and horizontal ceiling and floor extending from exterior wall to exterior wall, except for a common stairwell exterior to both dwelling units. 
UNUSUAL AND COMPELLING CIRCUMSTANCES — Those uncommon and extremely rare instances, factually detailed, which would warrant the Historic Preservation Commission action due to the evidence presented. 
UPLAND AREA — Land area located above the surface of any body of water. 
UTILITY — Water, sewerage, telephone, gas or electric service from a private or public utility company under the regulations of the New Jersey Board of Public Utilities. 
VARIANCE — Permission to depart from the literal requirements of the zoning ordinance as per N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(d). 
VEHICULAR SALES AREA — See AUTO SALES. 
VIEW CORRIDOR — Three dimensional space through which views of historic, cultural or aesthetic significance may be observed. 
VISTA — A view through or along an avenue, street or opening which as a view corridor frames, highlights or accentuates a prominent building, object, site, structure, scene or panorama, or patterns or rhythms of buildings, structures, objects, sites or landscape features; to include views of areas at a distance. 
WAIVER — Permission to depart from the requirements of an ordinance with respect to the submission of required documents, and/or compliance with particular design standards. 
WALKWAY — Any pathway set aside for and traveled by pedestrians and improved in such way to assist in the designated use. 
WALL — A solid, vertical structure of wood, masonry or other material serving to enclose, divide or protect an area. 
WAREHOUSE — A building used primarily for the storage of goods and materials. 
WATER TRANSPORTATION FACILITIES — See MASS TRANSIT FACILITY. 
WHARF — A structure built parallel to the shore, used to load passengers and may also serve as a walkway or access-way. A quay wall is a simple form of wharf that serves as both a retaining wall for shorefront protection and a docking facility. 
WHOLESALE SALES AND SERVICES — Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in selling merchandise to retailers; industrial, commercial, institutional or professional business users; other wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers and buying merchandise for, or selling merchandise to, such individuals or companies. 
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION ANTENNAS — Devices which are used for the transmission and reception of wave frequencies for the purposes of any wireless telecommunication (e.g., telephone, radio, paging, and/or television communication) and which are permitted as either second principal uses on existing structures or as "conditional uses" on a tower except in historic districts, in accordance with the specified zoning conditions and standards for their location and operation set forth in this Chapter. Wireless Communication Antennas shall not be considered to be a "public utility." 
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION TOWER — A freestanding vertical structure designed to support one or more wireless telecommunication antennas, including monopoles, guyed towers, lathe towers and similar structures. 
WORK/LIVE ARTIST STUDIO — A single, enclosed, private space of nine hundred (900) square feet or more, where at least one-half of the volume of the total space is devoted to work space for the creation, display and sale of art, and the remainder is used for living purposes. Nothing in this definition shall prohibit the use and occupancy of a "work/live artist studio" in a setting where shared kitchen and/or bath facilities are available, provided that applicable health and safety codes are met and maintained. 
WORK/LIVE UNIT — A unit that adheres to all of the standards of a Home Occupation except that a minimum of 900 (nine hundred) square feet must be provided, a maximum 50% of which may be used as work space and the remaining space is used for residential purposes. There is no maximum square footage to the workspace so long as it does not exceed 50% of the total unit area. 
YARD — An open space that lies between the principal building or buildings and the nearest lot line. The minimum required yard as set forth in the ordinance shall be unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as may be specifically provided in the zoning ordinance. 
YARD, FRONT — An open space extending across the full width of the lot and lying between the street line and the closest point of any building on the lot. The depth of the "front yard" shall be measured horizontally and at right angles to either a straight street line or the point of tangent of curved street lines. The minimum required "front yard" shall be the same as the required setback. 
YARD, REAR — An open space extending across the full width of the lot and lying between the rear lot line and the closest point of the principal building on the lot. The depth of the "rear yard" shall be measured horizontally and at right angles to either a straight rear lot line or the point of tangent of curved rear lot lines. The minimum required "rear yard" shall be the same as the required setback. 
YARD, SIDE — An open space extending from the front yard to the rear yard and lying between each side lot line and the closest point of the principal building on the lot. The width of the required "side yard" shall be measured horizontally and at right angles to either a straight side line or the point of tangent of curved side lot lines. The minimum required "side yard" shall be the same as the required setback. 
ZONE — see District 
ZONING PERMIT — A document signed by the Zoning Officer. 
A.  Which is required by ordinance as a condition precedent to the commencement of a use or the erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion or installation of a structure or buildings. 
B.  Which acknowledges that such use, structures or buildings comply with the provisions of the City Zoning Ordinance or variance therefore duly authorized by the appropriate agency of the City pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60 and 40:55D-70.  
ARTICLE II - Land Use Boards, Commissions and Advisory Boards 
 
§ 345-7. - Planning board. 
A.  Establishment of Planning Board. 
1.  Membership. The City of Jersey City Planning Board shall consist of nine members of the following four classes: 
a.  Class I: The Mayor or Mayor's designee. 
b.  Class II: One of the officials of the City, other than a member of the City Council, to be appointed by the Mayor. 
c.  Class III: A member of the City Council to be appointed by the City Council. 
d.  Class IV: Six other residents of the City to be appointed by the Mayor. The members of Class IV shall hold no other municipal office, position or employment except that one member may be a member of the Board of Adjustment. Not more than one Class IV member may be a member of the Board of Education. For the purpose of this section, membership on a City board or commission whose function is advisory in nature, the establishment of which is discretionary and not required by statute, shall not be considered the holding of City office. 
e.  Alternate Members. Two alternate members shall be appointed and shall meet the qualifications of Class IV members. Alternate members shall be appointed for a term of two years, and at the time of their appointments shall be designated Alternate No. 1 and Alternate No. 2, respectively. Alternate members may participate in discussions of the proceedings but may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular member. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that a choice must be made as to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. I shall vote. 
2.  Terms. The term of the Class I member shall correspond to his or her official tenure as Mayor. The terms of the members composing Class II and Class Ill shall be for one year or terminate at the completion of their respective terms of office, whichever occurs first. The term of a Class IV member who is also a member of the Board of Adjustment or Board of Education shall terminate whenever he or she is no longer a member of such other body or at the completion of his or her Class IV term, whichever occurs first. The term of all other Class IV members shall be four years. If a vacancy in any class shall occur otherwise than by expiration of the Planning Board term, it shall be filled by appointment, as above provided, for the unexpired term. 
3.  Substitute Members When Conflict Exists. If the Planning Board lacks a quorum because any of its members are prohibited by a conflict of interest from acting on a matter due to the member's personal or financial interest, regular members of the Board of Adjustment shall be called upon to serve, for that matter only, as temporary members of the Planning Board in order of seniority of continuous service to the Board of Adjustment until there are the minimum number of members necessary to constitute a quorum to act upon the matter without any personal or financial interest. If a choice has to be made between regular members of equal seniority, the Chairperson of the Board of Adjustment shall make the choice. 
4.  Organization. The Planning Board shall organize annually by selecting from among its Class IV members a chairperson and a vice chairperson. The Board shall also select a secretary who may or may not be a member of the Board or a municipal employee, and create and fill such other offices as established by ordinance. 
5.  Legal Counsel and Other Professional Staff. The Planning Board may annually appoint an attorney at law of New Jersey other than the Municipal Attorneys as Planning Board Attorney and may fix his or her compensation at an amount not exceeding the amount appropriated. The Planning Board may also employ or contract for and fix the compensation of such experts and other staff and services as it may deem necessary. The Board, however, shall not authorize expenditures which exceed, exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by the City Council for its use. 
6.  Conflict of Interest. No member of the Planning Board shall be permitted to act on any matter in which he has any personal or financial interest, either directly or indirectly. 
7.  Removal. Any member other than a Class I member, after a public hearing, if requested, may be removed by the City Council for cause. 
B.  Powers and Jurisdiction of Planning Board. 
1.  Mandatory Powers. The Planning Board shall exercise its powers in accordance with the Municipal Land Use Law in regard to: 
a.  The City Master Plan pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28. 
b.  Subdivision and site plan review pursuant to the Land Development Ordinance. 
c.  Any official map adopted by the City Council pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32 et seq. 
d.  The zoning ordinance including conditional uses pursuant to the land development ordinance. 
e.  Any capital improvements programs pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-29 et seq. 
f.  Variances and certain building permits in conjunction with subdivision, site plan and conditional use approval pursuant to this section. 
2.  Other Powers. The Planning Board may: 
a.  Participate in the preparation and review of programs or plans required by State or Federal law or regulation. 
b.  Assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuous planning process. 
c.  Perform such other duties as are assigned to it by ordinance or resolution of the City Council. 
3.  Planning Board Review In Lieu of Board of Adjustment. Whenever the proposed development requires approval of a subdivision, site plan or conditional use, but not a variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d, the Planning Board shall have the power to grant to the same extent and subject to the same restrictions as the Board of Adjustment: 
a.  Variances pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c. 
b.  Direction pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 for issuance of a permit for a building or structure in the bed of a mapped street or public drainage way, flood control basin or public area reserved pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32. 
c.  Direction pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36 for issuance of a permit for a building or structure not related to a street. 
4.  Referral Powers of the Planning Board. Prior to the adoption of a development regulation, revision or amendment thereto, the Planning Board shall make and transmit to the City Council, within thirty-five (35) days after referral, a report including identification of any provisions in the proposed development regulation, revision or amendment which are inconsistent with the City Master Plan and recommendations concerning these inconsistencies and any other matters as the Board deems appropriate. The City Council, when considering the adoption of a development regulation, revision or amendment thereto, shall review the report of the Planning Board and may disapprove or change any recommendation by a vote of a majority of its full authorized membership and shall record in its minutes the reasons for not following such recommendations. Failure of the Planning Board to transmit its report within the thirty-five (35) day period provided herein shall relieve the City Council from the requirements of this subsection in regard to the proposed development regulation, revision or amendment referred to the Planning Board. Nothing in this section shall be construed as diminishing the application of the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32 to any official map or an amendment or revision thereto or of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-62 to any zoning ordinance or any amendment or revision thereto. 
5.  The Mayor may appoint one or more persons as a citizens advisory committee to assist or collaborate with the Planning Board in its duties, but such committee shall have no power to vote or take other action required of the Board. Such persons shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor.  
§ 345-8. - Zoning Board of Adjustment. 
A.  Establishment of Zoning Board of Adjustment. [Amended 3-25-2015 by Ord. No. 15-032 ] 
1.  Membership. The City of Jersey City Zoning Board of Adjustment (herein referred to as the Board of Adjustment), shall consist of seven (7) regular members and four (4) alternate members, each of whom shall be residents of the City and shall be appointed by the Mayor. All regular members appointed shall serve for terms of four (4) years beginning June 30 of the year of their appointment. 
2.  Alternate Members. Alternate members shall be appointed for a term of two (2) years, and at the time of their appointments shall be designated Alternate No. 1, Alternate No. 2, Alternate No. 3, and Alternate No. 4, respectively. The terms of not more than two (2) alternate members shall expire in any one (1) year. Alternate members may participate in discussions of the proceedings but may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular member. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that a choice must be made as to which alternate member is to vote, alternate members shall vote in the order of their numerical designations. 
3.  Other Municipal Office. No member of the Board of Adjustment shall hold any elective office or position under the municipality. This includes city employees and non-elected officials. 
4.  Conflict of Interest. No member of the Board of Adjustment shall be permitted to act on any matter in which he or she has, either directly or indirectly, any personal or financial interest. 
5.  Removal. A member, after a public hearing if requested, may be removed by the City Council for cause. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled for the unexpired term only. 
6.  Election of Officers. The Board of Adjustment shall annually elect a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson from its members and a Secretary who may or may not be a member of the Board or a municipal employee. 
7.  Substitute Members when Conflict Exists. If the Board of Adjustment lacks a quorum because its regular or alternate members are prohibited by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69 from acting on a matter due to the member's personal or financial interest, Class IV members of the Planning Board shall be called upon to serve, for that matter only, as temporary members of the Board of Adjustment. The Class IV members of the Planning Board shall be called upon to serve in order of seniority of continuous service to the Planning Board until there are the minimum number of members necessary to constitute a quorum to act upon the matter without any personal or financial interest. If a choice has to be made between Class IV members of equal seniority, the Chairperson of the Planning Board shall make the choice. 
8.  Legal Counsel and Other Professional Staff. The Board of Adjustment may employ or contract for and fix the compensation of legal counsel, other than the Municipal Attorneys, and experts and other staff and services as it shall deem necessary, not exceeding, exclusive of gifts and grants, the amount appropriated by the City Council for its use. 
B.  Powers and Jurisdiction of Zoning Board of Adjustment. 
1.  The Board of Adjustment shall have the following powers: 
a.  Appeals. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or refusal made by the Zoning Officer or any other City Official, based on or made in the enforcement of the zoning ordinance. 
b.  Interpretations. Hear and decide requests for interpretation of the Zoning Map or Ordinance or for decisions upon other special questions upon which such Board is authorized to pass by any Zoning or Official Map Ordinance in accordance with the Municipal Land Use Law. 
c.  Bulk and Dimensional Variances: 
i.  Where by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of a specific piece of property, or by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or physical features uniquely affecting a specific piece of property, or by reason of an extraordinary and exceptional situation uniquely affecting a specific piece of property or the structures lawfully existing thereon, the strict application of any zoning regulation would result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to, or exceptional and undue hardship upon the developer of such property, the Board may grant, upon an application or an appeal relating to such property, a variance from such strict application of such regulation so as to relieve such difficulties or hardship; or 
ii.  Wherein an application or appeal relating to a specific piece of property the purposes of zoning set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-2 would be advanced by a deviation from the zoning ordinance requirements and the benefits of the deviation would substantially outweigh any detriment, the Board may grant a variance to allow departure from such zoning requirements, provided, however, that the fact that a proposed use is an inherently beneficial use shall not be dispositive of a decision on a variance under this subsection, and provided that no variance from those departures enumerated in this section shall be granted under this subsection; and provided further that the proposed development does not require approval by the Planning Board of a subdivision, site plan or conditional use in conjunction with which the Planning Board has the power to review a request for a variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-6Oa. 
d.  "d" Variances. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70:d, In particular cases and for special reasons, the Board may grant a variance to allow departure from zoning regulations to permit (i) a use or principal structure in a district restricted against such use or principal structure, (ii) an expansion of a non-conforming use, (iii) deviation from a specification or standard pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67 pertaining solely to a conditional use, (iv) an increase in the permitted floor area ratio as defined in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-4, (v) an increase in the permitted density as defined in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-4 except as applied to the required lot area for a lot or lots for detached one or two dwelling unit buildings which lot or lots are either an isolated undersized lot or lots resulting from a minor subdivision or (vi) a height of a principal structure which exceeds by ten (10) feet or ten percent (10%) the maximum height permitted in the district for a principal structure. A variance under this subsection shall be granted only by an affirmative vote of at least five members. 
2.  Relief Not Enumerated as a "d" Variance to be Decided Under Bulk and Dimensional Variance Criteria. If an application for development requests one or more variances but not a "d" variance, the decision on the requested variance or variances shall be rendered under the bulk and dimensional variance criteria. 
3.  Requirement for Showing of No Substantial Detriment. No variance or other relief may be granted under the terms of this section, including a variance or other relief involving an inherently beneficial use, without a showing that such variance or other relief can be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and will not substantially impair the intent and the purpose of the zone plan and zoning ordinance. 
4.  Referral of Application to Other Agencies. An application under this section may be referred to any appropriate person or agency for its report; provided that such reference shall not extend the period of time within which the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act. 
5.  Additional Powers. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have the following additional powers: 
a.  To direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 for a building or structure in the bed of a mapped street or public drainageway, flood control basin or public area reserved pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32. 
b.  To direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36 for a building or structure not related to a street. 
c.  To grant to the same extent and subject to the same restrictions as the Planning Board subdivision or site plan approval or conditional use approval whenever the proposed development requires approval by the Board of Adjustment of a variance pursuant to this section of this ordinance. The developer may elect to submit a separate application requesting approval of the variance and a subsequent application for any required approval of a subdivision, site plan or conditional use. The separate approval of the variance shall be conditioned upon grant of all required subsequent approvals of a site plan or subdivision by the Board of Adjustment. No such subsequent approval shall be granted unless such approval can be granted without substantial impairment to the public good and without substantial impairment to the intent and purpose of the zone plan and zoning ordinance. The number of votes of Board members required to grant any such subsequent approval shall be as otherwise provided in this Chapter for the approval in question, and the special vote pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d shall not be required. 
C.  Annual Report on Variances Heard by Zoning Board of Adjustment. The Board of Adjustment shall, at least once a year, review its decisions on applications and appeals for variances and prepare and adopt by resolution a report of its findings on zoning ordinance provisions which were the subject of variance requests and its recommendations for zoning ordinance amendment or revision, if any. The Board of Adjustment shall send copies of the report and resolution to the City Council and Planning Board.  
§ 345-9. - Historic Preservation Commission. 
A.  Establishment of Historic Preservation Commission. 
1.  Membership and Terms. 
a.  The Historic Preservation Commission (HPC) shall consist of eleven (11) members of whom nine shall be regular members and two shall be alternate members. Each member shall be appointed by the Mayor. At least four of the regular members shall be of and designated as Class A and B. The remaining regular members may be of and shall be designated as Class C. The two alternate members shall meet the qualifications of Class C and shall be designated Alternate No. 1 and Alternate 2. The Classes are defined as: 
i.  Class A — A person who is knowledgeable in building design and construction or architectural history and who may reside outside the city. 
ii.  Class B — A person who is knowledgeable of, or who has a demonstrated interest in local history and who may reside outside the city. 
iii.  Class C — Any citizen of the City who shall hold no other municipal office, position or employment except for membership on the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment. 
b.  All appointments of regular members shall be for a term of four years or until the appointment and qualification of a successor. 
c.  Alternate members shall meet the qualifications of Class C members. At the time of appointment, alternate members shall be designated as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2." 
d.  All appointments of alternate members shall be for a term of two years or until the appointment and qualification of a successor. 
e.  Not withstanding any other provision contained in this Ordinance, the term of any member who is also a member of the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment shall be coterminous with his or her membership on such Board. 
f.  Terms shall commence on April 1 or each respective year. 
g.  A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled for the unexpired term only. All vacancies shall be filled with qualified members within sixty (60) days. 
2.  Rules and Organization. 
a.  The HPC shall elect a Chairperson, Vice Chairperson and a Secretary who may or may not be a member of the Historic Preservation Commission or a municipal employee. 
b.  Alternative members may participate in discussion of the proceedings but may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular member. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead of an alternative member. In the event that a choice must be made as to which alternative member is to vote, Alternative No. 1 shall vote. 
c.  The HPC shall establish a regular schedule of meetings, at least once a month or as often as required to meet the needs of its business, to handle emergencies, or to meet time constraints imposed by law. Additional meetings may be called by the Chairperson or Vice Chairperson when the regular meetings are inadequate to meet the needs of its business or to meet time constraints imposed by law. 
d.  Five members shall constitute a quorum. A majority vote of those present and voting shall prevail; except that not less than five affirmative votes may approve an application for historic designation or Certificate of Appropriateness. 
e.  The HPC's Secretary shall keep minutes and records of all meetings and proceedings, including voting records, attendance, resolutions, findings, determinations, decisions and applications. All HPC records and minutes shall be made public records as provided by law and shall be available at the City Planning Office. 
f.  The HPC shall establish a regular schedule of meetings on at least a monthly basis. Additional meetings may be called by the Chairperson or Vice Chairperson when the regular meetings are inadequate to meet the needs of its business or to meet time constraints imposed by law. All HPC meetings shall comply with the Open Public Meetings Act, N.J.S.A. 10:4-7, et seq. and public notice of the time, date and subject of the meeting, by way of newspaper, shall be given at least forty-eight (48) hours in advance of any meeting. The HPC shall adopt written by-laws and procedures for the transaction of its business and for the consideration of applications. Such by laws shall not be inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter and shall include, but not be limited to, rules pertaining to all notices and hearings required herein. All rules of procedure shall be available to the public. 
g.  No member shall be permitted to act on any matter in which he or she has, either directly or indirectly, any personal or financial interest. A member may be removed after a public hearing for cause. 
h.  The Mayor, Director of City Planning and the Construction Official shall be ex-officio members. Ex-officio members cannot vote. 
3.  Expenses and Costs; Employment of Experts and Staff. The City Council shall make provision in its budget and appropriate funds for the expenses of the HPC. The HPC may employ, contract for and fix the compensation of experts and other staff and services as it shall deem necessary provided that the necessary funding is provided for within the municipal budget. The HPC shall obtain its legal counsel from the City Attorneys at the rate of compensation determined by City Council unless City Council, by appropriation, provides for separate legal counsel for the commission. Expenditures pursuant to this subsection shall not exceed, exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by the City Council for the Commission's use. 
B.  Powers and Duties of Historic Preservation Commission. 
1.  To identify, record and maintain a system for survey an inventory of all buildings, sites, places, structures, objects or landscape features of significant historical or architectural value based standards of the United States Department of the Interior and to aid the public in understanding their worth, methods of preservation, techniques of documentation and related matters. The Commission shall be guided by the standards of the United States Department of the Interior. 
2.  To undertake to maximize the entire City's knowledge and enjoyment of these historic resources and, as appropriate, promote this asset beyond the boundaries of the City. 
3.  To advise the City Council and Planning Board of the relative merits of proposals involving public funds to restore, preserve and protect landmark buildings, places and structures, sites, objects and landscape features including the preparation of a long-range plan therefore, securing state, federal and other grants and aid to assist therein and monitoring such projects once underway. 
4.  To advise and assist City officers, employees, boards and other bodies, including those at County, regional, State and Federal levels, on all matters which have potential impact on the landmark buildings, sites, structures, object or landscape features in the City or on the ambience of a historic district. 
5.  To recommend to the Planning Board and the City Council the establishment and boundaries of additional historic districts where appropriate. 
6.  To recommend to the Zoning Board of Adjustment and the Planning Board the grant or denial of development applications where such are deemed to be within the intent and purposes of this Article. 
7.  To assemble and arrange for the proper care, cataloging and availability of materials relevant to the City's history. 
8.  To maintain a system for the survey and inventory of historic resources that is compatible and coordinated with the statewide Inventory of the Office of New Jersey Heritage. 
9.  To cooperate with local, County, State or national societies, governmental bodies and organizations to maximize their contributions to the intent and purposes of this Article. 
10.  To recommend to applicable County, State and Federal agencies, where appropriate, recognition of historic districts and Landmark buildings, places and structures. 
11.  To request the City Council to seek, on its own motion or otherwise, injunctive relief of violations of this Article or other actions contrary to the intent and purpose of this Article. 
12.  To make recommendations to the Planning Board on the Historic Preservation Land Use and Community Facilities Plan elements of the Master Plan and on the implications for preservation of landmark, historic districts or any other Master Plan elements. 
13.  To advise the Planning Board on the inclusion of historic districts or landmarks in the recommended capital improvement program. 
14.  To provide the Administrative Officer with written reports on the application of the Zoning Ordinance provisions concerning historic preservation. 
15.  To carry out such other advisory, educational and informational functions as will promote historic preservation in the municipality. 
16.  To review all proposed National Register nominations in accordance with New Jersey's Certified Local Government Guidelines. 
17.  To issue Certificates of Appropriateness or Certificates of No Effect in accordance with the rules and standards set forth herein. 
C.  Administrative Officer Designated for Historic Preservation. The City's Zoning Officer shall act as the Administrative Officer with respect to administering the historic preservation provisions of the Land Development Ordinance. 
D.  City Historic Preservation Specialist. 
1.  The City Historic Preservation Specialist shall advise the Historic Preservation Commission on each application that shall come before the Commission. In addition to serving as advisory to the Commission, the City Historic Preservation Specialist has responsibility for coordinating the City's preservation activities with those of State and Federal agencies and with local, state and national preservation organizations in the private sector. 
2.  The Historic Preservation Specialist may recommend to the City Council buildings, sites, structures and districts for Council resolution directing the Historic Preservation Commission to review and comment for possible designation. 
3.  The City Historic Preservation Specialist may also recommend to the Commission buildings, objects, sites, structures and districts for nomination to the State and/or National Register of Historic Places. 
4.  The City Historic Preservation Specialist shall be an employee of Division of City Planning whose minimal professional qualifications meet the standards of the Historic Preservation Specialist within the New Jersey Department of Personnel.  
§ 345-10 - Environmental Commission. 
A.  Establishment of Environmental Commission. There is hereby created, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 et seq., the Jersey City Environmental Commission, to act and exercise the powers and function as set forth herein. [Amended 9-23-2014 by Ord. No. 14-105 ] 
1.  Membership and Terms. 
a.  The Jersey City Environmental Commission shall consist of seven members and two alternates to be appointed by the Mayor, who shall designate one of the members to serve as Chairperson and presiding officer. All members and alternates must be residents of the City of Jersey City. Each ward of the city shall be represented by at least one member. No ward shall have more than two members and alternates combined. One of the members shall also be a member of the Planning Board and one a member of the City Council. At least three members shall be professional environmental scientists, geologists, toxicologists, botanists or other environmental specialists. All members and alternates shall serve without compensation. 
b.  Each member of the Environmental Commission shall be appointed for a term of three years. All appointments to fill vacancies that may occur shall be for the unexpired term of the vacating member. 
2.  Removal. The Mayor may remove any member of the Commission for cause, on written charges. Such written charges must be served upon the member, and after a hearing on the allegations the member shall be entitled to be heard in person or by counsel. 
3.  Purpose of the Environmental Commission. 
a.  Promote the protection and conservation of land, air, water and other natural resources within the territorial limits of the City. Such promotion shall consist of educating the public and advising the city government about the best methods for protecting and conserving these resources. 
b.  Assist the City in the proper development and use of these resources by coordinating the planning efforts of the various departments, agencies and agents who provide environmental services. 
c.  Promote the protection of the public health by educating the public and advising City government about environmental health hazards. 
d.  Conduct research into the use and possible use of open land areas of Jersey City and: 
i.  Have the power to coordinate the activities of unofficial bodies organized for similar purposes. 
ii.  Keep an index of all open areas whether publicly or privately owned, including open marshlands, swamps and other wetlands, in order to obtain information on the proper use of such areas. 
iii.  Have the authority to recommend to the Planning Board plans and programs for the development and use of such areas for inclusion in the Jersey City Master Plan. 
e.  Advertise, prepare, print and distribute books, maps, charts, plans and pamphlets which it deems necessary for its purpose. 
f.  Study and make recommendations concerning open space preservation, water resources management, air pollution control, solid waste management, noise control, environmental appearance, marine resources, protection of flora and fauna and any other environmental concerns which affect the enjoyment and health of the public. 
g.  Refer matters to the proper City authorities whenever violations of environmental law come to its attention. 
h.  Keep records of its meetings and activities and shall make an annual report to the City Council. 
i.  Assist in the formulation of funding plans submitted to the Green Acres/Green Trust program of the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection. 
j.  Advise the Planning Board and Board of Adjustment as to the environmental impact of development projects which would use an average of at least ten thousand (10,000) gallons of water per day. 
k.  Delegate an environmental commissioner to be a permanent member of the Local Emergency Planning Council (per federal P.L. 99-499) and delegate other Commissioners to be members of the other municipal environmental bodies as the City creates from time to time. 
l.  Act and serve as the official Jersey City Sustainable Green Team that is responsible for pursuing and maintaining the City's Sustainable Jersey Certification through collaboration with the municipality and public to develop and support sustainable initiatives for the City. 
B.  Clerical and Technical Assistance. 
1.  For the purpose of effectuating the goals of this chapter, the Environmental Commission shall have such clerical and technical assistance, materials, supplies and provisions for such other costs and expenses of the Commission as shall annually be budgeted by the Office of the Mayor and approved by City Council. 
2.  The Commission may appoint such clerks and other employees as it may from time to time require and as shall be within the limits of funds appropriated to it. 
C.  Cooperation with City Departments and Agencies. All City departments and agencies shall cooperate with the work of the Environmental Commission to the degree possible and permitted by law.  
§ 345-11. - Artists' Certification Board. 
A.  Establishment of an Artist Certification Board. [Amended 9-9-2009 by Ord. No. 09-093] 
1.  There is hereby created an Artists' Certification Board (ACB), which shall serve as a citizens' advisory board to the Planning Board, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-27.a. The ACB shall be in, but not of, the Division of City Planning. The ACB is essentially an artists' peer review committee. In order to reside in a work/live studio in the WALDO, an artist must be so certified by the Planning Board. The Planning Board shall be guided in this certification by the recommendation made by the ACB. The Planning Board may reject the recommendation of the ACB, but the reasons for such rejection must be clearly stated in the resolution approved by the Board. 
2.  The ACB shall be comprised of persons knowledgeable in the arts. It shall consist of five full members, with no more than two additional alternate members who may vote in the absence of full members. A minimum of three full members of the ACB shall be professional artists. All members shall be appointed by the Mayor. After the initial appointments are made, all terms shall run for four years. 
3.  The ACB shall review application filed by persons who are interested in occupying work/live space in the WALDO as either owners, tenants or sub-tenants, to determine if the applicant can be certified to occupy such space. 
4.  The following shall serve as criteria to be used by the ACB in certifying an artist: (a) the artists' commitment to the fine arts as a career; (b) the need for large loft space in which to create his or her art; (c) education; (d) current body of work; (e) exhibition record; (f) references from other artists or art professionals. In no event shall the content of the art created be used as a criterion to determine eligibility to occupy work/live space in the WALDO. 
5.  The recommendation of the ACB to the Planning Board shall be submitted to the Planning Board within thirty (30) days of the ACB's decision, and shall state the reasons for the decision with specific reference to one or more of the criteria set forth in subsection (A)(4) of this section. 
6.  Once an artist is certified by the Planning Board, the Planning Board shall forward a copy of its certification decision to the Zoning Officer, who shall retain the certification in the Zoning Officer's files. The certification shall expire ten (10) years after the date of the decision by the Planning Board. Renewal applications may be filed. In the event a certified artist is divorced or dies, the family of the artist occupying the work/live space shall be given a two year grace period.  
ARTICLE III - Application Requirements, Development Procedures and Checklists 
 
§ 345-12. - Scope of applicability. 
A.  No building or structure shall hereafter be used, occupied, constructed, moved altered or repaired, nor shall any land be filled, cleared or graded, nor shall any water course be diverted, unless in conformity with the regulations of the Land Development Ordinance of the City of Jersey City. All Development Review Filing Procedures shall be in accordance with the provisions of this Article. 
B.  The City of Jersey City and/or its instrumentalities shall be exempt from the provisions of this Chapter.  
§ 345-13. - Completeness requirements in general. 
A.  Content. Each application for approval of a minor subdivision, minor site plan, preliminary major subdivision, preliminary site plan, final major subdivision, final site plan or conditional use, as the case may be, and each application for variance relief and appeals, shall include all information and data listed in the appropriate corresponding checklist as set forth below in this article. 
B.  Complete Application. The Division of City Planning shall review all applications and accompanying documents required by the applicable checklist to determine that the application is complete. An application for development shall be complete for purposes of commencing the applicable time period for action when so certified by the Division of City Planning. In the event that the Division of City Planning does not certify the application to be complete within forty-five (45) days of the date of its submission, the application shall be deemed complete upon the expiration of the forty-five (45) day period for purposes of commencing the applicable time period unless (1) the application lacks information indicated on the checklist for such application and (2) the Division of City Planning has notified the applicant, in writing, of the deficiencies in the application within forty-five (45) days of submission of the application. The applicant may request that one or more submission requirements be waived, in which event the Department shall grant or deny the request within forty-five (45) days. Nothing herein shall be construed as diminishing the applicant's obligation to prove in the application process that he is entitled to approval of the application. The Division of City Planning may subsequently require correction of any information found to be in error and submission of additional information not specified in the checklist or any revisions in the accompanying documents, as are reasonably necessary to make an informed decision as to whether the requirements necessary for approval of the application for development have been met. The application shall not be deemed incomplete for lack of any such additional information or any revisions in the accompanying documents so required by the Division of City Planning.  
§ 345-14. - Informal review. 
A.  Right to Request Informal Review. Prior to the submittal of an application for development, the applicant may request an informal review before the Planning Board as detailed in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.1. Informal review shall not apply to the Zoning Board of Adjustment. 
B.  Documents and Fees to be Submitted. Applicants seeking review of a concept plan shall provide fifteen (15) copies of the plan and one copy of the completed application and the required review fees to the Division of City Planning Secretary at least forty-five (45) days before a regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning Board. 
C.  Nature of Concept Plan. The concept plan is a general plan that need not be fully engineered. The plan or plat should be sufficiently detailed to allow the Planning Board to make suggestions on general site design and layout for circulation, stormwater management, location of open space and buffers, building arrangements and to determine how the proposal meets the City's development goals and objectives. 
D.  Effect of Informal Review. Neither the applicant nor the Planning Board is bound by any concept plan or informal review. The amount of any fees for such informal review shall be a credit toward fees for review of the application for development.  
§ 345-15. - Right to request a preapplication conference. 
A.  Filing Procedures. 
[Amended 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081 ; 9-12-2018 by Ord. No. 18-095 ] 
1.  The applicant shall submit all necessary documents to the Clerk of the Board of Adjustment or Planning Board. Clerks shall be employed by the Division of City Planning and designated by resolution of their respective Boards. 
2.  The Director of the Division of City Planning shall determine that an application is complete for the purpose of commencing the time period for action by the Municipal Agency per N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.3. The applicant will be notified in writing of any deficiencies within 45 days of receipt by the Department. If a submission is deemed incomplete, no tolling of time shall occur, nor shall deficient applications be scheduled for a hearing. 
3.  For the purpose of expediting applications and reducing development costs, a developer may request a preapplication conference, the purpose of which is to: 
a.  Acquaint the applicant with the substantive and procedural requirements of the Land Development Ordinance. 
b.  Exchange information about the proposed development plan and applicable elements of the Master Plan, this Chapter and other development regulations. 
c.  Advise the applicant of any public sources of information that may aid the application. 
d.  Review the conditions of existing service facilities, the impact of the proposed project on those facilities and improvements necessary to accommodate the project and the areas affected by the project. 
e.  Meet with any of the appropriate municipal representatives designated to participate in the review process to identify policies and regulations that create opportunities for or pose significant constraints to the proposed development, including but not limited to the staffs of the: 
i.  Division of City Planning; 
ii.  Construction Code Official; 
iii.  Division of Engineering; 
iv.  Historic Preservation Commission; 
v.  Department of Public Safety; 
vi.  Municipal Utilities Authority; 
vii.  Division of Traffic and Street Maintenance; 
viii.  Environmental Commission; 
ix.  United Water Company. 
f.  Permit input into the general design of the project. 
g.  Attendees at the pre-application conferences shall complete attendance forms as required by the City and shall be limited to City staff, the property owner and/or designated owner representatives including, but not limited to, the property owner's licensed professional(s), agent(s), contractor(s), and/or permit processor(s), as such terms are defined in Chapter 134.  
§ 345-16. - When site plan approval required. 
[Amended 12-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-166]. 
A.  Threshold for Major Site Plan Review. The following categories of site plans for new construction, land disturbance, rehabilitation and additions, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-37a, fall within the major site plan review threshold and must receive Board approval prior to issuance of either a building permit or Certificate of Occupancy [ Amended 8-20-2014 by 14-091 ] : 
1.  Creation of ten (10) or more dwelling units, regardless of number of structures and/or phases, and whether developed by one entity or several. 
2.  Projects on parcels of ten thousand (10,000) or more square feet. 
3.  Projects whose total gross floor area is ten thousand (10,000) or more square feet. [Amended 4-28-2004 by Ord. No. 04-046] 
4.  Additions increasing gross floor area by two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet or fifty percent (50%), whichever is less. 
5.  Additions increasing coverage, by all structures on a project parcel, by two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet or fifty percent (50%), whichever is less. 
6.  Additions increasing gross floor area of all structures on a project parcel by fifty percent (50%) or two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet, whichever is less. [Amended 4-28-2004 by Ord. No. 04-046] 
7.  Off-street parking facilities, except for one or two family structures meeting minimum parking requirements and meeting the minimum stall size requirements. 
8.  Changes in use requiring new or alteration of existing parking and/or loading facilities. [ Amended 9-27-2012 by Ord. No. 12-118 ] 
9.  Changes in the volume and/or configuration of existing parking and/or loading facilities. 
10.  Wireless telecommunication towers. 
11.  Land disturbances greater or equal to ten thousand (10,000) square feet in area, including but not limited to, the excavation, filling, grading, terracing, deposition of debris, compaction, earthwork construction, removal of vegetation, or dredging. This includes environmental remediation activities requiring a remedial action permit from NJDEP. The construction of utilities within City rights-of-way are exempt. [ Added 8-20-2014 by 14-091 ] 
12.  Alterations of the shoreline, removal or installation of riprap or bulkhead, or the construction of retaining walls, sheet piling, or other structures measuring fifty (50) linear feet or greater which effect the grading, topography, or drainage of a site. The construction of utilities within City rights-of-way are exempt. [ Added 8-20-2014 by 14-091 ] 
B.  Threshold for Minor Site Plan Review. The following categories of site plans for new construction, rehabilitation and additions, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-37a, fall within the minor site plan review threshold and must receive Board approval prior to issuance of either a building permit or Certificate of Occupancy: 
1.  Conversions, alterations, renovations and additions to existing storefronts. 
2.  Wireless communication antennas. 
3.  Projects whose total gross floor area is at least five thousand (5,000) and less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet. [Added 4-28-2004 by Ord. No. 04-046] 
4.  Any ancillary and/or mechanical equipment for a rooftop solar array which is located in any yard adjacent to a public right-of-way. 
C.  Threshold for Site Plan Review within Redevelopment Plan Areas. [Amended 1-14-2015 by Ord. No. 14-171 ] 
1.  Thresholds based on project size, gross floor area, lot area, additions, and all other criteria as outlined in Subsections 345-16(A) and (B) above shall apply to Redevelopment Plan Areas. With the following exception: 
a.  Any project with deviations that does not meet the threshold for a major site plan shall be considered a minor site plan. 
2.  Applications for new signage within a Redevelopment Plan Area shall be considered a Minor Site Plan. 
3.  Site plan review shall not be considered necessary for the following site work: 
a.  Normal maintenance. 
b.  Health and safety upgrades that are essentially interior and do not require any changes to the site plan at grade. 
c.  Interior renovations. 
d.  Deck or balcony construction that otherwise complies with residential bulk standards of the applicable plan. 
e.  Installation of accessory structures that otherwise complies with all requirements of the applicable redevelopment plan, with the specific exception of backup generators, which shall require minor site plan review.  
§ 345-17. - Traffic impact assessment. 
A.  When Required. The Division of City Planning shall require a traffic impact assessment as part of preliminary approval of a major subdivision or major site plan may be waived at the discretion of the Division Director. 
B.  General Provisions. 
1.  The traffic impact assessment shall be prepared by a New Jersey licensed professional engineer having appropriate experience and education. 
2.  All relevant sources of information used in the preparation of said statement shall be identified. 
C.  Submission Format. All traffic impact assessments shall provide a description of the impact and effect of the proposed land development upon all roads which are adjacent to or immediately affected by traffic and shall specifically address the following items: 
1.  Existing conditions in the vicinity of the proposed project including: 
a.  Roadway network. 
b.  Representative traffic counts, not during holiday or summer periods (or with appropriate statistical adjustments for counts during the summer months). 
c.  Traffic accident statistics. 
d.  Availability of public transportation. 
e.  Level of service of adjacent roadways. 
2.  Traffic generated by the proposed development including: 
a.  Trip generation. 
b.  Trip distribution. 
c.  Modal split. 
d.  Level of service under proposed conditions. 
3.  Traffic impacts caused by the proposed development as per change in existing conditions factoring in the projected buildout in the vicinity of the proposed project as defined in the Development Report prepared by the Division of City Planning. 
4.  Explanation of Traffic Reduction/Traffic Management Plans necessary pursuant to any current Federal, State or County requirements, and, where applicable, proposed interaction with appropriate County Transportation Management Areas (TMA). 
5.  Recommendations for alleviating or diminishing any possible congestion or disruption to the established traffic pattern. 
6.  Any other information requested by the appropriate Division of City Planning reasonably required to make an informed assessment of potential traffic impacts.  
§ 345-18. - Visual impact assessment. 
A.  When Required. The Division of City Planning shall require a visual impact assessment as part of preliminary approval of a major subdivision or site plan if, in the opinion of the Division of City Planning, the development could have an adverse affect on the visual environment and may be waived at the discretion of the Division Director. The Division of City Planning shall review the application with specific reference to scenic corridors and vistas. In addition, shadow analysis shall be required for buildings over eighty (80) feet in height. 
B.  Submission Format. All visual impact assessments shall consist of written and graphic materials which clearly present the following information: 
1.  Project Description. A description of the proposed project shall be presented to indicate the extent to which the site must be altered, the kinds of facilities to be constructed and the uses intended. The resident population, working population and visitor population shall be estimated. 
2.  The compatibility or incompatibility of the proposed project shall be described in relation to the following: 
a.  City of Jersey City Master Plan. 
b.  Hudson County planning documents. 
c.  Hudson County Urban Complex Strategic Plan. 
3.  Site Description and Inventory. The suitability of the site for the intended use shall be discussed. This shall include a description of environmental conditions on the site which shall include, but not be limited to, the following items: 
a.  Unique Scenic Features. Describe and map those portions of the site that can be considered to have unique scenic qualities and any scenic view from the site. 
b.  Shadow Constraints. The purpose of the analysis is to demonstrate the impact of the building on its surroundings showing the maximum extent of the shadow lengths on December 21 in the A.M., noon and P.M. 
4.  Impact. The negative and positive visual impacts of the project shall be discussed. 
5.  Environmental Performance Controls. The applicant shall indicate the measures which will be employed to minimize or eliminate negative visual impacts on and off site. 
6.  Alternatives. A discussion of site design and project location alternatives that were considered shall be provided. The discussion shall indicate why an alternative was rejected if it would have resulted in less of a negative impact than the proposed development. 
7.  Documentation. All publications, file reports, manuscripts or other written sources of information which were consulted in preparation of the environmental impact assessment shall be listed and footnoted. A list of all agencies and individuals from whom pertinent information was obtained orally or by letter shall be listed separately. Dates and locations of all meetings shall be specified. 
8.  Review. Applicants shall be encouraged or required to provide suitable mitigation for all adverse environmental impacts and other conditions identified in the EIA and/or in the course of the public hearings before the appropriate municipal board.  
§ 345-19. - Notice of applications. 
A.  Public notice of a hearing on an application for development shall be given. This shall also include: 
[Amended 11-28-2001 by Ord. No. 01-129; 11-29-2017 by Ord. No. 17-153 ] 
1.  Preliminary site plan review pursuant to section 34 of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-46; 
2.  Minor subdivisions pursuant to section 35 of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-47; or 
3.  Final approval pursuant to section 38 of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-50; and provided that public notice shall be given in the event that relief is requested pursuant to section 47 or 63 of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60 or 40:55D-76 as part of an application for development otherwise excepted herein from public notice. 
B.  Public notice shall also be given in the case of an application for appeal to the Zoning Board of Adjustment pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70a, or in the case of a request for interpretation by the Zoning Board of Adjustment pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70b. 
C.  Notice of a hearing requiring public notice shall be given by the applicant at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing in the following manner: 
1.  By publication in the official newspaper of the City. 
2.  To all owners of real property as shown on the current tax duplicate, Located in the state and within two hundred (200) feet in all directions of the property which is the subject of such hearing, provided that this requirement shall be deemed satisfied by notice to the condominium association, in the case of any unit owner whose unit has a unit above or below it, or horizontal property regime, in the case of any co-owner whose apartment has an apartment above or below it. Notice shall be given by serving a copy thereof on the property owner as shown on said current tax duplicate or his or her agent in charge of the property or mailing a copy thereof by certified mail to the property owner at his or her address as shown on said current tax duplicate. 
3.  Notice to a partnership owner may be made by service upon any partner. Notice to a corporate owner may be made by service upon its president, a vice president, secretary or other person authorized by appointment or by law to accept service on behalf of the corporation. Notice to a condominium association, horizontal property regime, community trust or homeowners' association, because of its ownership of common elements or areas located within two hundred (200) feet of the property which is the subject of the hearing, may be made in the same manner as to a corporation without further notice to unit owners, co-owners or homeowners on account of such common elements or areas. 
4.  To the Clerk of any adjoining municipality or municipalities when the property involved is located within two hundred (200) feet of said adjoining municipality or municipalities. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail. 
5.  To the Hudson County Planning Board when the application for development involves property adjacent to an existing county road or proposed road as shown on the County Official Map or the County Master Plan, adjoining other county land or situated within two hundred (200) feet of a municipal boundary. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail. 
6.  To the Commissioner of Transportation of the State of New Jersey when the property abuts a state highway. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail. 
7.  To the State Planning Commission when the hearing involves an application for the development of property which exceeds one hundred fifty (150) acres or five hundred (500) dwelling units, in which case the notice shall include a copy of any maps or documents required to be on file with the Administrative Officer. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail. 
8.  On applications for approval of a major subdivision or a site plan not defined as a minor site plan, to a public utility, cable television company or local utility which possesses a right-of-way or easement within the city and which has registered with the city in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12.1 by (a) serving a copy of the notice on the person whose name appears on the registration form on behalf of the public utility, cable television company or local utility or (b) mailing a copy thereof by certified mail to the person whose name appears on the registration form at the address shown on that form. 
D.  Upon the written request of an applicant, the City tax assessor shall, within seven days, make and certify a list from current tax duplicates of names and addresses of owners within the City to whom the applicant is required to give notice. Failure to give notice to any lot owner not on the list obtained in such manner shall not invalidate any hearing or proceeding. A sum, not to exceed the maximum set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12c, shall be charged for such list. 
E.  The applicant shall be responsible for giving proper notice to all property owners. 
F.  The notice shall state the date, time and place of the hearing and the nature of the matters to be discussed, including an identification of the property proposed for development by street address, if any, or by reference to lot and block numbers as shown on the current tax duplicate in the City tax assessor's office; and the location and times at which any maps or documents for which approval is sought are available for inspection.  
§ 345-20. - Registration by public utilities, cable television companies and local utilities. 
Every public utility, cable television company and local utility interested in receiving notice pursuant to subsection h. of section 7.1 of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12 may register with the City if the public utility, cable television company or local utility has a right-of-way or easement. The registration shall remain in effect until revoked by the public utility, cable television company, or local utility or by its successor in interest.  
§ 345-21. - Development phasing. 
Whenever an applicant intends to construct a development in phases, phasing information shall be included in the plans for preliminary approval, and all phases shall be: 
A.  Functionally self-contained and self-sustaining with regard to access, circulation, parking, utilities, open spaces and all other site improvements and physical features and shall be capable of perpetual independent use, occupancy, operation and maintenance upon completion of construction and development of the section or stage. 
B.  Properly related to other services of the community as a whole and to those facilities and services yet to be provided in the full execution and implementation of the plan. 
C.  Provided with such temporary or permanent transitional features, buffers or protective areas as are necessary to prevent damage or detriment to adjoining properties or to any completed section or stage. In addition, such temporary or permanent transitional features, buffers or protective areas shall not impede development of future sections or stages in the planned development. Plans, estimated dates of completion for each section or stage and specifications of such sections or stages are to be filed with the Division of City Planning, which must be of sufficient detail and of such scale as to fully demonstrate the arrangement and site locations of all structures, primary and accessory land uses, parking, landscaping, public and private utilities and services facilities, and land ownership conditions.  
§ 345-21.1. - Naming of new streets within a site plan or subdivision plan application. 
[Added 4-8-2015 by Ord. No. 15-046 ] 
Any new street proposed as part of a site plan or subdivision plan application shall conform to the standards set forth in § 3-39 entitled "Standards for naming streets and municipal property." Final approval of all street names shall rest with the Municipal Council.  
§ 345-22. - Minor subdivision and minor site plan review procedures. 
[Amended 5-14-2003 by Ord. No. 03-059] 
A.  Submission Requirements. 
[Amended 1-27-2010 by Ord. No. 10-007] 
1.  Submission requirements for minor subdivision and minor site plan approval are provided in the Minor Subdivision and Minor Site Plan Checklist in this article. 
2.  The Division of City Planning Staff shall have the authority to refer any application to other agencies or individuals for comments or recommendations. [Amended 2-23-2011 by Ord. No. 11-023] 
B.  Review by Other City Agencies and Officials. The officials and agencies cited above shall forward their comments and recommendations in writing to the Division of City Planning and the applicant's contact person as listed in the application form within fourteen (14) days after receipt of the application. 
C.  Action. [Amended 2-23-2011 by Ord. No. 11-023] 
1.  Applications for minor subdivision approval shall be acted upon by the Planning Board. 
2.  Upon submission of application documents, City Planning Staff will review the contents of the submission package to verify that it is a valid Application for Development. Upon verification, the application will be formally confirmed as "submitted" and development review will commence. 
3.  Except for applications governed by the time limits in this Chapter, the Planning Board shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny a minor subdivision or minor site plan as the case may be within forty-five (45) days of the submission of a complete application, unless the applicant shall extend the period of time within which the Planning Board may act. 
4.  Applicants who request extensions to the period of time within which the Planning Board may act are permitted to do so for one-month intervals, not to exceed three (3) months total. There shall be no limit to extensions requested by Planning Staff, so long as the applicant agrees to said extensions. 
5.  Failure of the Planning Board to act within the period prescribed shall constitute minor subdivision or site plan approval, as the case may be. A certificate of the Board Secretary as to the failure of the Board to act shall be issued on request of the applicant. The certificate shall be sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement or other evidence of approval, herein required, and shall be so accepted by the County Register for purposes of filing subdivision plats or deeds. 
D.  Effect of Approval. 
1.  Approval of a minor subdivision or minor site plan shall be deemed final approval provided that the Subcommittee or Board, as the case may be, may condition such approval on the provision of improvements as may be required. The zoning requirements and general terms and conditions, whether conditional or otherwise, upon which minor subdivision or minor site plan approval was granted, shall not be changed for a period of two years after the date on which the resolution of approval is adopted provided that the approved minor subdivision shall have been duly recorded in accordance with this Article. 
2.  Approval of any variance associated with a minor subdivision and/or minor site plan shall be valid for a period of two years after the date on which the resolution of approval is adopted if no construction, alteration or conversion has commenced within the two-year period. 
E.  Expiration of Minor Subdivision. Approval of a minor subdivision shall expire one hundred ninety (190) days from the date on which the resolution of approval is adopted unless within such period a plat in conformity with such approval and the Map Filing Law, N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq., or a deed clearly describing the approved minor subdivision is filed by the developer with the County Register, the City Engineer and the City Tax Assessor. Any such plat or deed accepted for such filing shall have been signed by the Board Chairperson and Secretary. In reviewing the application for development for a proposed minor subdivision, the Subcommittee may accept a plat not in conformity with N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.; provided that if the developer chooses to file the minor subdivision as provided herein by plat rather than deed such plat shall conform with the provisions of the said act. 
F.  Extensions of Minor Subdivision Approval. 
[Amended 2-23-2011 by Ord. No. 11-023] 
1.  The Planning Board may extend the one hundred ninety (190) day period for filing a minor subdivision plat or deed pursuant to this Chapter if the developer proves to the reasonable satisfaction of the Board: 
a.  That the developer was barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, from filing because of delays in obtaining legally required approvals from other governmental or quasi-governmental entities; and 
b.  That the developer applied promptly for and diligently pursued the required approvals. The length of the extension shall be equal to the period of delay caused by the wait for the required approvals, as determined by the Board. The developer may apply for the extension either before or after what would otherwise be the expiration date. 
2.  The Planning Board shall grant an extension of minor subdivision approval for a period determined by the Board, but not exceeding one year from what would otherwise be the expiration date, if the developer proves to the reasonable satisfaction of the Board that the developer was barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, from proceeding with the development because of delays in obtaining legally required approvals from other governmental agencies and that the developer applied promptly for and diligently pursued the required approvals. The developer shall apply for the extension before (a) what would otherwise be the expiration date of minor subdivision approval; or (b) the 91st day after the developer receives the first legally required approval from other governmental entities, whichever occurs later. 
G.  Inactive Applications. [Added 2-23-2011 by Ord. No. 11-023] 
1.  Any application for minor subdivision or minor site plan which has remained inactive and incomplete for six (6) consecutive months shall be subject to dismissal by City Planning Staff. 
2.  In order to be dismissed for inactivity, City Planning Staff must first provide a written warning to project applicant. A thirty (30) day time period must be provided for the applicant's response demonstrating diligence towards obtaining Board approval, including but not necessarily limited to fee payment in full and plan revisions. 
3.  If after thirty (30) days from the date of contact for inactivity pursuant to G.2 above, the applicant has not responded to City Planning Staff, has not submitted application fees, and/or has not demonstrated diligence towards obtaining Board approval, the application may be permanently dismissed by City Planning Staff.  
§ 345-23. - Preliminary major subdivision and site plan review procedures. 
[Amended 5-14-2003 by Ord. No. 03-059] 
A.  Submission Requirements. [Amended 1-27-2010 by Ord. No. 10-007] 
1.  Submission requirements for preliminary major subdivision and preliminary site plan approval are provided in the Preliminary Major Subdivision and Site Plan Checklist. 
2.  The applicant shall forward copies of the application and plans to review agents as listed in the General Development Application Package for review and comment, when instructed by City Planning Staff and where appropriate. [Amended 2-23-2011 by Ord. No. 11-023] 
3.  The Division of City Planning shall have the authority to refer any application to other agencies or individuals for comments or recommendations. [Amended 2-23-2011 by Ord. No. 11-023] 
B.  Review by Other City Agencies and Officials. The officials and agencies cited in this article above shall forward their comments and recommendations in writing to the Division of City Planning within fourteen (14) days after the receipt of the application. 
C.  Board Action. [Amended 2-23-2011 by Ord. No. 11-023] 
1.  Subdivisions. 
a.  Upon submission of application documents, City Planning Staff will review the contents of the submission package to verify that it is a valid Application for Development. Upon verification, the application will be formally confirmed as "submitted" and development review will commence. 
b.  The Board shall approve, conditionally approve or deny a preliminary major subdivision application of ten (10) or fewer lots within forty-five (45) days after the submission of a complete application, unless the applicant shall extend the period of time within which the Board may act. 
c.  The Board shall approve, conditionally approve or deny a preliminary major subdivision application of more than ten (10) lots within ninety-five (95) days after the submission of a complete application, unless the applicant shall extend the period of time within which the Board may act. 
d.  Applicants who request extensions to the period of time within which the Planning Board may act are permitted to do so for one-month intervals, not to exceed three (3) months total. There shall be no limit to extensions requested by City Planning Staff, so long as the applicant agrees to said extensions. 
e.  Failure of the Board to act within the time prescribed shall constitute preliminary major subdivision approval and a certificate of the Board Secretary as to the failure of the Board to act shall be issued on request of the Applicant. Said certificate shall be sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement or other evidence of approval herein required, and shall be accepted by the County Register for purposes of filing subdivision plats. 
2.  Site Plans. 
a.  Upon submission of application documents, City Planning Staff will review the contents of the submission package to verify that it is a valid Application for Development. Upon verification, the application will be formally confirmed as "submitted" and development review will commence. 
b.  The Board shall approve, conditionally approve or deny a preliminary major site plan which involves ten (10) acres of land or less, and ten (10) dwelling units or less, within forty-five (45) days after the submission of a complete application unless the applicant shall extend the period of time within which the Board may act. 
c.  The Board shall approve, conditionally approve or deny the preliminary major site plan of more than ten (10) acres or more than ten (10) dwelling units within ninety-five (95) days after the application is certified complete unless the applicant shall extend the period of time within which the Board may act. 
d.  Applicants who request extensions to the period of time within which the Planning Board may act are permitted to do so for one-month intervals, not to exceed three (3) months total. There shall be no limit to extensions requested by City Planning Staff, so long as the applicant agrees to said extensions. 
e.  Failure of the Board to act within the time prescribed shall constitute preliminary major site plan approval and a certificate of the Board Secretary as to the failure of the Board to act shall be issued on request of the applicant. Said certificate shall be sufficient in lieu of a written endorsement or other evidence of approval herein required. 
D.  Effect of Preliminary Approval. Preliminary approval of a major subdivision or site plan, except as provided in subsection (D) of this section, shall confer upon the applicant the following rights for a three-year period from the date on which the resolution granting preliminary approval is adopted: 
1.  That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary approval was granted shall not be changed, including, but not limited to, use requirements; layout and design standards for streets, curbs and sidewalks; lot sizes; yard dimensions and off-tract improvements; and in the case of a site plan, any requirements peculiar to site plan approval pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-41, except that nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the City from modifying by ordinance such general terms and conditions of preliminary approval as related to public health and safety. 
2.  That the applicant may submit for final approval on or before the expiration date of preliminary approval the whole or a section or sections of the preliminary subdivision plat or site plan, as the case may be. 
3.  That the applicant may apply for and the Board may grant extension on such preliminary approval for additional periods of at least one year but not to exceed a total extension of two years, provided that if the design standards have been revised by ordinance, such revised standards may govern. 
4.  In the case of a subdivision of or a site plan for a planned development of fifty (50) acres or more, conventional subdivision or site plan for one hundred fifty (150) acres or more, or site plan for development of a non-residential floor area of two hundred thousand (200,000) square feet or more, the appropriate Board may grant the rights referred to in subsections (A), (B) and (C) of this section for such period of time, longer than two years, as shall be determined by the appropriate Board to be reasonable taking into consideration (a) the number of dwelling units and non-residential floor area permissible under final approval, (b) economic conditions and (c) the comprehensiveness of the development. The developer may apply for thereafter, and the Board may thereafter grant, an extension of final approval for such additional period of time as shall be determined by the Board to be reasonable taking into consideration (a) the number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area permissible under final approval, (b) the number of dwelling units and non-residential floor area remaining to be developed, (c) economic conditions and (d) the comprehensiveness of the development. 
5.  Whenever the Board grants an extension of preliminary approval and preliminary approval has expired before the date on which the extension was granted, the extension shall begin on what would otherwise be the expiration date. The developer may apply for an extension either before or after what would otherwise be the expiration date. 
6.  The Board shall grant an extension of preliminary approval for a period determined by the Board but not exceeding one year from what would otherwise be the expiration date, if the developer proves to the reasonable satisfaction of the Board that the developer was barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, from proceeding with the development because of delays in obtaining legally required approvals from other governmental entities and that the developer applied promptly for and diligently pursued the required approvals. The developer shall apply for the extension before (a) what would otherwise be the expiration date of the preliminary approval, or (b) the 91st day after the developer received the last legally required approval from other governmental entities, whichever is later. An extension granted pursuant to this section shall not preclude the Board from granting an extension pursuant to the provisions of this Article. 
E.  Simultaneous Preliminary and Final Site Plan Approval. 
1.  Combined preliminary and final site plan approval may be granted provided all submission requirements for both applications are met. The time limit within which the Board shall act shall be the longest time permitted for either of the two approvals. 
2.  Approval of any variance associated with a combined preliminary and final site plan approval shall be valid for a period of two years after the date on which the resolution of approval is adopted if no construction, alteration or conversion has commenced within the two-year period. 
F.  Applications for variance approval which required neither Major Site Plan approval nor Major or Minor Subdivision approval shall be submitted to the Zoning Board of Adjustment. Approval of any variance by the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be valid for a period of two years after the date on which the resolution of approval is adopted if no construction, alteration or conversion has commenced within the two-year period. 
G.  Inactive Applications. [Added 2-23-2011 by Ord. No. 11-023] 
1.  Any application for Preliminary Major subdivision or Preliminary Major site plan which has remained inactive and incomplete for six (6) consecutive months shall be subject to dismissal by City Planning Staff. 
2.  In order to be dismissed for inactivity, City Planning Staff must first provide a written warning to project applicant. A thirty (30) day time period must be provided for the applicant's response demonstrating diligence towards obtaining Board approval, including but not necessarily limited to fee payment in full and plan revisions. 
3.  If after thirty (30) days from the date of contact for inactivity pursuant to G.2 above, the applicant has not responded to City Planning Staff, has not submitted application fees, and/or has not demonstrated diligence towards obtaining Board approval, the application may be permanently dismissed by City Planning Staff.  
§ 345-24. - Final approval of major subdivision and site plan review procedures. 
[Amended 5-14-2004 by Ord. No. 03-059] 
A.  Submission Requirements. [Amended 1-27-2010 by Ord. No. 10-007] 
1.  Submission requirements for final major subdivision and site plan approval are provided in the Final Major Subdivision and Final Site Plan Checklist. 
2.  The applicant shall forward copies of the application and plans to review agents as listed in the General Development Application Package for review and comment where if deemed appropriate and necessary by City Planning Staff. 
[Added 2-23-2011 by Ord. No. 11-023] 
3.  The Division of City Planning shall also have the authority to refer any application to other agencies or individuals for comments or recommendations. 
[Added 2-23-2011 by Ord. No. 11-023] 
B.  Review by Other City Agencies and Officials. The officials and agencies cited in this article above shall forward their comments and recommendations in writing to the Division of City Planning and the applicant's contact person as listed in the application form within fourteen (14) days after the receipt of the final application. 
C.  Amendments to the Plan. If as a result of review of any governmental agencies, there are changes to the approved plan, then the applicant shall submit an amended application to the reviewing Board. 
D.  Board Action. [Added 2-23-2011 by Ord. No. 11-023] 
1.  Upon submission of application documents, City Planning Staff will review the contents of the submission package to verify that it is a valid Application for Development. Upon verification, the application will be formally confirmed as "submitted" and development review will commence. 
2.  The Board shall grant final approval if the detailed drawings, specifications and estimates of the application for final approval conform to the standards established by ordinance for final approval, the conditions for preliminary approval, and, in the case of a major subdivision, the standards prescribed in the "Map Filing Law" P.L. 1960, c. 141. In the case of a planned unit development, planned unit residential development or residential cluster, the Board may permit minimal deviations from the conditions of preliminary approval necessitated by change of conditions beyond the control of the developer since the date of preliminary approval without the developer being required to submit another application for development for preliminary approval. 
3.  Final approval shall be granted or denied within forty-five (45) days after submission of a complete application or within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant. Failure of the Board to act within the period prescribed shall constitute final approval and a certificate of the Board Secretary as to the failure of the Board to act shall be issued on request of the applicant. The certificate shall be sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement or other evidence of approval, herein required, and, in the case of subdivision plans, shall be so accepted by the County Register for purposes of filing. 
4.  Applicants who request extensions to the period of time within which the Planning Board may act are permitted to do so for one-month intervals, not to exceed three (3) months total. There shall be no limit to extensions requested by City Planning Staff, so long as the applicant agrees to said extensions. 
5.  Whenever review or approval of the application by the County Planning Board is required by N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.1 or 40:27-6.6, the Board shall condition its approval upon timely receipt of a favorable report on the application by the County Planning Board or approval by the County Planning Board by its failure to report thereon within the required time period. 
E.  Effect of Final Approval. 
1.  The zoning requirements applicable to the preliminary approval first granted and all other rights conferred upon the developer including any associated variance approval, pursuant to this Article, whether conditionally or otherwise, shall not be changed for a period of two years after the date on which the resolution of final approval is adopted; provided that in the case of major subdivision the rights conferred by this Article shall expire if the plat has not been duly recorded within the time period provided in this article. If the developer has followed the standards prescribed for final approval and, in the case of subdivision, has duly recorded the plat with the County Register in accordance with this article, Board may extend such period of protection for extensions of one year but not to exceed three extensions. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Article, the granting of final approval terminates the time period of preliminary approval pursuant to this Article, for any section of the development which is granted final approval. 
2.  In the case of a subdivision or site plan for a planned development of fifty (50) acres or more, conventional subdivision or site plan for one hundred fifty (150) acres or more, or site plan for the development of nonresidential floor area of two hundred thousand (200,000) square feet or more, Board may grant the rights referred to in this Article for such period of time, longer than two years, as shall be determined by the Board to be reasonable, taking into consideration: 
a.  The number of dwelling units and non-residential floor area permissible under final approval. 
b.  Economic conditions. 
c.  The comprehensiveness of the development. The developer may apply for thereafter, and the Board may thereafter grant, an extension of final approval for such additional period of time as shall be determined by the Board to be reasonable taking into consideration the following: 
i.  The number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area permissible under final approval; 
ii.  The number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area remaining to be developed; 
iii.  Economic conditions; and 
iv.  The comprehensiveness of the development. 
3.  Whenever the Board grants any extension of final approval pursuant to this Article and final approval has expired before the date on which the extension is granted, the extension shall begin on what would otherwise be the expiration date. The developer may apply for the extension either before or after what would otherwise be the expiration date. 
4.  The Board shall grant an extension of final approval for a period determined by the Board but not exceeding one year from what would otherwise be the expiration date, if the developer proves to the reasonable satisfaction of the Board that the developer was barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, from proceeding with the development because of delays in obtaining legally required approvals from other governmental entities and that the developer applied promptly for and diligently pursued these approvals. A developer shall apply for an extension before (a) what would otherwise be the expiration date of final approval, or (b) the 91st day after the developer receives the last legally required approval from other governmental entities, whichever occurs later. An extension granted pursuant to this Article shall not preclude the Board from granting an extension pursuant to subsections (E)(1) and (2) of this section. 
F.  Conditions of Approval. 
1.  Conditions Binding. All conditions of preliminary and final approval shall be binding upon the applicant, all present and future owners, tenants, users and occupants of the property and their respective successors and assigns. 
2.  Failure to Maintain. The applicant and any successor in interest shall be responsible for installing and maintaining in good order and condition all required improvements and landscaping, unless such improvements and landscaping are to be installed by, and/or dedicated to and maintained by the City, County or another party, under the terms of approval granted by the Board. Such required improvements shall include, but not be limited to, parking improvements, buffer zones, drainage facilities, exterior lighting and landscaping. Failure of any responsible party to install and/or maintain required improvements or landscaping, shall constitute a violation of this Chapter and shall be subject to the enforcement procedures set forth in this Chapter. 
3.  Payment of Taxes and Assessments. As a condition of approval all taxes or assessments for local improvements shall be paid on the property for which any application is made. 
G.  Expiration of Final Major Subdivision Approval. 
1.  Final approval of a major subdivision shall expire ninety-five (95) days from the date of signing of the plat unless within such period the plat shall have been duly filed by the applicant with the County Register. The Board may for good cause shown extend the period for recording for an additional period not to exceed one hundred ninety (190) days from the date of signing of the plat. The Board may extend the ninety-five (95) day or one hundred ninety (190) day period if the applicant proves to the reasonable satisfaction of the Board (a) that the applicant was barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, from filing because of delays in obtaining legally required approvals from other governmental or quasi-governmental entities and (b) that the applicant applied promptly for and diligently pursued required approvals. The length of the extension shall be equal to the period of delay caused by the wait for the required approvals, as determined by the Board. The developer may apply for an extension either before or after the original expiration date. 
2.  No subdivision plat shall be accepted for filing by the County Register until it has been approved by the Board as indicated on the instrument by the signature of the Chairperson, Secretary of the Board. The signatures of the Board Chairperson and Secretary shall not be affixed until the developer has posted the performance guarantees required by this Chapter and has satisfied all other applicable conditions of final approval. If the County records any plat without such approval, such recording shall be deemed null and void, and upon request of the municipality, the plat shall be expunged from the official records. 
H.  Inactive Applications. [Added 2-23-2011 by Ord. No. 11-023] 
1.  Any application for Final Major subdivision or Final Major site plan which has remained inactive and incomplete for six consecutive months shall be subject to dismissal by City Planning Staff. 
2.  In order to be dismissed for inactivity, City Planning Staff must first provide a written warning to project applicant. A thirty (30) day time period must be provided for the applicant's response demonstrating diligence towards obtaining Board approval, including but not necessarily limited to fee payment in full and plan revisions. 
3.  If after thirty (30) days from the date of contact for inactivity pursuant to H.2 above, the applicant has not responded to City Planning Staff, has not submitted application fees, and/or has not demonstrated diligence towards obtaining Board approval, the application may be permanently dismissed by City Planning Staff.  
§ 345-25. - Amended site plan or subdivision review. 
[Amended 2-23-2011 by Ord. No. 11-023] 
Applications for amended site plan or subdivision review shall be governed by the same requirements as all other applications for Preliminary Major Subdivision or site plan approval. Amendments shall be necessary for any application with minor changes. Projects with changes involving substantial redesign, a change of twenty percent (20%) or more (either increasing or decreasing) in the number of units, or a change of twenty percent (20%) or more (either increasing or decreasing) in the number of stories, shall not be considered amendments but will require a new Application for Development.  
§ 345-26. - Conditional use approval. 
The submission requirements and review process for conditional use applications shall be the same as for a major site plan, except as set forth below. 
A.  The Board shall grant or deny an application for conditional use approval within ninety-five (95) days of submission of a complete application or within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant. 
B.  The Board shall approve or deny a conditional use application simultaneously with any accompanying subdivision and/or site plan application. The longest time period for action by the Board, whether it be for subdivision, conditional use or site plan approval, shall apply. Whenever approval of a conditional use is requested by the applicant, notice of the hearing on the application shall include reference to the request for conditional use approval.  
§ 345-27. - County approval. 
Whenever review or approval of a development application by the County Planning Board is required by N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3 or 40:27-6.6, the Board shall condition any approval that it grants upon timely receipt of a favorable report on the application by the County Planning Board, The County Planning Board's failure to report thereon within the required time period provided by law shall be considered a favorable response. Whenever County Planning Board review or approval is required, the applicant shall be responsible for filing all necessary applications, plans, reports and other documents directly with the County Planning Board.  
§ 345-28. - Signing and distribution of approved plans. 
[Amended 5-14-2003 by Ord. No. 03-059] 
A.  When all conditions of any minor, preliminary or final approval have been met, the applicant shall submit to the Board Secretary at least four copies of the approved plan(s) with all revisions required by the conditions of approval. The approved plan(s) shall then be signed by the Board Chairperson, and Secretary. Three sets of signed plans go the Division of Zoning, two of these sets shall be forwarded by the Director of Zoning to the Building Department and a fourth set shall be retained on file by the Division of City Planning. If more than four sets are submitted and signed, the additional signed set shall be returned to the applicant. 
B.  In addition to the foregoing, whenever any subdivision is to be perfected by the filing of the approval plat with the County Register in conformance with the Map Filing Law, the applicant shall submit to the Board Secretary, simultaneously with the plans described in subsection (A) of this section, two mylars and at least four paper prints of the plat intended for recording. Provided that it conforms to the Map Filing Law, the plat intended for recording shall be signed by the Board Chairperson and Secretary simultaneously with the signing of the approved plans submitted pursuant to subsection (A) of this section. After signing, one mylar and all paper prints of the plat so signed shall be returned to the applicant for recording with the County Register. 
C.  Following the filing of any approved subdivision plat or minor subdivision deed with the County Register, the applicant shall promptly deliver to the Board Secretary at least four copies of the filed plat or recorded deed, as the case may be. 
D.  Whenever any subdivision is to be perfected by the filing of the approved plat with the County Register, and when the engineering review of such subdivision has been performed by the Board Engineer, the plat intended for recording shall be signed by the Municipal Engineer. 
E.  The Division of City Planning shall maintain at least one true copy of all signed and approved site plans and subdivision deeds and all signed, approved and filed subdivision plats.  
§ 345-29. - Subdivision certificate. 
The prospective purchaser, prospective mortgagee, or any other person interested in any land which forms part of a subdivision three years preceding the effective date of the Act, may apply in writing to the Administrative Officer, for the issuance of a certificate certifying whether or not such subdivision has been approved by the Board. Such application shall contain a diagram showing the location and dimension of the land to be covered by the certificate and the name of the owner thereof.  
§ 345-30. - Historic preservation review procedures. 
A.  Certificate of Appropriateness/Certificate of No Effect. No permit shall be issued or amended nor shall any construction, alteration, minor alteration, ordinary maintenance and repair or demolition be started on a landmark building nor on any sign, building, structure, object, site or landscape feature within a designated historic district, whether or not a construction permit is required, prior to a filing of an application for review by the Historic Preservation Commission or the issuance of either a Certificate of Appropriateness or a Certificate of No Effect. [Amended 11-10-2010 by Ord. No. 10-129] 
1.  Application for Review. Application for a Certificate of Appropriateness or a Certificate of No Effect shall be made on forms available in the Division of City Planning. A completed application form shall be returned to the Division of City Planning and shall be accompanied by: 
a.  Appropriate sketches and/or signed drawings. 
b.  Current photograph(s) of façade showing detail, if applicable. 
c.  A copy of Tax Assessor's 1938 photo showing façade, if not already on file with the Division of City Planning. 
d.  Specifications of all materials to be used, including catalog lot sheets, sample paint chips, etc. 
e.  A detailed description explaining the proposed construction, alterations, minor alterations, ordinary maintenance and repair or other changes; a contract for work shall be submitted if applicable. If the proposed changes are to be presented to the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment, the same documentation for submission to those Boards shall be submitted to the Commission in addition to the above-required items. 
[Amended 11-10-2010 by Ord. No. 10-129] 
2.  Review Process. 
a.  Applications must be submitted to the Division of City Planning a minimum of fourteen (14) business days prior to a Commission's regularly scheduled meeting and shall be reviewed for completeness by the Historic Preservation Officer as per the Historic Preservation Commission application checklist provided in this Article. The Historic Preservation Officer shall refer all applications for new construction, alterations, relocation or demolition to the Historic Preservation Commission for review. Applications referred to the Historic Preservation Commission must be complete at least ten (10) days prior to a hearing date for the purpose of scheduling. At least ten (10) days prior to the hearing the applicant shall post a notice on the property on a form provided by the Division of City Planning. Applications for minor alterations and ordinary maintenance and repair may be reviewed by the Historic Preservation Officer who, at his or her discretion may issue a Certificate of No Effect, may require additional submittal information and/or refer the application to the Commission upon being deemed complete. A Certificate of No Effect shall require the signature of the Director of City Planning. 
b.  In making such a determination the Historic Preservation Officer shall consider the effect of the proposed work in creating, altering, destroying or affecting the architectural features of the landmark building, structure, object, site or landscape feature upon which such work is to be done and the relationship between the results of such work and the architectural features of neighboring buildings, structures, objects, sites and landscape features. In appraising such effects and relationships, factors of aesthetic, historical and architectural values and significance, architectural style, design, arrangement, texture, material and color in addition to any other pertinent matters shall be considered. These criteria are listed in addition to those which are found elsewhere in this Article. 
c.  The Commission may advise the applicant and make recommendations with regard to the appropriateness of the proposed action at the public hearing. These recommendations may become part of the conditions for approval of an application, may be referred to a subcommittee of the Commission for further review with the applicant's consent or the basis for the rejection of an application. 
d.  The outcome of all Commission decisions shall be recorded by the Historic Preservation Officer and presented to the Administrative Officer by the close of the following business day. 
e.  If an application is approved, a Certificate of Appropriateness or Certificate of No Effect shall be issued promptly by the Commission. The chairperson or acting chairperson and one other Commission member shall sign all Certificates of Appropriateness. 
f.  If the Commission disapproves an application, the Commission shall state its reasons in writing to the applicant within ten (10) days of such decision. 
3.  Reapplication for Certificate of Appropriateness. lf an application for a Certificate of Appropriateness is denied, another application pertaining to the same site, structure, building, object or landscape feature shall not be resubmitted for consideration until one year has elapsed from the date of disapproval unless a substantially different application is resubmitted or if there has been a change in circumstances. The Commission may waive, by five affirmative votes, the aforementioned time restriction if an application presents substantial evidence providing the above. If a waiver is granted, a new application shall be filed as per the procedures set forth herein. 
B.  Appeals to the Board of Adjustment. 
1.  An applicant dissatisfied with the action of the Commission resulting in the denial of a Certificate of Appropriateness shall have the right to appeal to the Board of Adjustment within twenty (20) days after receipt of notification of such action. The applicant shall be advised by the Secretary to the Board of Adjustment of the time and place of the hearing at which the appeal will be considered and shall have all rights defined under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70, Subsection a. 
[Amended 11-10-2010 by Ord. No. 10-129] 
2.  A Certificate of Appropriateness or a Certificate of No Effect shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of issue unless reasonable extensions are granted by the Commission; requests for extensions shall be made by written request and shall require five affirmative votes. If a permit is also required and is obtained prior to expiration of the one-year period, then the certificate shall be valid for the life for the permit. 
C.  Emergency Procedure. 
1.  In the event that an act of God or any other unexpected event shall cause a property owner the need for immediate issuance of a building permit or other permit to commence to stabilize, secure, repair or protect a landmark building, structure, object, site or landscape feature damaged from such event, and a Certificate of Appropriateness or a Certificate of No Effect is a condition precedent to the issuance of such permit, and the Construction Code Official certifies the immediate necessity for such permit issuance, a Notice to Proceed may be issued in forthwith. In the event that a Notice to Proceed is issued, following emergency stabilization, the property owner is required to submit to the Historic Preservation Commission a full structural stabilization and remediation plan which shall be prepared by a licensed structural engineer. The applicant may proceed with construction in accordance with the submitted plan only upon approval of a Certificate of Appropriateness or Certificate of No Effect, unless conditions affecting the stability of the subject structure change and make necessary a new Notice to Proceed. 
2.  All other subsequent work must be submitted for review by the Historic Preservation Commission under the application procedures found elsewhere in this Article. 
D.  Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-045, adopted April 27, 2011, amended the Code by repealing former subsection D. Former subsection D pertained to a Certificate of Economic Hardship, and derived from Ord. No. 10-106, adopted September 15, 2010. 
E.  Application for Demolition Permit. 
1.  The following shall be considered in regard to an application to demolish an individual landmark building, structure, site or object or any building, structure, site or object contained within a historic district [Amended 9-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-106] : 
a.  Its historic, architectural and aesthetic significance. 
b.  Its use. 
c.  Its importance to the city and the extent to which its historic or architectural value is such that its removal would be detrimental to the public interest. 
d.  The extent to which it is of such old, unusual or uncommon design, craftsmanship, texture or material that it could not be reproduced or could be reproduced only with great difficulty. 
e.  The probable impact of its removal upon the ambience of the historic district. 
f.  The structural soundness and integrity of the building so as to comply with the requirements of the state uniform code. 
g.  The effect on the remaining portions of the building, structure, site, object or landscape feature in cases of partial demolition. 
2.  In the event that a structure is unsafe or unsound so as to impose a danger to health or safety, the power and authority of the City of Jersey City to demolish the structure, as otherwise provided by law, shall not be impaired or altered in any way by the provisions of this Chapter. The city shall be exempt from making an application to the Commission but shall notify the Commission prior to the demolition. 
3.  If an application to demolish is denied, the applicant shall follow the appeal process detailed herein for denial of Certificates of Appropriateness. 
F.  Procedure for Nominating Sites, Landmarks and Districts for Local Designation. Any interested party may nominate a site, landmark or district for local designation. The nomination may originate at either the Historic Preservation Commission, the Planning Board or City Council; however, in any case, it shall be reviewed by all these bodies. 
G.  Historic Districts/Landmarks. Pursuant to this section, the following historic districts and landmark buildings, objects, sites, structures or landscape features are designated and recognized as "historic" and shall enjoy the protection of law as herein provided. 
[Added 1-22-2003 by Ord. No. 03-009; amended 1-11-2006 by Ord. No. 05-176; 3-23-2011 by Ord. No. 11-031; 6-19-2013 by Ord. No. 13-079 ; 6-10-2015 by Ord. No. 15-040 ] 
Landmarks: 	Ord. No. 	Date 
Apple Tree House 	03-009 	05-24-2000 
Dickinson High School 	03-009 	05-27-1980 
Ellis Island 	03-009 	06-22-1994 
Holland Street 	03-058 	04-23-2003 
The Hudson and Manhattan Railroad Powerhouse 	11-031 	03-23-2011 
Saint John's Episcopal Church and Rectory 	13-079 
06-19-2013 
Pennsylvania Railroad Harsimus Branch Embankment 	05-176 	01-11-2006 
Terminal Distribution Warehouses of Hudson County, New Jersey, 1865-1945/Butler Brothers Warehouse 	11-031 	03-23-2011 
Terminal Distribution Warehouses of Hudson County, New Jersey, 1865-1945/Great Atlantic & Pacific Tea Company Warehouse Auxiliary Building and Bakery 	11-031 	03-23-2011 
Terminal Distribution Warehouses of Hudson County, New Jersey, 1865-1945/Great Atlantic & Pacific Tea Company Warehouse (Headquarters) 	11-031 	03-23-2011 
Terminal Distribution Warehouses of Hudson County, New Jersey, 1865-1945/Merchants' Refrigerating Company Warehouse 	11-031 	03-23-2011 
The Former Whitlock Cardage Site 	03-057 	05-14-2003 
Women's Club 	03-058 	04-23-2003 
 
Historic Districts 	Date 
Hamilton Park 	02-01-1977 
Harsimus Cove 	07-21-1983 
Paulus Hook 	02-01-1977 
Van Vorst Park 	02-01-1977 
West Bergen-East Lincoln Park 	06-10-2015 
  
§ 345-31. - Applications and checklists. 
[Amended 1-25-2006 by Ord. No. 06-002; 1-11-2006 by Ord. No. 05-170; amended 6-17-2009 by Ord. No. 09-070; 8-12-2009 by Ord. No. 09-091; 11-10-2010 by Ord. No. 10-133; 9-27-2011 by Ord. No. 11-112; 5-10-2017 by Ord. No. 17-052 ] 
No submission shall be deemed a complete application unless the items, information and documentation listed in the applicable checklist are submitted to the Division of City Planning. If any required item is not submitted, the applicant must request in writing a waiver and state the reasons supporting each such request. 
A.  General Development Application. The Division of City Planning maintains and makes updates as necessary to the General Development Application. A copy of the Application is available upon request from Division of City Planning staff or a digital version is accessible through the City's official website. 
[Amended 2-23-2011 by Ord. No. 11-023; 5-9-2012 by Ord. No. 12-060 ; 12-17-2014 by Ord. No. 14-156 ] 
B.  "A" and "B" Appeals Checklist. 
CASE #: 	
DATE: 	
PROPERTY ADDRESS: 	
APPLICANT: 	
OWNER: 	
 
"A" and "B" Appeals Checklist 
	Submitted 	Waiver Requested * 	Remarks (For Staff Use Only) 
	Yes 	No 	N/A 		
1. Completed General Development Application (applicable sections). 					
2. Affidavit of Performance 					
3. Affidavit of Ownership 					
4. One copy of the application for Building Permits or Certificate of Occupancy, if available. 					
5. Notice of Rejection which has been signed by the Zoning Officer, it available. 					
6. Notice of Appeal from the opinion of the Zoning Officer, if applicable. 					
7. Application Fee. 					
8. A Statement of Principal Points relative to the appeal as per N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(a) or (b). 					
9. Certified list and block diagram of all property owners within 200 feet. 					
10. Notice to property owners. (Must be submitted at least 14 days prior to the hearing for staff review). 					
11. The following must be submitted at least 2 days prior to the hearing: 					
 A) Certified Mail Receipts 					
  (1) Mounted on 8.5 × 11 bound paper 					
  (2) Six to a page 					
  (3) Arranged in the same order as indicated on the certified list of property owners (a properly certified U.S. Postal Form 3877 will be accepted in lieu of the mounted receipts, provided that the addresses are arranged in the same order as indicated on the certified list) RETURN RECEIPT POSTCARDS WILL NOT BE ACCEPTED 					
 B) Affidavit of Proof of Service 					
 C) Affidavit of Publication 					
 
  
* If a waiver is requested, please supply detailed reasons for the request. Attach additional sheets if necessary. 
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____ 
C.  "C" and "D" Variance Checklist. [Amended 12-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-148; 5-9-2012 by Ord. No. 12-060 ; 1-23-2013 by Ord. No. 13-001 ] 
CASE #: 	
DATE: 	
PROPERTY ADDRESS: 	
APPLICANT: 	
OWNER: 	
 
"C" and "D" Variance Checklist 
	Submitted 	Waiver Requested * 	Remarks (For Staff Use Only) 
	Yes 	No 	N/A 		
1. Completed General Development Application (applicable sections). 					
2. Affidavit of Performance. 					
3. Affidavit of Ownership. 					
4. One copy of the application for Building Permits or Certificate of Occupancy, if available. 					
5. Current survey upon which plan is based. 					
6. A Statement of Principal Points relative to the variance as per N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(c) and (d). 					
7. Original certified list and block diagram of all property owners within 200 feet. 					
8. Notice to property owners (Must be submitted at least 14 days prior to the hearing for staff review). 					
9. Affidavit of Vacant and Nonconforming Use indicating length of time property has been vacant, if applicable. 					
10. Fourteen sets of folded plans (once complete) of proposed buildings or alterations with the following information: 					
 A) All pages must bear an original signature and seal of an engineer or architect licensed in New Jersey. 					
 B) A key map at a scale not less than 1? to 600' depicting a 1000' radius clearly identifying zoning districts, streets and lots involved in the application. To be located on the first numbered drawing sheet. 					
 C) Zoning comparison chart (contrasting existing standards in the use zone or general zoning requirements with proposed site details as listed below with variances, deviations or design standard waiver requests. If any, clearly noted.) One table per plan set, to be located on the first numbered drawing sheet. 					
  (1) Density. 					
  (2) Height. 					
  (3) Floor Area Ratio. 					
  (4) Setbacks. 					
  (5) Vehicle parking (# of spaces, stall dimensions). 					
  (6) Bicycle parking (# of spaces). 					
  (7) Loading (# of berths, dimensions). 					
  (8) Access (circulation, driveway width, curbcut dimensions). 					
  (9) Signage. 					
  (10) Landscaping. 					
  (11) Bonus provisions. 					
  (12) Building coverage for each structure, if more than one is part of development parcel. 					
  (13) Lot dimensions. 					
  (14) Lot size in square feet. 					
  (15) Buffer areas. 					
  (16) Gross floor area. 					
  (17) Lot coverage. 					
  (18) Design standards (list all for which a waiver is requested). 					
 D) The scale shall be a minimum of: 1? = 20;ft; for tracts up to 40 acres or 1? = 50;ft; for tracts over 40 acres. (No 15' scale) 					
 E) Site plan, including all proposed structures and building footprints, paved areas, curb cuts, and egress points. Site plans shall not include existing conditions to be removed. 					
 F) Demolition plan, if applicable. 					
 G) Floor plans with all room dimensions, including basement plan and roof plan. 					
 H) Elevations, with details of materials and colors, for all applicable facades and window dimensions. 					
 I) For rehabilitation projects, existing and proposed floorplans and elevations shall be provided side-by-side for comparison. 					
 J) Sign details, if applicable. 					
 K) North arrow; designated so that the north arrow is facing the top of the page. 					
 L) Street addresses and block number(s). 					
 M) Dates of drawings and revisions, if any. 					
 N) Graphic scale. 					
 O) Project title. 					
11. Notice of rejection, which has been signed by the zoning officer, if available. 					
12. Current color site photo and photo including adjacent properties, where applicable 					
13. Application fee. 					
14. Certificate of tax and water bills paid. 					
15. 10% disclosure statement, if applicable 					
16. Application filed with the historic preservation Commission, if applicable 					
17. The following must be submitted at least 2 days prior to the hearing: 					
 A) Certified mail receipts. 					
  (1) Mounted on 8.5 × 11 bound paper 					
  (2) Six to a page 					
  (3) Arranged in the same order as indicated on the certified list of property owners (a properly certified U.S. Postal Form 3877 will be accepted in lieu of the mounted receipts, provided that addresses are arranged in the same order as indicated on the certified list) RETURN RECEIPT POSTCARDS WILL NOT BE ACCEPTED. 					
 B) Affidavit of proof of service. 					
 C) Affidavit of publication. 					
 
* If a waiver is requested, please supply detailed reasons for the request. Attach additional sheets if necessary. 
_____
_____
_____
_____ 
D.  Minor Site Plan Checklist. 
[Amended 12-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-148; 5-9-2012 by Ord. No. 12-060 ; 1-23-2013 by Ord. No. 13-001 ; 1-29-2014 by Ord. No. 14-004 ; 2-24-2016 by Ord. No. 16-028 ] 
CASE #: 	
DATE: 	
PROPERTY ADDRESS: 	
APPLICANT: 	
OWNER: 	
 
Minor Site Plan Checklist 
	Submitted 	Waiver Requested* 	Remarks (For Staff Use Only) 
	Yes 	No 	N/A 		
1. Completed General Development Application (applicable sections). 					
2. Plan drawn, signed, and sealed by a P.E., L.S., P.P., or R.A. as permitted by law and based on a current survey. 					
3. The scale shall be a minimum of 1? = 20' or as required by the Planning Staff. No 15' scale. 					
4. The plan size shall be one of the following: 8.5 × 13?; 15 × 21?; 24 × 36?; or 30 × 42?. 					
5. Current survey upon which plan is based. 					
6. A key map at a scale not less than 1? to 600' depicting a 1,000' radius clearly identifying zoning district, streets and lots involved in the application. To be located on the first numbered drawing sheet. 					
7. Title block and basic information: 					
 A) Project Title. 					
 B) Date of Original Preparation and Date(s) of revision. 					
 C) North arrow to be designed so that north is facing the top of the page. 					
 D) Graphic Scale. 					
 E) Tax block, lot numbers and street addresses. 					
 F) Name, address and license number of person preparing plan. 					
8. Zoning table, located on first numbered page. 					
9. Site plan, including all proposed structures and building footprints, paved areas, curb cuts, and egress points. Site plans shall not include existing conditions to be removed. 					
10. For rehabilitation projects, existing and proposed floorplans and elevations shall be provided side-by-side for comparison. 					
11. Affidavit of Performance. 					
12. Affidavit of Ownership. 					
13. 10% disclosure, if applicable. 					
14. Letter of Rejection from Zoning Officer, if available. 					
15. Application fee. 					
16. Certificate of tax and water bills paid. 					
17. Current color site photo and photo including adjacent properties, where applicable. 					
18. Elevations of all applicable facades, including window dimensions. 					
19. Roof plan, if applicable. 					
20. Application filed with the Historic Preservation Commission, if applicable. 					
21. Digital Submission - the following shall be submitted at least 14 days prior to the scheduled hearing: 					
 A) One (1) digital PDF of the full plan representing an exact copy of the application to be presented at the scheduled hearing. 					
  (1) The PDF shall be a direct export from AutoCAD or similar program. Scanned copies are not acceptable. 					
  (2) The PDF file shall include all of the following, if applicable: 					
   (a) general development application with case number 					
   (b) architectural and engineering plans preferably 24? × 36? 					
   (c) subdivision plats and survey preferably 24? × 36? 					
   (d) renderings and other visual project representations 					
   (e) professional reports (i.e. stormwater management) 					
  (3) The PDF file shall be labeled (named) as follows: Case number - Block.lot - Address - Application Type.pdf (as assigned by the Division of City Planning). Example: P00-001 - 12101.1 - 555 Planning St. - Minor Site Plan.pdf. 					
 
* If a waiver is requested, please supply detailed reasons for the request. Attach additional sheets if necessary. 
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____ 
E.  Preliminary and Final Major Site Plan Checklist. 
[Amended 12-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-148; 5-9-2012 by Ord. No. 12-060 ; 1-23-2013 by Ord. No. 13-001 ; 2-24-2016 by Ord. No. 16-028 ] 
CASE #: 	
DATE: 	
PROPERTY ADDRESS: 	
APPLICANT: 	
OWNER: 	
 
Preliminary and Final Major Site Plan Checklist 
Planning Completeness 	Submitted 	Waiver Requested* 	Remarks (For Staff Only) 
	Yes 	No 	N/A 		
1. Completed General Development Application (applicable sections). 					
2. Affidavit of Ownership. 					
3. Affidavit of Performance. 					
4. 10% disclosure, if applicable. 					
5. Letter of Rejection from Zoning Officer, if available. 					
6. Current color site photo and photo including adjacent properties, where applicable. 					
7. Application Fee. 					
8. Certificate of tax and water bills paid. 					
9. The following number of plans shall be submitted: 					
 A) One when initial application is filed. 					
 B) Review agent sets (when instructed by staff). 					
 C) Fourteen for Planning Board (when completed). 					
 D) Eleven for Zoning Board (when completed). 					
10. All plans shall include: 					
 A) A key map at a scale not less than 1? to 600' depicting a 1000' radius clearly identifying zoning district, streets and lots involved in the application. To be located on the first numbered drawing sheet. 					
 B) Signature and seal of map preparer; Licensed Engineer, Architect or Land Surveyor in New Jersey on all pages. 					
 C) Zoning comparison chart (contrasting existing standards in the use zone or general zoning requirements with proposed site details as listed below with variance or design standard waiver request, if any, clearly noted). One table per plan set, to be located on the first numbered drawing sheet. 					
  (1) Density. 					
  (2) Height. 					
  (3) Floor area ratio. 					
  (4) Setbacks. 					
  (5) Vehicle parking (# of spaces, dimensions). 					
  (6) Bike parking (# of spaces). 					
  (7) Loading (# of berths, dimensions). 					
  (8) Access (circulation, driveway width, curbcut dimensions). 					
  (9) Signage. 					
  (10) Landscaping. 					
  (11) Bonus provisions. 					
  (12) Building coverage for each structure, if more than one is part of development parcel. 					
  (13) Lot dimensions. 					
  (14) Lot size in square feet. 					
  (15) Buffer areas. 					
  (16) Gross floor area. 					
  (17) Lot coverage. 					
  (18) Design standards (list all for which a waiver is requested). 					
11. The scale shall be a minimum of 1? = 20' for tracts up to 40 acres or 1? = 50' for tracts over 40 acres. (No 15' scale) 					
12. Map size: 8.5 × 13?; 15 × 21?; 24 × 36?; 30 × 42?. 					
13. The following details shall be on all site plans: 					
 A) Tax block, lot numbers and street address of site. 					
 B) Dates of drawings and revisions, if any. 					
 C) Graphic scale. 					
 D) Project title. 					
 E) North arrow. 					
 F) Landscaping. 					
  (1) Type. 					
  (2) Caliper. 					
  (3) Square footage. 					
  (4) Height. 					
  (5) Planting schedule. 					
  (6) Maintenance procedures and guarantees. 					
 G) Survey showing block and lot numbers with metes and bounds description; existing and proposed easements, and size and location of any existing or proposed structures with setbacks dimensions. 					
 H) Demolition plan, if applicable. 					
 I) Site plan, including all proposed structures and building footprints, paved areas, curb cuts, and egress points. Site plans shall not include existing conditions to be removed. 					
 J) Floor plans with all room dimensions including basement plan and roof plan. 					
 K) Locations of all mechanical and other equipment. 					
 L) Materials used in paved areas and walks and all other surface treatments. 					
 M) Lighting: wattage, location, height, attachment details, areas of diffusion. 					
 N) Fences/walls: height, materials, width of internal details (e.g. pickets), spacing of internal details. 					
 O) Refuse: location of dumpster, etc., screening height, materials, details of removal path. 					
 P) Signage: lettering, dimensions, location, materials equipment, and lighting. 					
 Q) Recreation areas: location, square footage, materials, equipment and lighting. 					
 R) Elevations of all facades indicating colors and materials and window dimensions. 					
 S) Enlarged elevations of the first two floors, including details of windows, doors, signs, lighting, facade materials, etc. at ¼? scale where appropriate. 					
 T) Enlarged details of typical upper story windows, including dimensions, glazing details, sills and headers, projections, etc. at ¼? scale where appropriate. 					
 U) For rehabilitation projects, existing and proposed floorplans and elevations shall be provided side-by-side for comparison. 					
 V) Elevation of roof indicating heating, ventilation and air-conditioning equipment, communication equipment, and antennae specifying screening height, colors and materials. 					
 W) Utility connection points into proposed structures (eg: facade conduits, transformers) to be detailed on site plans and facade elevations. 					
 X) One illustrative site plan depicting details using the following color scheme: 					
  (1) Asphalt paved areas: gray concrete. 					
  (2) Paved areas: beige. 					
  (3) Buildings: dark brown. 					
  (4) Landscaped areas: light green. 					
  (5) Trees and scrubs: dark green. 					
  (6) Water: light blue. 					
  (7) Signs: red. 					
  (8) Lighting fixtures: black. 					
 Y) Circulation: parking spaces, dimensions, aisle widths, location of accessible bike racks/storage, car sharing, sidewalk details, etc. 					
 Z) Shadow study, if applicable. 					
 AA) Visual assessment, if required. 					
14. Indication of review/approval (if applicable) by Environmental Commission, Department of Environmental Protection, Army Corps of Engineers. 					
15. Application filed with Historic Preservation Commission, if applicable. 					
16. Indication if property contains a right-of-way preservation area, per map 4.4-1 of the Jersey City Master Plan Circulation Element. 					
Engineering Completeness 
1. The following engineering details shall be included on Plans. Plans will be forwarded to the Division of Engineering and/or other appropriate municipal review agents for comment: 					
 A) Survey, signed and sealed by a licensed surveyor, showing block and lot numbers with metes and bounds description; existing and proposed easements, and size and location of any existing or proposed structures with setbacks dimensions. 					
 B) Location of project relative to adjacent properties and improvements, including encroachments. 					
 C) Topographic data with existing and proposed elevations. 					
 D) Existing public rights-of-way with the existing and proposed utilities and service connections to the project showing pipe sizes, materials, lengths, rim and invert elevations for sewers, valves and other relevant information. Also, all existing conditions and structures in the adjacent public right-of-way, including but not limited to signposts, hydrants, street trees and tree pits, bus stops, etc. 					
 E) Proposed and exact location of above and below-ground utilities and amenities, including but not limited to traffic control poles, hydrants, street furniture, and signal boxes. 					
 F) Entrance to the project from public streets with curbs, drop curbs, aprons, and sidewalks. 					
 G) Storm system demand, strategy and design with drainage calculations and impact on existing drainage detailed in an Engineering Report, in compliance with the Stormwater Control Ordinance. 					
 H) Standards and details for curbs, wheel stops, walks, catch basins, trenches, street grade and intersections, pavement cross sections and profiles, traffic control and directional signs. 					
 I) Parking lot drainage. 					
 J) Water service connections including valves, hydrants. 					
 K) Proposed erosion control plan and method of control. 					
 L) Water supply system demand, strategy and design. 					
 M) Sanitary sewer system demand, strategy and design. 					
 N) Traffic study, if required by Planning Director, showing existing and proposed traffic flows and volumes. (Per § 345-17) 					
 
* If a waiver is requested, please supply detailed reasons for the request. Attach additional sheets if necessary. 
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____ 
F.  Minor Subdivision Checklist. [Amended 1-23-2013 by Ord. No. 13-001 ; 1-29-2014 by Ord. No. 14-004 ; 2-24-2016 by Ord. No. 16-028 ] 
CASE #: 	
DATE: 	
PROPERTY ADDRESS: 	
APPLICANT: 	
OWNER: 	
 
Minor Subdivision Checklist 
	Submitted 	Waiver 
Requested* 	Remarks (For Staff Use Only) 
	Yes 	No 	N/A 		
1. Completed General Development Application (applicable sections). 					
2. Originally signed and sealed maps as described: 					
 A) One when initial application is filed. 					
 B) Review agent sets (when instructed by Staff). 					
 C) Fourteen for Planning Board (when complete). 					
 D) Eleven for Zoning Board (when complete). 					
  (1) Signature and seal of map preparer; Licensed Engineer, Architect or Land Surveyor in New Jersey on all pages. 					
  (2) A key map at a scale not less than 1? to 600' depicting a 1000' radius clearly identifying zoning district, streets and lots involved in the applications. To be located on the first numbered drawing sheet. 					
  (3) The scale shall be a minimum of 1? = 20' for tracts up to 40 acres and 1? = 50' for tracts over 40. 					
  (4) The subdivision plat size shall be one of the following: 8.5 × 13?; 15 × 21?; 24 × 36?; or 30 × 42?. 					
  (5) Zoning table. 					
  (6) Plat details. 					
   (a) A definite point of beginning, referenced by adjacent lines. 					
   (b) Each boundary of the survey, shown by metes, bounds and bearings, indicated by magnetic, true north or relative bearing. 					
   (c) The area(s) of both the original and proposed lots. 					
   (d) Any right-of-way or other permanent easement existing on the property. 					
   (e) Any building line restrictions of record. 					
   (f) All property lines not to change shall be indicated by heavy solid lines. 					
   (g) All property lines to be changed shall be indicated by broken lines. 					
   (h) All new property lines shall be shown in heavy broken lines. 					
   (i) Tax block, lot number(s) and street addresses. 					
   (j) Dates of drawings and revisions, if any. 					
   (k) Graphic scale. 					
   (l) Project title. 					
   (m) North arrow: to be designed so that north is facing the top of page. 					
3. Affidavit of Performance. 					
4. Affidavit of Ownership. 					
5. 10% disclosure, if applicable. 					
6. Application Fee. 					
7. Certificate of tax and water bills paid. 					
8. Current color photo of site and photo including adjacent properties, where applicable. 					
9. Digital Submission - the following shall be submitted at least 14 days prior to the scheduled hearing: 					
 A) One (1) digital PDF of the full plan representing an exact copy of the application to be presented at the scheduled hearing. 					
  (1) The PDF shall be a direct export from AutoCAD or similar program. Scanned copies are not acceptable. 					
  (2) The PDF file shall include all of the following, if applicable: 					
   (a) general development application with case number. 					
   (b) architectural and engineering plans preferably 24? × 36?. 					
   (c) subdivision plats and survey preferably 24? × 36?. 					
   (d) ;renderings and other visual project representations. 					
   (e) professional reports (i.e. stormwater management). 					
  (3) The PDF file shall be labeled (named) as follows: Case number - Block.lot - Address - Application Type.pdf (as assigned by the Division of City Planning). Example: P00-001 - 12101.1 - 555 Planning St. - Minor Site Plan.pdf. 					
 
* If a waiver is requested, please supply detailed reasons for the request. Attach additional sheets if necessary. 
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____ 
G.  Preliminary and Final Major Subdivision Checklist. [Amended 1-23-2013 by Ord. No. 13-001 ; 1-29-2014 by Ord. No. 14-004 ; 2-24-2016 by Ord. No. 16-028 ] 
CASE #: 	
DATE: 	
PROPERTY ADDRESS: 	
APPLICANT: 	
OWNER: 	
 
Preliminary and Final Major Subdivision Checklist 
	Submitted 	Waiver 
Requested* 	Remarks (For Staff Use Only) 
	Yes 	No 	N/A 		
1. Completed General Development Application (applicable sections). 					
2. Affidavit of Ownership. 					
3. Affidavit of Performance. 					
4. The following number of maps as described, and metes and bounds description bearing original signature and seal of the New Jersey licensed surveyor preparing them, shall be submitted: 					
 A) One when initial application is filed. 					
 B) Review agent sets (when instructed by Staff). 					
 C) Fourteen for Planning Board (when complete). 					
 D) Eleven for Zoning Board (when complete). 					
  (1) Signature and seal of map preparer; Licensed Engineer, Architect or Land Surveyor in New Jersey on all pages. 					
  (2) A key map at a scale not less than 1? to 600' depicting a 1000' radius clearly identifying zoning district, streets and lots involved in the application. To be located on the first numbered drawing sheet. 					
  (3) The scale shall be a minimum of 1?=20' for tracts up to 40 acres and 1?=50' for tracts over 40 acres. 					
  (4) The subdivision plat size shall be one of the following: 8.5 × 13?; 15 × 21?; 24 × 36?; or 30 × 42?. 					
  (5) Zoning table. 					
  (6) Plat details. 					
   (a) A definite point of beginning, referenced by adjacent lines. 					
   (b) Each boundary of the survey, shown by metes bounds and bearings, indicated by magnetic, true north or relative bearing. 					
   (c) The area(s) of both the original and proposed lots. 					
   (d) Any right-of-way or other permanent easement existing on the property. 					
   (e) Any building line restrictions of record. 					
   (f) All property lines not to change shall be indicated by heavy solid lines. 					
   (g) All property lines to be changed shall be indicated by broken lines. 					
   (h) All new property lines shall be shown in heavy broken lines. 					
   (i) Tax block, lot number(s) and street addresses. 					
   (j) Dates of drawings and revisions, if any. 					
   (k) Graphic scale. 					
   (l) Project title. 					
   (m) North arrow: to be designed so that north is facing the top of the page. 					
5. Certified list and block diagram of all property owners within 200'. 					
6. 10% disclosure, if applicable. 					
7. Application Fee. 					
8. Certificate of tax and water bills paid. 					
9. Current color photo of site and photo including adjacent properties, if applicable. 					
10. Review agent signature sheet, if applicable. 					
11. Digital Submission - the following shall be submitted at least 14 days prior to the scheduled hearing: 					
 A) One (1) digital PDF of the full plan representing an exact copy of the application to be presented at the scheduled hearing. 					
  (1) The PDF shall be a direct export from AutoCAD or similar program. Scanned copies are not acceptable. 					
  (2) The PDF file shall include all of the following, if applicable: 					
   (a) general development application with case number. 					
   (b) architectural and engineering plans preferably 24? × 36?. 					
   (c) subdivision plats and survey preferably 24? × 36?. 					
   (d) renderings and other visual project representations. 					
   (e) professional reports (i.e. stormwater management). 					
  (3) The PDF file shall be labeled (named) as follows: Case number - Block.lot - Address - Application Type.pdf (as assigned by the Division of City Planning). Example: P00-001 - 12101.1 - 555 Planning St. - Minor Site Plan.pdf. 					
 
* If a waiver is requested, please supply detailed reasons for the request. Attach additional sheets if necessary. 
_____
_____
_____ 
H.  Historic District Checklist. 
[Added 7-13-2016 by Ord. No. 16-108 ] 
CASE #: 	
DATE: 	
PROPERTY ADDRESS: 	
APPLICANT: 	
OWNER: 	
 
Historic District Checklist 
Paper Documentation 	Submitted 	Waiver Requested 	Remarks (staff only) 
	Yes 	No 	N/A 		
1. Completed application form. 					
2. Application Fee. 					
3. Signed and sealed architectural drawings, if applicable, with colors and materials clearly noted. (13 sets) 					
4. Appropriate sketches indicating all proposed materials & colors, if architect's drawing are not required. (13 sets) 					
5. All materials & color specifications, including, but not limited to, applicable catalog cuts, detailed drawings or photos, sample paint chips, brick & mortar samples and specifications, window and door specifications (including manufacturer & model) etc. (13 sets) 					
6. Current, detailed color photos of existing facade(s). (13 sets) 					
7. Copy of Tax Assessor's 1938 photo. (13 sets) 					
8. Detailed description of proposed work. 					
9. As to any development parcel or part thereof that is now traversed or has been traversed within the last fifty (50) years by a railroad and which parcel is the subject of an ordinance authorizing the acquisition of the parcel by the City for a public purpose, the applicant must submit proof of the abandonment of the railroad use or that an abandonment is not required under the Interstate Commerce Commission termination Act, 49 U.S.C. 10501, or other applicable Federal or State law. 					
 
Digital Submission 	Submitted 	Waiver Requested 	Remarks (for staff only) 
	Yes 	No 	N/A 		
1. Digital Submission - the following shall be submitted at least 10 days prior to the scheduled hearing for a Certificate of Appropriateness: 					
	A) One (1) digital PDF of the full plan representing an exact copy of the application to be presented at the scheduled hearing. 					
	(1) The PDF shall be a direct export from AutoCAD or similar program. Scanned copies are not acceptable. 					
	(2) The PDF file shall include all of the following, if applicable: 					
	(a) Certificate of appropriateness application with case number. 					
	(b) Architectural and engineering plans preferably 24" × 36". 					
	(c) All materials and colors specifications as previously detailed In the paper documentation checklist. 					
	(d) Current color photos and 1938 tax photograph. 					
	(e) professional reports {i.e. engineer's report). 					
	(3) The PDF file shall be labeled (named) as follows: Case number - Block.lot - Address - Application Type.pdf (as assigned by the Historic Preservation Officer) 
Example: H00-001 -12101.1 - 555 Washington St. - Rear Yard Addition.pdf 					
 
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____ 
I.  Notice of Public Hearing. 
NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING 
Be advised that a hearing concerning an Application for a Certificate of Appropriateness for proposed work at ___________ will be held before the Jersey City Historic Preservation Commission on Monday, _______ at 6:30 pm in the Council Chamber, 2nd Floor, City Hall, 280 Grove Street. 
Any member of the public wishing to address the Commission regarding the application may do so at that time. 
A copy of the application along with submitted plans and materials is available for review at the Division of City Planning, 30 Montgomery St., Suite 416, Monday through Friday, from 8:30 am to 4 pm. 
J.  Subdivision Map Digital Submission Standards. 
Applicant shall submit a digital subdivision map that meets or exceeds the standards of the New Jersey Division of Taxation and common New Jersey Land Surveying practices. The digital subdivision map shall meet or exceed the standards set forth below. Submissions which do not meet these standards or are unreadable will be returned to the applicant. 
1.  It is the city's intention to use the subdivision map digital CAD deliverables for inclusion in the Jersey City GIS database and for the maintenance of the city's tax maps. The digital data submitted shall be such that it will be capable of being processed through typical GIS feature development techniques, for both lifework and attribute data, with minimal to no editing of the source CAD data, translation, or other maintenance. 
2.  Subdivision map information shall be input into a computer utilizing a commercially available computer drafting package. The CAD software output shall be readable by AutoCAD release 2000 or greater. 
3.  Each subdivision map sheet shall be constructed full scale and georeferenced to the New State Plane Coordinate NAD83. 
4.  Subdivision map shall be prepared in such a way that all different types of lines are placed on separate layers. The layers to include dimensions/verbiage and locating arrows or directional indicators. 
5.  Layering shall be the same for all subdivision sheets with each sheet containing the full layer set even though some layers may be void of data. Layer names shall be all upper case and contain no spaces. Underscores may be used to separate portion of the layer names. 
6.  The subdivision map shall not contain any duplicate linework (i.e. no lines on top of lines). All intersecting lines shall be snaped to within 0.01 feet. There shall be no undershoots or overshoots, and all short line segments shall be deleted. 
7.  All curves including those along street centerlines shall be true curves. All straight lines between lot corners shall consist of a single line segment with no intermediate nodes. All property boundaries shall be broken at lot line intersections. 
8.  All files pertaining to the project are to be submitted to one or more CDs or DVDs with an attached table of contents of files including file names and descriptions. 
K.  Solid waste and recycling management. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
§ 345-31.1. - Hearing requirements. 
[Added 4-11-2012 by Ord. No. 12-044 ] 
Applicants are required to bring at least one set of any necessary site plans, including floor plans and elevations, mounted on display boards; subdivision plats; photographs; and appropriate material samples and/or material boards and/or color catalog cuts of primary façade materials to the hearing for Board review and approval. Any experts who testify must be licensed in the State of New Jersey, when and if required by law.  
ARTICLE IV - Fees, Deposits and Inspections 
[Amended 4-28-2004 by Ord. No. 04-046] 
 
§ 345-32. - Non-refundable application fees. 
A.  There shall be a non-refundable fee for applications to the Jersey City Planning Board, Zoning Board of Adjustment, and Historic Preservation Commission as provided by law and established herein. The fees provided for shall be non-refundable and are for purposes of offsetting the administrative and clerical costs of running these Boards. 
[Amended 3-23-2005 by Ord. No. 05-033; 4-23-2008 by Ord. No. 08-046] 
B.  The City of Jersey City and its agencies, such as the Housing Authority and Board of Education, as well as applications for affordable housing (affordable housing being defined pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301, et seq. or the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development), and applications for certificates of appropriateness and certificates of no effect submitted by non-profit entities for property within a designated historic district are exempt from the fees described herein. 
[Amended 11-12-2014 by Ord. No. 14-017 ; 5-13-2015 by Ord. No. 15-054 ] 
C.  As for projects by non-City entities that propose a mix of affordable housing and market rate housing, the fees shall be pro-rated so that only affordable housing units and their associated building components shall be exempt from the fees. All market rate housing units and their associated building components, as well as non-residential (commercial or industrial) units, shall remain subject to the fees described herein. 
(Added 5-13-2015 by Ord. No. 15-054 )  
§ 345-33. - Fees. 
[Amended 3-23-2008 by Ord. No. 05-033; 4-23-2008 by Ord. No. 08-046; 8-12-2009 by Ord. No. 09-091; 11-10-2015 by Ord. No. 15-147 ] 
A.  Applicable Fees. 
1.  Every application for review or hearing before the Zoning Board of Adjustment, or the Planning Board shall be initially accompanied by a check for $150.00, and every application to the Historic Preservation Commission shall be initially accompanied by a check for $10.00. Balance due will be determined upon City Planning Staff's review in accordance with the amount(s) as provided in Fee Table I and based upon the initial submission package. If future submissions result in additional fees, such will be calculated at that time. This balance will be due within 30 days of issuance of the first review checklist. If not received within 30 days, review will cease until payment is submitted. [Amended 2-23-2011 by Ord. No. 11-021; 4-11-2012 by Ord. No. 12-043 ] 
2.  The applicant shall arrange to provide the Division of City Planning with two copies of the transcript for its files and shall pay the complete cost of the transcript of his or her application. Any balance due the transcription firm engaged by the Division for its services shall be payable immediately upon billing. 
3.  Copies of resolutions rendered by either the Board of Adjustment or the Planning Board shall be available to any person requesting them at their sole cost and expense. Any applicant shall receive a copy of the decision rendered at no additional cost. Minutes of either the Board of Adjustment or the Planning Board shall also be available on request to any person or applicant at their sole cost and expense. Amounts charged shall be as provided for in the City's ordinance regulating photocopy and documents fees. 
4.  Performance guarantees may be required by the Zoning Board of Adjustment or the Planning Board pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53. 
5.  The Zoning Officer, and the Division of Zoning Enforcement may establish reasonable fees to cover administrative costs for the issuance of permits, certificates or authorizations pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-18. 
B.  Schedule of Fees. 
[Amended 5-28-2008 by Ord. No. 08-072; 11-10-2010 by Ord. No. 10-133; 2-23-2011 by Ord. No. 11-021; 9-27-2011 by Ord. No. 11-112] 
Fee Table I 
Application Type 	Application Fees 
Zoning Officer and Division of Zoning Enforcement Applications 	Non-Refundable 
Plan Review and Determination 	$100.00 
Certificate of Occupancy Review and Determination 	$100.00 
Zoning Determination 	$100.00 
Pre-existing Curbcut Determination 	$ 25.00 
 
Application Type 	Application Fees 
Planning Board and Board of Adjustment Applications 	Non-Refundable 
Minor site plan—Cell antenna application 
Minor site plan—Signage and storefronts 
Minor site plan—Other 	$2,500.00 
$  200.00 
$  350.00 
Preliminary major site plan—Residential 	$50.00 per dwelling unit or a minimum of $500.00 
Preliminary major site plan—Non-residential 	With principal buildings over 1,000 sq. ft. GFA: 
$50.00 per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA or part thereof or a minimum of $500.00 
Without principal building over 1,000 sq. ft. GFA: 
$50.00 per 1,000 sq. ft. lot area or part thereof or a minimum of $500.00 
Final major site plan 	50% of current preliminary major site plan fee 
Site plan amendment 	50% of the current application fee or a minimum of $1,000.00 
Administrative amendment 	$100.00 
Conceptual site plan 	$500.00 (to be deducted from fees for formal application for development) 
Extension of site plan approval 	$300.00 
Minor subdivision 	$500.00 
Preliminary major subdivision 	$1,000.00 plus $100.00 per lot 
Final major subdivision 	50% of current preliminary major subdivision fee 
SPECIAL MEETING REQUESTED BY APPLICANT 	$1,000.00 
REZONING OR REDEVELOPMENT PLAN AMENDMENT REQUESTED BY DEVELOPER 	Fee as specified in applicable redevelopment plan, or $1,000.00, if no fee specified in plan. 
APPEALS, INTERPRETATIONS AND VARIANCES 	$150.00 
"a" and "b" appeals and interpretations as per N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70 a and b 	$150.00 
"c" variance as per N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(c) and deviation from redevelopment plan 	$500.00 for the first variance or deviation when not accompanied by a major or minor site plan or subdivision 
$300.00 for the first variance or deviation when accompanied by a major or minor site plan or subdivision 
$150.00 for each additional 
"d" variance as per N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(d) 	$1,000.00 for the first variance 
$250.00 for each additional 
Extension of variance approval 	$300.00 (when not filed concurrently with extension of Site Plan) 
 
Application Type 	Application Fees 
Historic Preservation Commission Applications 	Non-Refundable 
CERTIFICATE OF NO EFFECT 	
Non-Residential 	
 With principal building 	$40.00 per 1,000 square feet GFA or part thereof 
 Without principal building 	$40.00 per 1,000 square feet of lot area or part thereof 
 Unlit Interior window sign only 	$40.00 
 Sidewalk repair/replacement when not filed concurrently with other work 	$40.00 for first 25 linear feet of frontage, additional $20.00 for each 25 feet of frontage over 25 or part thereof 
Residential 	
 Interior work only 	$10 per affected dwelling unit to a Maximum of $60 
 Exterior work only or Interior & exterior work filed concurrently 	$20.00 per dwelling unit to a maximum of $750.00 
 Sidewalk repair/replacement when not filed concurrently with other work 	$20.00 per dwelling unit to a maximum of $60.00 
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS (COA) 	
Residential 	
 New construction on vacant land 	$500.00 
 All others: 	
  1—4 dwelling units 	$100.00 
  5 dwelling units or over 	$20.00 per dwelling unit to a maximum of $1,000.00 
Non-residential 	
 With principal building 	$100.00 per 1,000 square feet of GFA or part thereof 
 Without principal building 	$100.00 per 1,000 square feet lot area or part thereof 
 Exterior sign application only 	$100.00 
 Outdoor café only 	$100.00 
Extension of COA approval 	$200.00 
SPECIAL MEETING REQUESTED BY APPLICANT 	$700.00 
 
[Amended 3-23-2008 by Ord. No. 05-033; 4-23-2008 by Ord. No. 08-046; 8-12-2009 by Ord. No. 09-091]  
ARTICLE V - Zoning and Design Standards 
 
§ 345-34. - Zoning districts. 
For the purpose of this Chapter, the City of Jersey City is hereby divided into the following zoning districts and shown on the Zoning Map: 
A.  R-1 One and Two Family Housing; 
B.  R-1A One and Two Family Housing; [Added 1-24-2007 by Ord. No. 06-163; 12-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-149] 
C.  R-1F One and Two Family Housing; 
[Added 9-11-2007 by Ord. No. 07-156] 
D.  R-2 Multi-Family Attached Housing; 
E.  R-3 Multi-Family Mid-Rise Housing; 
F.  R-4 Multi-Family High-Rise Housing; 
G.  NC Neighborhood Commercial; 
H.  O/R Office/Residential; 
I.  CBD Central Business District; 
J.  HC Highway Commercial; 
K.  C/A Commercial/Automotive; 
L.  Marion Works Office/Residential Overlay District; 
[Added 5-18-2005 by Ord. No. 05-052] 
M.  I Industrial; 
N.  PI Port Industrial; 
O.  U University; 
P.  M Medical; 
Q.  G Government; 
R.  P/OS Parks/Open Space; 
S.  WPD Waterfront Planned Development; 
T.  C Cemetery; 
U.  H Historic District; 
V.  DT Destination Tourism.  
§ 345-35. - Zoning map. 
The boundaries of these zoning districts are established on the map entitled "City of Jersey City Zoning Map" originally adopted by Council on April 11, 2001 by Ord. No. 01-042. This map is amended periodically. The current map is in on file and available for public inspection and/or purchase at the Division of City Planning, 30 Montgomery Street, Suite 1400, Jersey City, New Jersey. 
  
§ 345-36. - Interpretation of boundaries. 
A.  Zoning district boundary lines are intended to follow street center lines, railroad rights-of-way and lot lines as they exist on lots of record at the time of enactment of this chapter unless otherwise indicated by dimensions on the Zoning Map. Any dimensions shown shall be in feet and measured horizontally and, when measured from a street, shall be measured from the street right-of-way line even if that same street is the location of a zoning district line along its center line. The exact location of any disputed zoning district boundary line shall be determined by the Board of Adjustment. The zoning standards, controls and designations apply to every structure, lot and use within each district, and the district lines extend vertically in both directions from ground level. The district boundary lines shown to terminate at the pierhead line should be continued in a straight line out to the City limits, should these water areas require a district interpretation. 
B.  Boundaries indicated as following or approximately following shorelines shall be construed as following such shorelines but, in the event of change in the shoreline, shall be construed as moving with the actual shoreline. Boundaries indicated as following or approximately following City lines shall be construed as following such City lines. 
C.  If there is question regarding any zone boundary, the zoning map as referenced and attached hereto shall be used to determine the exact boundary line.  
§ 345-37. - Vacating a street or other public right-of-way. 
Where a vacated street or other public right-of-way is bounded on both sides by different zoning districts, the former center line of the vacated right-of-way shall be considered the zoning district boundary line.  
§ 345-38. - Redevelopment areas. 
[Amended 9-12-2012 by Ord. No. 12-112 ; 2-13-2013 by Ord. No. 13-009 ] 
A.  In any area officially declared and delineated as a redevelopment area by duly adopted ordinances, the standards and designations contained in the Redevelopment Plans for such legally adopted plans shall take precedence over any standards contained within this Chapter. The only exception to this provision shall apply to the Site Plan approval requirements of the Planning Board. All redevelopment plan approval procedures within redevelopment plans shall be revised to be consistent with the following procedure and requirements: 
1.  Prior to commencement of construction, architectural drawings and site plans with detailed specifications for the construction and/or rehabilitation of improvements to the area shall be submitted by the developer to the Planning Board of the City of Jersey City for review and approval so that compliance of such plans with the redevelopment requirements and objectives can be determined. Site plan review shall be conducted by the Planning Board pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. Applications may be submitted for the entire project or in any number of phases. Final Site Plan approval for any phase shall entitle an applicant to building permits. 
2.  As part of any Final Site Plan approval, the Planning Board may require a developer to furnish performance guarantees pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53 et seq. Such performance guarantees shall be in favor of the City in a form approved by the Jersey City Corporation Counsel. The amount of any such performance guarantees shall be determined by the City Engineer and shall be sufficient to assure completion of on- and off-site improvements within one (1) year of final site plan approval. 
Where the standards and controls of the Plans do not provide alterations to the provisions of this chapter, those provisions of this Chapter that remain unchanged shall prevail. 
B.  Definitions as found in §345-1 shall apply to all zones and all Redevelopment Plan Areas citywide.  
§ 345-39. - Variances and waivers. 
Any deviation from a provision of this Chapter which is identified as a design standard shall require a waiver by the reviewing board from the specific design standard. Any other deviation from a standard contained in this Chapter shall require a variance from the specific standard in accordance with the Municipal Land Use Law.  
§ 345-40. - R-1 One and Two Family Housing District. 
 
A.  Purpose. 
[Amended 9-10-2003 by Ord. No. 03-113] 
1.  The purpose of this district is to accommodate existing housing and encourage compatible in-fill development with detached [Deleted 3-14-2007 by Ord. No. 07-036] one- and two-family homes that preserve the streetscape, utilize on-street parking where the frontages are narrow and maintain the low-rise character of the area. 
2.  An intended consequence of this designation is preserving the integrity of residential neighborhoods, limiting non-residential uses to appropriate areas, increasing the availability of community resources and reinforcing the viability of existing neighborhood districts. 
 
B.  Permitted principal uses are as follows: 
1.  One family dwellings. 
2.  Dwellings with two dwelling units. 
3.  Houses of worship. 
4.  Parks and playgrounds. 
5.  Essential services. 
6.  Schools. 
7.  Governmental uses. 
8.  Conversions of first floor commercial to a single residential unit per commercial unit converted, in addition to and regardless of the number of existing residential units (Provided, however, that the original storefront character including window configuration shall be maintained or restored as per the 1938 Tax Assessor's photo). 
[Amended 9-10-2003 by Ord. No. 03-113] 
9.  Assisted living residences. 
10.  Nursing homes. 
11.  Senior housing. 
12.  Public utilities, except that natural gas transmission lines shall be prohibited. 
[Added 12-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-164] 
C.  Uses incidental and accessory to the principal use, such as 
[Amended 3-14-2007 by Ord. No. 07-036]: 
1.  Private garages in accordance with R-1 bulk standards. 
2.  Off-street parking (See also 345-70 Off Street Parking and Loading). 
3.  Fences and walls (See 345-67 for specific fence standards). 
4.  Meeting rooms, recreation areas and similar uses normally associated with houses of worship. 
5.  Home occupations (See 345-60.G.2. Standards for Specific Accessory Uses. a. Home Occupations). 
6.  Swimming pools (See 345-60.G.2.b for specific standards). 
7.  Signs (See 345-68 for specific standards). 
8.  Decks and patios (See 345-60.G.2.c for specific standards). 
D.  Conditional Uses. 
[Added 10-13-2010 by Ord. No. 10-125] 
1.  Mortuaries. 
2.  Medical Offices, only along the west side of Palisade Avenue between Saint Paul's Avenue and Waverly Street, limited to the ground floor. Conditional use application to the Planning Board shall be required for a new medical office or the expansion of an existing medical office, subject to the following standards and conditions: 
a.  No Ambulatory care facility, diagnostic center, rehabilitation center, or narcotic and drug abuse treatment center shall be permitted 
b.  Staff offices directly associated with ground floor medical office may be located on the second floor of the building that houses the medical office, provided that no examining rooms or any other patient services shall be located on the second floor. 
c.  For adaptive reuse of an existing building: 
1)  The existing lot and structure shall be considered conforming with respect to area, yard, bulk and height, provided that where 3-story structures already exist above an uninhabited basement area, no additional stories shall be created by lowering the basement floor. 
2)  Additions to an existing building shall conform to height and bulk standards for 1- and 2-family housing in the R-1 zone. 
3)  No parking shall be required for the Medical Office Use. 
d.  For new construction: 
1)  Minimum height: 2 stories. 
2)  Bulk standards shall be the same as for a 1-or 2-family house in the R-1 Zone. Parking standards for the R-1 Zone shall not apply to the Medical Office use. 
e.  Sign standards for both new and expanded medical office use along Palisade Avenue shall be as follows: 
1)  One (1) building sign pertaining to the Medical Office use shall be permitted at the ground floor level, not to exceed 5% of the area of the ground floor facade, or 10 square feet, whichever is smaller. 
2)  One rectangular freestanding sign shall be permitted, to not exceed 24 inches in width and 12 inches in height The top of the freestanding sign structure shall not be more than 5 feet in height from grade at the base of the sign, which grade shall not be raised for the purpose of increasing the height of the sign. 
3)  No sign shall be internally lit 
E.  Bulk Standards for One and Two Family Dwellings. 
[Amended 1-24-2007 by Ord. No. 07-009; 3-14-2007 by Ord. No. 07-036; 5-23-2007 by Ord. No. 07-065; 6-13-2007 by Ord. No. 07-103; 11-10-2010 by Ord. No. 10-132; 2-13-2013 by Ord. No. 13-010 ; 1-29-2014 by Ord. No. 14-005 ; 6-15-2016 by Ord. No. 16-096 ] 
1.  All existing lots of record at time of the adoption of this ordinance are considered conforming. 
2.  Minimum Lot Size: Two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet. 
3.  Minimum Lot Width: Twenty-five (25) feet. 
4.  Minimum Lot Depth: One hundred (100) feet. 
5.  Front Yard Setback: 
Front yard setback shall match the setback of the Front Primary Façade (see Article I for definition of Front Primary Façade) of the closest permitted use on either side of the subject parcel, provided that the building setback to be matched shall be closest to the predominant (most frequently occurring) setback on the blockfront. A current signed and sealed survey of the subject property showing adjacent building setbacks on both sides along with photos showing the entire blockfront to the left and right of the subject property must be provided to the Zoning Officer as part of the application for a building permit. 
6.  Side Yards: 
a.  Detached Buildings: 
Minimum setback for one side: Two feet. 
Minimum setback for both sides: Five feet one inch. 
b.  Attached Buildings: 
i.  If adjacent building has zero side yard setback (i.e., is built to the side lot line), a zero feet side yard may be permitted (i.e., new house may also be built to the side lot line). 
ii.  In the instance the adjacent building has a zero side yard setback but also has an existing window that is either directly on the side lot line or setback less than three feet, the new building may still build to the zero side lot line, starting at the front building line, but shall be required to setback the new building three feet, starting from one foot in front of the existing window, to the rear building line. 
c.  All side yard setback three feet or greater: The side yard starting at the front of the building shall be enclosed with a fence constructed in compliance with the design standards in 345-67.B. 
7.  Minimum Rear Yard: 
a.  The rear yard setback shall be added to the front yard setback (as determined above) to produce a total of not less than thirty-five (35) feet, provided however, that in no case shall a rear yard be less than twenty (20) feet. The mathematical formula for this calculation is as follows. 
X = required front yard setback 
Y = required rear yard setback 
X + Y = at least 35 feet 
For example: 
Front Yard 	Rear Yard 	Total 
0 	35 	35 
5 	30 	35 
10 	25 	35 
12 	23 	35 
15 or more feet 	20 	35 or more feet 
16 	20 	36 
17 	20 	37 
20 	20 	40 
Etc. 		
 
b.  Where lot depth exceeds one hundred (100) feet, the minimum rear yard as determined by the above standard shall be increased by fifty percent (50%) of the portion of the lot depth in excess of one hundred (100) feet. 
8.  Maximum Building Height: Three stories with a minimum floor to ceiling height of nine feet, a maximum floor to ceiling height of twelve (12) feet, and a maximum of five additional feet between the top of the third floor and the topmost point of any peaked roof (where a peaked roof is deemed appropriate under the design standards), provided that a minimum of two adjacent floors must be connected solely by means of a staircase internal to the unit, and provided that only one of the two internally connected floors may have a kitchen and/or a full bath. 
For the purposes of calculating the maximum allowable building height an additional twelve (12) inches is assumed between the ceiling of each story and the floor above in accordance with the chart below: 
Fl. to Ceiling ht 	Fl. to fl. ht 	Total bldg ht with flat roof 	Total ht with peaked roof 
9 ft 	10 ft 	30 ft 	35 ft 
10 ft 	11 ft 	33 ft 	38 ft 
11 ft 	12 ft 	36 ft 	41 ft 
12 ft 	13 ft 	39 ft 	44 ft 
 
In the case of varied floor to ceiling heights, the total permitted building height with a flat roof shall be the sum of the floor to ceiling heights of each floor plus twelve (12) inches per floor. The total permitted building height with a peaked roof is five (5) feet higher than with a flat roof. 
9.  Maximum Building Coverage: Sixty percent (60%). 
10.  Maximum Lot Coverage: Eighty-five percent (85%). 
11.  Maximum Accessory Building Height: Fifteen (15) feet. 
12.  Minimum Accessory Building Setbacks: 
Rear Yard: Seven and one half feet; 
Side Yard: Two feet. 
F.  Parking Standards for One and Two Family Dwellings. 
 
1.  Parking not required for lots with width of fifty (50) feet or less. Minimum required parking for lots with widths over fifty (50) feet: one space per dwelling unit. 
[Amended 6-13-2007 by Ord. No. 07-101] 
2.  No parking shall be permitted between the building line and the street line. Garages within the building line are permitted on lots under thirty (30) feet wide. 
3.  Maximum width of curb cut: ten (10) feet; Maximum width of driveway: ten (10) feet; Maximum garage door width: ten (10) feet; only a single curb cut is permitted along the front property line; two garage doors with a pier between them shall be permitted on corner lots where garage entrance(s) shall be located at the rear of the long side of the building. 
[Amended 6-13-2007 by Ord. No. 07-101] 
4.  Where there is construction of two or more homes with permitted driveways on adjacent lots, new driveways shall be located so as to maximize on-street parking space; no existing street tree shall be removed to create a driveway without prior approval by the Jersey City Division of Parks & Forestry. 
[Amended 6-13-2007 by Ord. No. 07-101] 
5.  Garages constructed as part of the ground floor of any new two family house shall be at least thirteen (13) feet wide and at least forty-four (44) feet deep except on corner lots as described in E.3 above; shall comprise at least fifty percent (50%) of the ground floor interior space; and shall accommodate at least two cars. 
[Added 5-23-2007 by Ord. No. 07-065] 
6.  Garages constructed as part of the ground floor of any new single-family house are subject to area and dimensional requirements noted above if and when the subject building is converted into a two-family home. One-car garages approved as part of a single-family home are to be designed to enable expansion in depth to accommodate no less than a 13-foot wide by 44-foot deep garage. 
[Added 11-20-2010 by Ord. No. 10-132] 
7.  Conversions of 1st Floor Commercial to Residential: No on-site parking required. 
[Amended 5-23-2007 by Ord. No. 07-065; 6-13-2007 by Ord. No. 07-101; 11-20-2010 by Ord. No. 10-132] 
G.  Bulk Standards for Houses of Worship. 
 
1.  Minimum Lot Size: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
2.  Minimum Lot Width: Fifty (50) feet. 
3.  Minimum Lot Depth: One hundred (100) feet. 
4.  Minimum Front Yard: Twenty (20) feet. 
5.  Minimum Side Yards: Ten (10) feet (one)/Twenty (20) feet (both). 
6.  Minimum Rear Yard: Ten (10) feet. 
7.  Maximum Building Height: Four stories and forty (40) feet, exclusive of spires, towers and other ornamental features. 
8.  Maximum Building Coverage: Fifty percent (50%). 
9.  Maximum Lot Coverage: Eighty percent (80%). 
H.  Bulk Standards for Schools and Governmental Uses. 
 
1.  Minimum Lot Size: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
2.  Minimum Lot Width: One hundred (100) feet. 
3.  Minimum Lot Depth: One hundred (100) feet. 
4.  Minimum Front Yard: Twenty (20) feet. 
5.  Minimum Side Yards: Ten (10) feet (one)/Twenty (20) feet (both). 
6.  Minimum Rear Yard: Ten (10) feet. 
7.  Maximum Building Height: Four stories and forty (40) feet. 
8.  Maximum Building Coverage: Fifty percent (50%). 
9.  Maximum Lot Coverage: Eighty percent (80%). 
I.  Parking Standards for Houses of Worship, Schools and Governmental Uses. 
 
1.  Houses of worship: One space for each ten (10) seats. One seat shall be considered twenty-four (24) inches in calculating the capacity of pews and benches. Houses of worship without seats or pews shall allow for ten (10) square feet per prayer space in calculating space and shall provide parking at a rate of one stall for each one hundred (100) square feet of prayer space. [Amended 9-10-2003 by Ord. No. 03-113; 3-13-2013 by Ord. No. 13-030 ] 
2.  Schools: One and a half spaces for each classroom from Kindergarten thru 12th grades. 
3.  Governmental uses: One space for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area of office space, plus one space for each official car assigned to the use. 
J.  Bulk and Parking Standards for Assisted Living Residences. 
 
1.  Minimum Lot Size: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
2.  Maximum Density: Ninety (90) bedrooms per acre. 
3.  Minimum Front Yard: Ten (10) feet. 
4.  Maximum Front Yard: Fifteen (15) feet. 
5.  Minimum Rear Yard: Forty (40) feet. 
6.  Minimum Side Yard: Fifteen (15) feet. 
7.  Maximum Height: Seven stories and seventy (70) feet. 
8.  Maximum Building Coverage: Sixty-five percent (65%). 
9.  Maximum Lot Coverage: Seventy-five percent (75%). 
10.  Parking: 0.2 spaces per bedroom. 
K.  Bulk and Parking Standards for Senior Housing. [Amended 5-11-2011 by Ord. No. 11-057] 
 
1.  Minimum Lot Size: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
2.  Minimum Lot Width: One hundred (100) feet. 
3.  Minimum Lot Depth: One hundred (100) feet. 
4.  Minimum Front Yard: Ten (10) feet. 
5.  Maximum Front Yard: Fifteen (15) feet. 
6.  Minimum Rear Yard: Forty (40) feet. 
7.  Minimum Side Yard: Fifteen (15) feet. 
8.  Maximum Building Height: Seven stories and seventy (70) feet. 
9.  Maximum Building Coverage: Sixty-five percent (65%). 
10.  Maximum Lot Coverage: Seventy-five percent (75%). 
11.  Minimum Parking: 0.2 spaces per bedroom. 
L.  Bulk and Parking Standards for Nursing Homes. 
 
1.  Minimum Lot Size: Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. 
2.  Minimum Lot Width: Two hundred (200) feet. 
3.  Minimum Lot Depth: One hundred (100) feet. 
4.  Minimum Front Yard: Fifteen (15) feet. 
5.  Minimum Side Yards: Ten (10) feet (one)/Twenty (20) feet (both). 
6.  Minimum Rear Yard: Thirty (30) feet. 
7.  Maximum Building Height: Four stories and forty (40) feet. 
8.  Maximum Building Coverage: Fifty percent (50%). 
9.  Maximum Lot Coverage: Seventy-five percent (75%). 
10.  Parking: 0.25 spaces per bed. 
M.  Conditional Use Standards for Mortuaries. 
 
1.  Minimum Lot Size: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
2.  Minimum Lot Width: One hundred (100) feet. 
3.  Minimum Lot Depth: One hundred (100) feet. 
4.  Minimum Front Yard: Twenty (20) feet. 
5.  Maximum Front Yard: Thirty (30) feet. 
6.  Minimum Side Yard: Ten (10) feet (one), Twenty (20) feet (both). 
7.  Minimum Rear Yard: Ten (10) feet. 
8.  Maximum Building Height: Four stories and forty (40) feet. 
9.  Maximum Building Coverage: Fifty percent (50%). 
10.  Maximum Lot Coverage: Eighty percent (80%). 
11.  Parking: One space per employee and one space per every five square feet of floor area exclusive of administrative and preparation areas.  
§ 345-40.1. - R-1A One and Two Family Housing District. 
[Added 1-24-2007 by Ord. No. 06-163; amended 4-28-2010 by Ord. No. 10-054; 5-27-2015 by Ord. No. 15-065 ] 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this district is to preserve the pattern, quality, and architectural individuality of the existing detached one- and two-family homes and to discourage subdivision and demolition. This district is similar to the R-1 zone except that it is intended to protect the character of streets where larger houses are typical and the predominant lot size is larger than the standard 25 × 100 lot size for Jersey City. 
B.  Permitted principal uses are as follows: 
1.  One-family dwellings. 
2.  Dwellings with two (2) dwelling units. 
C.  Uses incidental and accessory to the principal use, such as: 
1.  Private garages. 
2.  Off-street parking. 
3.  Fences and walls. 
4.  Home occupations. 
5.  Swimming pools. 
6.  Decks and patios. 
E.  Bulk standards for one- and two-family dwellings. 
1.  Minimum lot size: Four thousand (4,000) square feet. 
2.  Minimum lot width: Forty (40) feet. 
3.  Minimum lot depth: One hundred (100) feet. 
4.  Front yard setback: Predominant setback shall apply. 
5.  Side yards: Minimum of five (5) feet on both sides. 
6.  Minimum rear yard: Thirty (30) feet. 
7.  Maximum building height: Three (3) stories and thirty-five (35) feet; 
8.  Maximum building coverage: Fifty-five percent (55%). 
9.  Maximum lot coverage: Seventy-five percent (75%). 
10.  Maximum accessory building height: Fifteen (15) feet. 
11.  Minimum accessory building setbacks: 
Rear yard: Three (3) feet; 
Side yard: Two (2) feet. 
F.  Parking standards for one- and two-family dwellings. 
1.  Minimum required parking: One (1) space per dwelling unit. 
2.  No parking shall be permitted between the building line and the street line. Garages are required to be located within the rear yard setback. 
3.  Maximum width of driveway: Ten (10) feet.  
§ 345-40.6. - R-1F One and Two Family Housing District. 
[Added 9-11-2007 by Ord. No. 07-156] 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this district is to preserve the pattern, quality, and architectural individuality of the existing detached one- and two-family homes and to discourage subdivision and demolition. This district is similar to the R-1 zone except that it is intended to protect clusters of larger on lot sizes that are larger than the standard 25x100 lot size for Jersey City. 
B.  Permitted principal uses are as follows: 
1.  One family dwellings. 
2.  Dwellings with two dwelling units. 
C.  Uses incidental and accessory to the principal use, such as: 
1.  Private garages. 
2.  Off-street parking. 
3.  Fences and walls. 
5.  Home occupations. 
6.  Swimming pools. 
8.  Decks and patios. 
D.  Conditional Uses. 
1.  Dwellings with three units. 
E.  Bulk Standards for One, Two, and Three Family Dwellings. 
1.  Minimum Lot Size: Four thousand (4,000) square feet. 
2.  Minimum Lot Width: Forty (40) feet. 
3.  Minimum Lot Depth: One hundred (100) feet. 
4.  Front Yard Setback: Predominant setback shall apply. 
5.  Side Yards: Minimum of five feet on both sides. 
6.  Minimum Rear Yard: Thirty (30) feet. 
7.  Maximum Building Height: three stories and thirty-five (35) feet; for three-family buildings, see conditional uses standards for height. 
8.  Maximum Building Coverage: Fifty-five percent (55%). 
9.  Maximum Lot Coverage: Seventy-five percent (75%). 
10.  Maximum Accessory Building Height: Fifteen (15) feet. 
11.  Minimum Accessory Building Setbacks: 
Rear Yard: Three (3) feet; 
Side Yard: Two (2) feet. 
F.  Parking Standards for One, Two, and Three Family Dwellings. 
1.  Minimum required parking: one space per dwelling unit. 
2.  No parking shall be permitted between the building line and the street line. Garage entrances must be on the rear wall of the building or as part of a detached or attached fully enclosed garage. 
3.  Maximum width of driveway: Ten (10) feet. 
G.  Conditional Use Standards for Three-family homes. 
1.  Homes must be designed to appear as single family dwellings. Three-family buildings must have only one front entry. 
2.  Three parking spaces must be provided on site. Garage entrances must be on the rear wall of the building or as part of a detached or attached fully enclosed garage. 
3.  Homes must be designed to include architectural elements such as gables, front porches, transoms, cornices, divided light windows, dormers, bay windows, oriels, turrets, and other elements found within the existing streetscape. 
4.  Roof pitches must be designed to be compatible with adjacent houses by using prevalent slopes and angles. 
5.  All exterior walls are to be treated with the same materials and architectural detail; although, the treatment of side and rear walls maybe simplified. 
6.  Design elements shall have compatible rhythm and repetition with an emphasis on materials and colors prevalent in the neighborhood. 
7.  Building height shall be visually compatible with adjacent buildings. The size, scale, and height of new construction shall relate to the prevailing pattern of the streetscape. 
8.  Buildings are to be sited on their lot so that their placement and relationship to surrounding property is equivalent to the existing pattern of development on the street. 
9.  Materials must reflect the predominant traditional building materials in use on existing homes. Where appropriate, the use of multiple materials maybe encouraged. However, use of EFIS, vinyl siding, light colored brick, stucco, brick-face, stone-face, and other inappropriate cladding materials is strictly prohibited.  
§ 345-41. - R-2 Multi-Family Attached Housing (four stories or less) District. 
 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of the multi-family attached housing (four stories or less) district is to recognize the existing pattern of housing development along Palisades Avenue to preserve the low-rise character of the areas and to promote compatible infill development. 
B.  Permitted principal uses are as follows: 
[Amended 12-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-164; 2-27-2013 by Ord. No. 13-022 ; 5-23-2018 by Ord. No. 18-046 ] 
1.  Townhouses. 
2.  Houses of worship. 
3.  Parks and playgrounds. 
4.  Essential services. 
5.  Schools. 
6.  Governmental uses. 
7.  Conversions of first floor commercial to a residential unit. 
8.  Assisted living residences. 
9.  Nursing homes. 
10.  Senior housing. 
11.  Public utilities, except that natural gas transmission lines shall be prohibited. 
C.  Uses incidental and accessory to the principal use, such as: 
 
1.  Private garages within the building envelope, where on-site parking is permitted. 
2.  Off-street parking in accordance with R-2 District parking standards. (See also 345-70 Off Street Parking and Loading) 
3.  Fences and walls. (See 345-67 for specific fence standards) 
4.  Meeting rooms, cafeterias, recreation areas and similar uses normally associated with schools, houses of worship and other public buildings. 
5.  Home occupations. (See 345-60.G.2. Standards for Specific Accessory Uses. a. Home Occupations). 
6.  Swimming pools. (See 345-60.G.2.b for specific standards). 
7.  Signs. (See 345-68 for specific standards). 
D.  Conditional Uses. 
1.  Mortuaries. 
E.  Bulk Standards for Townhouses. 
[Amended 4-25-2007 by Ord. No. 07-064] 
1.  Minimum Lot Size: Two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet; except on Block 234 where the minimum lot size shall be the existing lot size at the time of adoption of this ordinance. 
2.  Minimum Lot Width: Twenty-five (25) feet; except on Block 234 where the minimum lot width shall be the existing lot width at the time of adoption of this ordinance. 
3.  Minimum Lot Depth: One hundred (100) feet; except on Block 234 where the minimum lot depth shall be the existing lot depth at the time of adoption of this ordinance. 
4.  Front Yard Setback: Predominant setback shall apply. 
5.  Maximum Side Yard: Zero (0); except three feet required if adjacent lot with windows along the side wall, starting from one foot before the frontmost existing window. 
6.  Minimum Rear Yard: Thirty (30) feet. 
7.  Maximum Building Height: Four stories and forty (40) feet. 
8.  Maximum Density: Fifty-five (55) units per acre; except on Block 234 where the maximum density shall be ninety (90) units per acre. 
9.  Maximum Building Coverage: Sixty percent (60%); except on Block 234 where the maximum building coverage shall be one hundred percent (100%). 
10.  Maximum Lot Coverage: Eighty percent (80%); except on Block 234 where the maximum lot coverage shall be one hundred percent (100%). 
11.  Maximum Accessory Building Height: Fifteen (15) feet. 
12.  Minimum Accessory Building Setbacks: 
Rear Yard: Seven and one-half feet. 
Side Yard: Two feet. 
F.  Parking Standards for Townhouses. 
 
1.  One space per unit for dwellings with up to three bedrooms. 
2.  One and one-half spaces per unit for dwellings with three or more bedrooms. 
3.  No off-street parking shall be permitted on a lot with a width of fifty (50) feet or less. Lots with a width of more than fifty (50) feet prior to subdivision and/or development shall provide the required off-street parking. 
 
G.  Bulk and Parking Standards for Houses of Worship, Schools and Governmental Uses. See R-1 Bulk and Parking Standards. 
H.  Bulk and Parking Standards for Assisted Living Residences, Nursing Homes and Senior Housing. See R-1 Bulk and Parking Standards. 
I.  Conditional Use Standards for Mortuaries. See R-1 Conditional Use Standards.  
§ 345-41A. - R-2D Palisade Avenue Mixed Use Multi-Family Attached Housing District. 
[Added 5-23-2018 by Ord. No. 18-046 ] 
A.  Purpose. 
1.  The purpose of this district is to recognize the existence and importance of the historic mixed use, neighborhood business district along Palisade Avenue. Palisade Avenue was one of the first thoroughfares to be constructed in Hudson County and is surrounded by some of the earliest neighborhoods established in Jersey City. The unique location of Palisade Avenue allowed Jersey City to establish a connection to Hoboken/New York City and Northern Hudson County. The purpose of this zoning is to promote the historical pattern along Palisade Avenue and continue to permit a mix of uses consistent with major corridors. 
B.  Permitted principal uses are as follows: 
1.  Ground floor and upper floors: 
a.  Residential and/or live/work. 
i.  For lots that are 25 feet and less in width: 
1.  Permitted on all floors, provided that in no instance shall there be a garage on the ground floor or on-site parking. 
ii.  For lots that are greater than 25 feet in width: 
1.  Permitted above ground floor. 
2.  Residential uses are permitted on the ground floor, provided that ground floor residential uses are located 25 linear feet from any lot line fronting on a right-of-way. 
3.  Live/work uses permitted on the ground floor, provided that they have a dedicated entrance from the right-of-way. 
b.  Art galleries; 
c.  Health clubs; 
d.  Offices; 
e.  Theaters and museums; 
f.  Education facilities, public and private; 
g.  Child day care centers; 
h.  Adult day care centers. 
2.  Ground floor only: 
a.  Retail sales of goods and services. 
b.  Financial institutions without drive-thru facilities. 
c.  Restaurants, category one and two. 
3.  Government uses. 
4.  Parks and playgrounds. 
C.  Uses incidental and accessory to the principal use, such as: 
1.  Parking garages shall be located 25 feet from any lot line fronting on Palisade Avenue. 
2.  Fences and walls. 
3.  Signs. 
4.  Sidewalk cafes associated with category one and two restaurants. 
5.  TV, radio, and/or stereo systems accessory to bars and restaurants. 
6.  Live entertainment accessory to Category One restaurants only, subject to issuance of a "restaurant entertainment license" by the Division of Commerce and the restrictions as to decibel level, hours of operation, and location of entertainment providers attached to that license (see Ordinance No. 12-001). 
D.  Bulk standards for R-2D Palisade Avenue: 
1.  All existing lots of record at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this section derived are considered conforming. 
2.  Minimum lot size: 2,500 square feet. 
a.  Minimum lot width: 25 feet. 
b.  Minimum lot depth: 100 feet. 
3.  Maximum density: 75 units an acre. 
4.  Setback standards: 
a.  Front yard setback: None. 
b.  Minimum side yard: None; except where existing adjacent building has windows less than three feet from the side lot line then three feet required starting from one foot in front of the first window to the rear building line. 
c.  Minimum rear yard: Five feet at the ground floor level, 30 feet for all levels above the ground floor. 
5.  Coverage standard: 
a.  Maximum lot coverage: 100%. 
b.  Maximum building coverage: 95%. 
c.  All exposed rooftop shall provide an inaccessible true green roof. 
d.  All lots where there is less than 100% lot coverage, all areas shall be covered using one of the following materials: 
i.  Reinforced lawn; 
ii.  Ground cover; 
iii.  Rain garden; 
iv.  Bioswales; 
v.  Plants that are native, non-invasive and proven drought resistant in an urban environment. 
6.  Height: 
a.  Maximum building height; 
i.  Four stories, 45 feet on lots 50 feet wide or less. 
ii.  Five stories, 55 feet on lots greater than 50 feet wide, provided that the fifth story is setback ten feet from the front of the primary street frontage. 
b.  Rooftop decks must be setback a minimum of five feet from the side property line and a minimum ten feet setback from the front and rear of the roof. Rooftop deck shall not cover more than 30 percent of the roof inclusive of the setback requirements herein. Where an inaccessible green roof is installed for stormwater detention, a rooftop deck is permitted an increase in coverage but shall not cover more that 80 percent of the roof, inclusive of the setback requirements herein, and provided that the remaining areas of the roof is a green roof. 
c.  Rooftop appurtenances shall be no larger than 20 percent of the roof surface area. 
E.  Parking standards for R-2D Palisade Avenue uses: 
1.  No on-site parking is required for additions on structures greater than 50 years old or for adaptive reuse of existing buildings. 
2.  No parking is required or permitted for lots 50 feet wide or less. 
3.  Parking is required for new construction on lots 75 feet wide and greater subject to the following requirements: 
a.  In no instance shall parking be permitted between the front building line and street line. 
b.  Garage placement shall be setback a minimum of four feet from any lot line fronting a right-of-way. 
c.  Maximum width of curb cut: 14 feet; and in no instance shall the siting of a curb cut preclude the retention or creation of at least three on-street parking spaces along width of the lot for that portion of Palisade Avenue. 
d.  Minimum parking requirements for residential uses: 
Studio units: No parking required 
One- and two-bedroom units: 0.5 spaces per unit 
Three bedroom and up units: One space per unit 
e.  Offices: a minimum of one space per 1,000 square feet, excluding the first 5,000 square feet of ground floor area. 
f.  Retail sales of goods and services: a minimum of one space per 600 square feet, excluding the first 5,000 square feet of ground floor area. 
g.  Financial institutions: a minimum of one space per 1,000 square feet, excluding the first 5,000 square feet of ground floor area. 
h.  Restaurants: a minimum of one space per four seats, excluding the first 5,000 square feet of ground floor area. 
i.  Theaters and museums: a minimum of one space per four seats, excluding the first 5,000 square feet area. 
j.  Educational facilities above ground floor: a minimum of two spaces per classroom, plus two spaces per 20 seats for each auditorium, gymnasium and lecture hall. 
k.  Adult day care and child care: A minimum of one space for loading and/or pick-up drop off. If the lot is under 50 feet wide, a designated on street parking space shall be proposed in accordance with the approval from the Division of Engineering. 
4.  Curb cuts are discouraged along Palisade Avenue. If the property is on a corner lot, the location for the curb cut shall be on the side street 
5.  Parking spaces, driveways, and any type of patio shall be constructed using pervious paving materials. The following are acceptable materials: 
a.  Interlocking concrete blocks; 
b.  Permeable pavers; 
c.  Open-celled pavers; 
d.  Porous pavement, concrete or asphalt; 
e.  Gravel; 
f.  Reinforced lawn; or 
g.  Other material deemed appropriate by Planning/Zoning Board. 
F.  Design standards. 
1.  Chain link fences are prohibited. 
2.  Buildings shall be designed contextually to present a harmonious appearance in terms of architectural style and materials and shall be encouraged to incorporate historic elements found throughout the surrounding area. 
3.  The width and height of windows, doors and entries, including porches and stoops, must harmonize in scale and proportion with the width and height of windows, doors and entries of adjacent and surrounding buildings. 
4.  The roof form and slope of a building or structure shall be consistent with the prevailing block or corridor pattern.  
§ 345-42. - R-3 Multi-Family Mid-Rise District. 
[Amended 3-10-2010 by Ord. No. 10-027; 4-8-2015 by Ord. No. 15-042 ] 
 
A.  Purpose. 
1.  The purpose of the multi-family mid-rise district is to provide for a broad range of multi-family housing in areas served by arterial streets, mass transit, neighborhood commercial uses and community facilities. 
2.  The purpose of this zone is to relate the building to the street and not create the type of development that centers the tower in a sea of parking, disconnecting the building from the street. 
3.  The multi-family mid-rise district contains mid-rise buildings of three to eight stories. 
B.  Permitted principal uses are as follows: 
[Added 12-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-164; amended 5-11-2016 by Ord. No. 16-071 ] 
 
1.  Mid-rise apartment buildings, (see 345-6 for definition). 
2.  Townhouses. 
3.  Three and four family detached dwellings. 
4.  Houses of worship. 
5.  Parks and playgrounds. 
6.  Essential services. 
7.  Schools. 
8.  Governmental uses. 
9.  Office uses, including medical offices for no more than two practitioners, as part of the ground floor of mid-rise apartment buildings along John F. Kennedy Boulevard. 
10.  Assisted living residences. 
11.  Nursing homes. 
12.  Senior housing. 
13.  Public utilities, except that natural gas transmission lines shall be prohibited. 
14.  Groundfloor retail, limited to new construction on corner lots. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-042, adopted April 8, 2015, amended the Code by adding a new subsection B.13. In order to prevent duplication of subsection numbers, the subsection has been numbered as B.14 at the discretion of the editor. 
C.  Uses incidental and accessory to the principal use, such as: 
 
1.  Private garages. 
2.  Off-street parking. 
3.  Fences and walls. 
4.  Meeting rooms, cafeterias, recreation areas and similar uses normally associated with schools, houses of worship and other public buildings. 
5.  Home occupations. 
6.  Swimming pools. 
7.  Recreation areas as part of residential developments. 
8.  Signs. 
D.  Conditional Uses. 
1.  Mortuaries. 
E.  Bulk Standards for Townhouses, Three- and Four-Family Detached Dwellings, and Mid-Rise Apartments. 
[Amended 1-27-2016 by Ord. No. 16-008 ] 
 
1.  Required Lot Size: 
a.)  Any lot existing at the time of adoption of this section with an area of at least two thousand (2,000) square feet shall be considered conforming, provided that such lot is isolated (i.e., no adjacent, vacant lot(s) exist) and provided that it is not held in common ownership with any adjacent lot/parcel fronting on the same street. 
b.)  Lots with an area of six thousand (6,000) square feet or more and a width of at least sixty (60) feet shall not be subdivided without application to a land use board for variance approval. 
c.)  Townhouses with three or four dwelling units are permitted on isolated lots, or lots approved by subdivision, with an area of at least two thousand (2,000) square feet, but not more than three thousand (3,000) square feet, and where the existing houses on both adjacent lots are built to the side lot line(s) (use location of single adjacent house for corner lots). 
d.)  Detached three- and four-family dwellings are permitted on isolated lots, or lots approved by subdivision, with an area from two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet to six thousand (6,000) square feet where existing houses on either or both adjacent lots are not built to the side lot line(s). 
e.)  Mid-rise apartment buildings are permitted on any lot six thousand (6,000) square feet or greater. 
2.  Maximum density shall apply to mid-rise apartment buildings in accordance with the following table: 
GRADUATED DENSITY TABLE APPLICABLE TO MID-RISE APARTMENT BUILDINGS 
Lot Dimensions 	Lot Size 	Max. dwelling units/acre* 
60×100 
  
75×100 
  
  
100×100 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
100×200 
  
  	 6,000 
 7,000 
 7,500 
 8,000 
 9,000 
10,000 
11,000 
12,000 
13,000 
14,000 
15,000 
16,000 
17,000 
18,000 
19,000 
20,000 
21,000 
22,000 	 60 
 65 
 70 
 75 
 80 
 85 
 90 
 95 
100 
105 
110 
115 
120 
125 
130 
135 
140 
145 
 
*Applicable density for any interim lot size shall apply and may be calculated as needed, rounding down for fractions less than 0.5 and up for fractions of 0.5 or greater. 
Lots with greater than twenty-two thousand (22,000) square feet shall be capped at one hundred forty-five (145) units per acre. 
3.  Minimum Lot Width: 
a.)  Townhouses: Twenty (20) feet. 
b.)  Three- and four-family detached dwellings: Twenty-five (25) feet. 
c.)  Mid-rise apartment buildings: Sixty (60) feet. 
d.)  Any use with ground floor retail: Minimum lot width shall be fifty (50) feet or the minimum for the use, whichever is greater. 
4.  Minimum Lot Depth: One hundred (100) feet. 
5.  Required Front Yard: 
a.)  Townhouses: Predominant setback shall apply. 
b.)  Three- and four-family detached dwellings: Front yard setback shall match the setback of the primary building façade of the closest permitted use on either side of the subject parcel, provided that the building setback to be matched shall be closest to the predominant (most frequently occurring) setback on the blockfront. A current signed and sealed survey of the subject property showing adjacent building setbacks on both sides along with photos showing the entire blockfront to the left and right of the subject property must be provided to the Zoning Officer as part of the application for a building permit (see Article I for definition of "primary building façade"). 
c.)  Mid-rise apartment buildings: Shall match the front yard setback of the primary building façade of adjacent building(s), if any, or a minimum of five (5) feet and a maximum of ten (10) feet shall apply if no adjacent building. 
6.  Minimum Rear Yard: 
a.)  Townhouses: Thirty (30) feet. 
b.)  Three- and four-family detached dwellings: R-1 standards for one- and two-family dwellings shall apply. 
c.)  Mid-rise apartment buildings: Ground floor or single floor partially above grade parking garages may be built to the rear lot line in accordance with height restrictions (see 8.c below), and all floors above the garage shall provide a minimum of thirty (30) feet. 
7.  Required Side Yard: 
a.)  Townhouses: Zero required (i.e., must be built to the side lot line) except three (3) feet required if there is an adjacent house with windows along the side wall, starting from one (1) foot before the frontmost existing window; 
b.)  Three- and four-family detached dwellings: Minimum two (2) feet one (1) side, three (3) feet other side, five (5) feet total both sides on lots less than thirty-seven (37) feet in width; minimum five (5) feet on each side on lots thirty-seven (37) feet in width or greater. 
c.)  Mid-rise apartment buildings: Parking garage level(s) may be built to the side lot line, and residential floors shall provide a minimum of five (5) feet on each side. 
8.  Minimum and Maximum Building Height: 
a.)  Townhouses and three- and four-family detached dwellings: Three (3) stories minimum and four (4) stories and forty-two (42) feet maximum including above-grade parking level, and a minimum floor to ceiling height of nine (9) feet for above-grade entirely residential floors, and a maximum floor to ceiling height of eight (8) feet for a parking level and any residential unit located on the same level as parking. 
b.)  Mid-rise apartment buildings: Three (3) stories minimum and eight (80 stories and eighty-five (85) feet maximum including above-grade parking levels, and a minimum floor to ceiling height of nine (9) feet for all residential floors, and a maximum floor to ceiling height of eight (8) feet for a parking level and any residential unit located on the same level as parking. 
c.)  No wall/elevation of any parking structure connected to a mid-rise apartment building shall rise more than ten (10) feet above the existing grade. 
9.  Maximum Building Coverage: 
a.)  Townhouses and three- and four-family detached dwellings: Sixty percent (60%). 
b.)  Mid-rise apartment buildings: Up to one hundred percent (100%) building coverage shall be permitted only for a parking garage level at grade or partially below grade and where the front yard standard requires between 0 and 4.99 feet (see front yard standard); sixty-five percent (65%) for all residential floors above the garage on lots of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or less; and seventy-five percent (75%) for all residential floors on lots over ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
10.  Maximum Lot Coverage: 
a.)  Townhouses and three- and four-family detached dwellings: Eighty percent (80%). 
b.)  Mid-rise apartment buildings: Up to one hundred percent (100%) lot coverage shall be permitted only for a parking area or parking garage at grade or partially below grade and where the front yard setback standard requires between 0 and 4.99 feet (see front yard standard) and where buffer requirements allow; seventy-five percent (75%) if parking is entirely below grade. 
11.  Maximum Accessory Building Height: Fifteen (15) feet. 
12.  Minimum Accessory Building Setbacks: 
Rear yard: Three (3) feet. 
Side yard: Two (2) feet. 
F.  Parking Standards for Townhouses and Three- and Four-Family Detached Dwellings: 
 
1.  On lots less than thirty-seven (37) feet in width the following shall apply: 
a.)  Parking is not required; a maximum of two (2) spaces are permitted. 
b.)  Maximum width of curb cut: Ten (10) feet; 
Maximum width of driveway: Ten (10) feet; 
Maximum garage door width: Ten (10) feet; 
Only a single curb cut is permitted along the front property line. 
c.)  All parking shall be contained within the building envelope and spaces may be located one behind the other. 
d.)  On corner lots, a parking garage located at the rear of the building may be accessed through the rear yard via a single ten-foot wide curb cut, or two (2) garage doors may be located along the rear portion the long side of the building and two (2) ten-foot wide driveways shall be separated by a two-foot wide pier and a curbed landscape bed. 
2.  On lots thirty-seven (37) feet in width or greater the following shall apply: 
a.)  One (1) space per dwelling unit is required. 
b.)  Garage doors shall not face the front of the lot. 
c.)  Except on corner lots, parking spaces shall be accessed by a single driveway, running from the front of the property along the side of the house, and the spaces shall be located either in the rear yard or in a garage, but not both. 
d.)  On corner lots, parking shall be accessed through the rear yard via a single curb cut. 
3.  Where there is construction of two (2) or more homes with permitted driveways on adjacent lots, new driveways shall be located so as to maximize on-street parking space; no existing street tree shall be removed to create a driveway without prior approval by the Jersey City Division of Parks & Forestry. Prior to approving any plan to remove a tree to create a driveway it shall be demonstrated that no other way to construct the driveway is feasible under the construction code. 
G.  Parking Standards for Mid-Rise Apartment Buildings: 
1.  None for efficiency units. 
2.  One-half (½) space for one-bedroom units. 
3.  One (1) space for units with two (2) or more bedrooms. 
4.  Office uses where permitted: none. 
5.  A minimum ten-foot wide vegetative landscape buffer is required between on-site surface parking areas for mid-rise apartment buildings and any adjacent residential zones of lower density than R-3 (includes R-2, R-l, R-1A, R-1F, and any other zones of similar low density yet to be adopted). 
H.  Parking Standards for Retail: one (1) space per six hundred (600) square feet, excluding the first five thousand (5,000) square feet of retail floor area. 
I.  Bulk and Parking Standards for Houses of Worship, Schools and Governmental Uses. See R-1 Bulk and Parking Standards. 
[Amended 12-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-164] 
J.  Bulk and Parking Standards for Assisted Living Residences Nursing Homes and Senior Housing. See R-1 Bulk and Parking Standards. 
K.  Conditional Use Standards for Mortuaries. See R-1 Conditional Use Standard.  
§ 345-43. - R-4 Multi-Family High-Rise District. 
 
A.  Purpose. 
1.  The purpose of the multi-family high-rise district is to accommodate low, medium and high-rise multi-family housing in appropriate locations that are served by mass transit, off-street parking and adequate public infrastructure. The location of these districts in close proximity to shopping, employment and recreational amenities is intended to promote an increased mix of uses, twenty-four (24) hour activity and pedestrian traffic characteristic of dense urban centers. 
2.  This district should not create a "tower in the park," type of development. This type of development centers the tower in a sea of parking disconnecting the building from the street. 
B.  Permitted principal uses are as follows: 
1.  Townhouses. 
2.  Mid-rise apartments. 
3.  High-rise apartments. 
4.  Schools. 
5.  Parks and playgrounds. 
6.  Essential services. 
7.  Governmental uses. 
8.  Houses of worship. 
9.  Retail sates of goods and services and offices as part of the ground floor of high-rise apartment buildings. 
10.  Assisted living residences. 
11.  Nursing homes. 
12.  Senior housing. 
C.  Uses incidental and accessory to the principal use, such as: 
1.  Private garages. 
2.  Off-street parking. 
3.  Fences and walls. 
4.  Meeting rooms, cafeterias, recreation areas and similar uses normally associated with schools, houses of worship and other public buildings. 
5.  Home occupations. 
6.  Swimming pools. 
7.  Recreation areas as part of residential developments. 
8.  Signs. 
D.  Conditional Uses. 
1.  Mortuaries. 
E.  Bulk Standards for High-Rise Apartments. [Amended 3-14-2012 by Ord. No. 12-025; 3-25-2015 by Ord. No. 15-031 ] 
 
1.  Minimum Lot Size: Sixty thousand (60,000) square feet. 
2.  Maximum Density: One hundred fifty (150) units per acre. 
3.  Minimum Lot Width: Three hundred (300) feet. 
4.  Minimum Lot Depth: Two hundred (200) feet. 
5.  Minimum Front Yard: Ten (10) feet. 
6.  Minimum Rear Yard: Twenty-five (25) feet. 
7.  Minimum Side Yard: Ten (10) feet. 
8.  Minimum Building Height: Eight (8) stories and eighty (80) feet. 
9.  Maximum Building Height: One hundred ten (110) feet. 
10.  Maximum Building Coverage: Sixty percent (60%). 
11.  Maximum Lot Coverage: Eighty-five percent (85%). 
F.  Parking Standards for High-Rise Apartments. [Amended 3-14-2012 by Ord. No. 12-025] 
1.  Minimum 0.5 parking spaces per dwelling unit. 
2.  Office and Retail Use where permitted: None. 
3.  A minimum buffer of ten (10) feet is required between on-site parking areas and adjacent R-1 and R-2 zones. 
G.  Bulk and Parking Standards for Townhouses. See R-2 Bulk and Parking Standards. 
 
H.  Bulk and Parking Standards for Mid-Rise Apartments. [Amended 3-14-2012 by Ord. No. 12-025; 3-25-2015 by Ord. No. 15-031 ] 
1.  Minimum Lot Size: Sixty thousand (60,000) square feet, provided all bulk and parking standards are met. 
2.  Maximum Density: 
Lot Dimensions 	Lot Size 	Max. dwelling units/acre* 
60 × 100 	6,000 	60 
	7,000 	65 
75 × 100 	7,500 	70 
	8,000 	75 
	9,000 	80 
100 × 100 	10,000 	85 
	11,000 	90 
	12,000 	95 
	13,000 	100 
	14,000 	105 
	15,000 	110 
	16,000 	115 
	17,000 	120 
	18,000 	125 
	19,000 	130 
100 × 200 	20,000 	135 
	21,000 	140 
	22,000 	145 
 
*Lots with greater than 22,000 sf shall be capped at 145 units per acre. 
3.  Minimum Lot Width: Sixty (60) feet. 
4.  Minimum Lot Depth: One hundred (100) feet. 
5.  Required Front Yard: Shall match the front yard setback of the primary building facade of adjacent building(s), if any, or a minimum of five (5) feet and a maximum of ten (10) feet shall apply if no adjacent building. 
6.  Minimum Rear Yard: Ground floor or single floor partially above grade parking garages may be built to the rear lot line in accordance with height restrictions, and all floors above the garage shall provide a minimum of thirty (30) feet. 
7.  Required Side Yard: Parking garage level(s) may be built to the side lot line, and residential floors shall provide a minimum of five (5) feet on each side. 
8.  Minimum and Maximum Building Height: Three (3) stories minimum and eight (8) stories and eighty-five (85) feet maximum including above-grade parking levels, and a minimum floor to ceiling height of nine (9) feet for all residential floors, and a maximum floor to ceiling height of eight (8) feet for a parking level and any residential unit located on the same level as parking. No wall/elevation of any parking structure connected to a mid-rise apartment building shall rise more than ten (10) feet above the existing grade. 
9.  Maximum Building Coverage: Up to one hundred (100) percent building coverage shall be permitted only for a parking garage level at grade or partially below grade and where the front yard standard requires between zero (0) and four and ninety-nine-hundredths (4.99) feet (see front yard standard); sixty-five (65) percent for all residential floors above the garage on lots of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or less; and seventy-five (75) percent for all residential floors on lots over ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
10.  Maximum Lot Coverage: Up to one hundred (100) percent lot coverage shall be permitted only for a parking area or parking garage at grade or partially below grade and where the front yard setback standard requires between zero (0) and four and ninety-nine-hundredths (4.99) feet (see front yard standard) and where buffer requirements allow; eighty-five (85) percent if parking is entirely below grade. 
11.  Maximum Accessory Building Height: Fifteen (15) feet. 
12.  Minimum Accessory Building Setbacks: 
a.  Rear yard: Three (3) feet. 
b.  Side yard: Two (2) feet. 
13.  Parking: 
a.  Minimum one-half (0.5) parking spaces per dwelling unit. 
b.  Office uses where permitted: none 
c.  A minimum ten (10) feet wide vegetative landscape buffer is required between on-site surface parking areas for mid-rise apartment buildings and any adjacent residential zones of lower density than R-3 (includes R-2, R-1, R-1A, R-1F, and any other zones of similar low density yet to be adopted). 
I.  Bulk and Parking Standards for Houses of Worship, Schools, and Governmental Uses. See R-1 Bulk and Parking Standards. 
J.  Bulk and Parking Standards for Assisted Living Residences, Nursing Homes and Senior Housing. See R-1 Bulk and Parking Standards except for height; height shall be in accordance with the height standard for high-rise apartments. [Amended 5-11-2011 by Ord. No. 11-057] 
K.  Conditional Use Standards for Mortuaries. See R-1 Conditional Use Standards.  
§ 345-44. - R-5 Low Rise Residential, Mixed Use Zone. 
[Added 2-8-2017 by Ord. No. 17-013 ] 
A.  Purpose: The purpose of this district is to provide development regulations contextual to the existing predominantly two- to four-story multifamily neighborhood with occasional retail venues. Moreover, the intent of the zoning regulations are to protect the historically low-rise nature of the neighborhood from inappropriate infill such as: buildings greater than four (4) stories, detached buildings, front yard parking, and ground floor garages on lots smaller than four thousand (4,000) square feet. Additionally, the purpose of the zoning in this district is to address and mitigate the impact the flooding in low laying vulnerable areas, and create a more resilient neighborhood for future generations. 
B.  Permitted Principal Uses: 
1.  Residential. 
2.  Retail sales of goods and services on the ground floor along Brunswick Street, Monmouth Street, or Coles Street, or other locations where there are existing, legal storefronts. 
3.  Professional offices and medical offices on the ground floor along Brunswick Street, Monmouth Street, or Cotes Street, or other locations where there are existing, legal storefronts. 
4.  Cafes on the ground floor along Brunswick Street, Monmouth Street, or Coles Street, or other locations where there are existing, legal storefronts. 
5.  Schools. 
6.  Governmental uses. 
7.  Houses of worship. 
8.  Parks and playgrounds. 
9.  Home occupations (see Subsection 345-60.I.2. Standards for Specific Accessory Uses, a. Home Occupations). 
10.  Live work. 
11.  Any building that can be dated back to 1890 shall not be demolished without written consent from the Historic Preservation Officer. It is within the Historic Preservation Officer's purview to refer the determination of the appropriateness of demolition to the Historic Preservation Commission. Any appeal of the Historic Preservation Officer or Historic Preservation Commission shall be reviewed by the Zoning Board of Adjustment. 
12.  Any combination of the above (with the exception that retail and office are limited to the criteria above in B.2 and B.3) 
C.  Bulk Standards: 
1.  All lots legally existing at the time of adoption of this section (2016) are now conforming. 
2.  Lot Standards: 
a.  Minimum Lot Size: One thousand eight hundred (1,800) square feet. 
b.  Minimum Lot Width: Eighteen (18) feet. 
c.  Minimum Lot Depth: One hundred (100) feet. 
3.  Setback Standards. 
a.  Minimum Front Yard Setback: Must meet adjacent structure setback closest to the predominant blockfront setback. 
b.  Minimum Rear Yard Setback: Thirty (30) feet. 
c.  Side Yard Setbacks: Zero, except where there a window exists on an adjacent structure. In that instance, the building must be setback a minimum three (3) feet one (1) inch, starting at least one (1) foot before the window. 
4.  Height: 
a.  Maximum Building Height: 
Streets with sixty-foot right-of-way or larger: Four (4) stories, forty-two (42) feet. 
Streets with less than sixty-foot right-of-way: Three (3) stories with a fourth floor setback a minimum of fifteen (15) feet from the front of the building. The total height permitted is forty-two (42) feet. In the instance the fifteen-foot setback cannot be met, a height variance and setback variance shall be required. 
Corner lots: The height of the lot shall be controlled by the size of the street line with the lesser frontage. 
b.  Minimum Floor to Ceiling Height: Nine (9) feet. 
c.  Mezzanines are not permitted. 
d.  Any rooftop deck and its surrounding barrier, required by code, must be setback a minimum of five feet from the front of the building. Rooftop deck shall not cover more than thirty percent (30%) of the roof's available surface, area except where a green roof is installed. Where a green roof is installed, the remaining roof area, inclusive of the setback requirements, can be covered up to fifty percent (50%); the rest must be a green roof installation. 
5.  Density: 
a.  Maximum Density: Eighty (80) units an acre. 
6.  Coverage Standard: 
a.  Maximum Building Coverage: Seventy percent (70%). 
b.  Maximum Lot Coverage: Eighty percent (80%). 
F.  Parking Standards: 
1.  Parking is prohibited on any lots that have sole frontage on Brunswick Street, Monmouth Street, or Coles Street. 
2.  Parking is prohibited on lots less than forty (40) feet wide, unless the rear lot line is adjacent to an alley, in which case parking is permitted in the rear yard with access from the alley. 
3.  Where parking is permitted, parking is required on lots forty (40) feet wide or greater, according to the following: 
a.  Residential units shall provide a minimum of one-half (0.5) parking space and a maximum of one (1) parking space per unit. 
b.  In no instance shall parking be permitted between the front building line and street line. 
c.  Maximum width of curb cut: Ten (10) feet. 
d.  Maximum width of driveway: Ten (10) feet. 
e.  Only a single curb cut, per property, is permitted; however in no instance shall a curb cut be permitted on Brunswick Street, Monmouth Street, or Coles Street. 
4.  Parking spaces, driveways, and any type of patio shall be constructed using pervious paving materials. The following are acceptable materials: 
a.  Interlocking concrete blocks. 
b.  Permeable pavers. 
c.  Open-celled pavers. 
d.  Porous pavement, concrete or asphalt. 
e.  Gravel. 
f.  Reinforced lawn. 
g.  Or other material deemed appropriate by Planning/Zoning Board. 
G.  Landscaping Standards: 
1.  All properties are required to provide street trees, except where it can be demonstrated to Planning Staff that it is not possible to plant trees due to underground constraints such as water or utility lines. 
2.  All street trees shall be in accordance with the design standards in 345-66.B. 
3.  In the event a street, tree is removed for construction, required repair/replacement, or for any other purpose, restoration of a street tree is required in accordance with the design standards in 345-66.B 
4.  At least twenty percent (20%) of every lot shall be landscaped with one (1) of the following materials: 
a.  Reinforced lawn. 
b.  Ground cover. 
c.  Rain garden. 
d.  Bioswales. 
e.  Plants that are native, non-invasive and proven drought resistant in an urban environment. 
H.  Design Standards: 
1.  Buildings shall be designed to present a harmonious appearance in terms of architectural style and materials and shall be encouraged to incorporate historic elements found throughout the surrounding area. 
2.  Blank walls without fenestration, specifically the non-habitable portion of the building within the flood elevations, shall incorporate facade articulation, recess portions of the street wall, a planter/landscaping buffer, stairs, porches, or any other architectural techniques to ensure visual connectivity between the elevated first floor and the sidewalk. 
3.  Buildings where ground floor retail is permitted shall incorporate a cornice element or horizontal projection above the storefront glazing separating ground floor uses from the building above.  
§ 345-45. - NC Neighborhood Commercial District. 
 
A.  Purpose. 
The purpose of this district is to recognize the existence and importance of neighborhood business districts and promote continued efforts to strengthen and revitalize them through public-private partnerships. 
These areas are located along: Central Avenue, Newark Avenue, McGinley Square, West Side Avenue, Communipaw Avenue, and Lower John F. Kennedy Boulevard. 
B.  Permitted principal uses are as follows [Amended 6-24-2015 by Ord. No. 15-084 ] : 
1.  Retail sales of goods and services. 
2.  Offices. 
3.  Financial institutions without drive-thru facilities. 
4.  Restaurants, category one and two. 
5.  Theaters and museums. 
6.  Governmental uses. 
7.  Parking garages, provided that the ground floor parking level shall be located behind a ground floor commercial façade not less than twenty (20) feet deep after allowing for required vehicular access drive(s) and building entrances, provided, however, that ground floor commercial use shall not be required on lots in the NC zone having frontage along Sixth Street between Brunswick and Division Streets, or Seventh Street between Brunswick Street and Newark Avenue, or Division Street between Sixth and Eighth Streets. 
[Amended 11-8-2006 by Ord. No. 06-131; 3-12-2008 by Ord. No. 08-024] 
8.  Parks and playgrounds. 
9.  Residential apartments above ground floor. 
[Amended 3-12-2008 by Ord. No. 08-024; 3-25-2015 by Ord. No. 15-031 ] 
10.  Ground floor residential on lots having frontage on Sixth Street between Brunswick and Division Streets, on Seventh Street between Brunswick Street and Newark Avenue, or on Division Street between Sixth and Eighth Streets. 
11.  Educational facilities, public and private, above ground floor. 
[Amended 11-8-2006 by Ord. No. 06-131] 
12.  Bars. 
13.  Child day care centers. 
14.  Medical offices. 
[Added 3-14-2007 by Ord. No. 07-035] 
15.  Any combination of the above. 
C.  Uses incidental and accessory to the principal use, such as: 
1.  Off-street parking. 
2.  Fences and walls. 
3.  Signs. 
4.  Sidewalk cafés associated with category one and two restaurants. 
5.  T.V., radio, and/or stereo systems accessory to bars and restaurants. 
[Added 1-25-2012 by Ord. No. 12-002] 
6.  Live entertainment accessory to Category One restaurants only, subject to issuance of a "Restaurant Entertainment License" by the Division of Commerce and the restrictions as to decibel level, hours of operation, and location of entertainment providers attached to that license (see Ordinance #12-001), with the exception of properties on Lower John F. Kennedy Boulevard where no live entertainment shall be permitted. 
[Added 1-25-2012 by Ord. No. 12-002] 
D.  Bulk Standards for Neighborhood Commercial Uses: 
 
1.  All existing lots of record at time of the adoption of this ordinance are considered conforming. 
2.  Minimum Lot Size: Two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet. 
3.  Minimum Lot Width: twenty-five (25) feet. 
4.  Minimum Lot Depth: One hundred (100) feet. 
5.  Front Yard Setback: None. 
6.  Minimum Side Yard: None. 
7.  Minimum Rear Yard: Fifteen (15) feet, provided, however, that where lot depth exceeds one hundred (100) feet, the minimum rear yard shall be increased by five linear feet for every ten (10) linear feet of increase in lot depth. 
[Amended 8-16-2006 by Ord. No. 06-090] 
8.  Minimum Building Height: Three stories. 
9.  Maximum Building Height 
[Amended 11-8-2006 by Ord. No. 06-131]: 
a.  Four stories from grade where on-site parking is not required (see Parking Standards for NC uses); five stories from grade where on-site parking is required regardless of whether parking level is below, at, or above grade. 
b.  Minimum floor to ceiling height shall be nine feet for all floors except those devoted to parking; maximum floor to ceiling height for residential floors shall be twelve (12) feet. 
E.  Parking Standards for Neighborhood Commercial uses: 
 
1.  No on-site parking is required for existing uses, or for adaptive reuse of existing buildings, or for development on any lot that is located within five hundred (500) feet of a PATH station entrance. 
[Amended 11-8-2006 by Ord. No. 06-131] 
2.  Parking is required for new construction on lots over fifty (50) feet wide that are not located within five hundred (500) feet from a PATH station entrance, or for construction on any lot along the Lower John F. Kennedy Boulevard NC District (from south side of Winfield Ave. to Bayonne City line) subject to the following requirements 
[Amended 11-8-2006 by Ord. No. 06-131]: 
a.  Offices (except medical offices): One space per one thousand (1,000) square feet, excluding the first five thousand (5,000) square feet of ground floor area, except along Lower John F. Kennedy Boulevard where no such exclusion shall apply. 
[Amended 3-14-2007 by Ord. No. 07-035] 
b.  Medical Offices: One space per five hundred (500) square feet, excluding the first two thousand (2,000) square feet of ground floor area, except along Lower John F. Kennedy Boulevard where no such exclusion shall apply. 
[Added 3-14-2007 by Ord. No. 07-035] 
c.  Retail Sales of Goods and Services: One space per six hundred (600) square feet, excluding the first five thousand (5,000) square feet of ground floor area, except along Lower John F. Kennedy Boulevard where no such exclusion shall apply. 
d.  Financial Institutions: One space per six hundred (600) square feet, excluding the first five thousand (5,000) square feet of ground floor area, except along Lower John F. Kennedy Boulevard where no such exclusion shall apply. 
e.  Restaurants: One space per four seats, excluding the first five thousand (5,000) square feet of ground floor area, except along Lower John F. Kennedy Boulevard where no such exclusion shall apply. 
f.  Theaters and Museums: One space per four seats, excluding the first five thousand (5,000) square feet area, except along Lower John F. Kennedy Boulevard where no such exclusion shall apply. 
g.  Residential apartments above ground floor: One space per dwelling unit. 
h.  Educational facilities above ground floor: Two spaces per classroom, plus two spaces per twenty (20) seats for each auditorium, gymnasium and lecture hall.  
§ 345-46. - O/R Office/Residential District. 
 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this district is to accommodate residential and office uses in close proximity to Journal Square. The zone encourages development of attractive high-rise office, residential and mixed use structures. 
B.  Permitted principal uses are as follows: 
1.  Offices. 
2.  Financial institutions and brokerage houses. 
3.  Retail sales of goods and services on the ground floor only. 
4.  Restaurants, category one and two. 
5.  Mid-rise apartments. 
6.  High-rise apartments. 
7.  Theaters. 
8.  Hotels. 
9.  Public and private colleges, universities and technical/vocational schools. 
[Amended 3-14-2007 by Ord. No. 07-035] 
10.  Governmental uses. 
11.  Medical offices. 
[Added 3-14-2007 by Ord. No. 07-035] 
12.  Child Day Care Centers. 
[Added 3-14-2007 by Ord. No. 07-035] 
13.  Any combination of the above. 
C.  Uses incidental and accessory to the principal use, such as: 
1.  Off-street parking garages and lots and off-street loading. 
2.  Fences and walls. 
3.  Signs. 
4.  T.V., radio, and/or stereo systems accessory to bars and restaurants. [Added 1-25-2012 by Ord. No. 12-002] 
5.  Live entertainment accessory to Category One restaurants only, subject to issuance of a "Restaurant Entertainment License" by the Division of Commerce and the restrictions as to decibel level, hours of operation, and location of entertainment providers attached to that license (see Ordinance #12-001). [Added 1-25-2012 by Ord. No. 12-002] 
D.  Bulk Standards for Office/Residential District. 
1.  Minimum Lot Size: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
2.  Maximum Density: One hundred fifty (150) units per acre. 
3.  Minimum Lot Width: One hundred (100) feet. 
4.  Minimum Lot Depth: One hundred (100) feet. 
5.  Minimum Front Yard: None. 
6.  Maximum Front Yard: Fifteen (15) feet. 
7.  Minimum Rear Yard: Thirty (30) feet. 
8.  Minimum Side Yard: Ten (10) feet. 
9.  Minimum Building Height: Four stories and forty (40) feet. 
10.  Maximum Building Height: One hundred ten (110) feet. 
11.  Maximum Building Coverage: Sixty-five percent (65%). 
12.  Maximum Lot Coverage: Seventy-five percent (75%). 
 
E.  Parking Standards for Office/Residential Uses. 
1.  No parking shall be required for existing structures or adaptive reuse. 
2.  Offices (except medical offices): One space per one thousand (1,000) square feet. 
[Amended 3-14-2007 by Ord. No. 07-035] 
3.  Medical Offices: One space per five hundred (500) square feet. 
[Added 3-14-2007 by Ord. No. 07-035] 
4.  Retail sales of goods and services: One space per six hundred (600) square feet of gross floor area. 
5.  Financial institutions and brokerage houses: One space per one thousand (1,000) square feet. 
6.  Restaurants: One space per four seats. 
7.  Theaters and museums: No parking required. 
8.  Colleges, universities and adult technical/vocational schools above ground floor: Two spaces per classroom, plus one space per twenty (20) seats for each auditorium, gymnasium and lecture hall. 
[Amended 3-14-2007 by Ord. No. 07-035] 
9.  Hotels: One space per one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area per room including all purpose rooms such as banquet, meeting and conference rooms. 
10.  Mid-rise and high-rise apartments: See R-4 parking standards.  
§ 345-47. - CBD Central Business District/Journal Square. 
 
A.  Purpose. 
1.  The purpose of this district is to foster the development of a vibrant and accessible Citywide activity district that is a center of commerce and civic activity. It functions as a Local and regional destination for business, retail, education, government services, entertainment and transportation. 
2.  The central business district contains numerous commercial, residential, institutional and government/public uses in a high intensity urban context. 
B.  Permitted principal uses are as follows: 
 
1.  Government uses. 
2.  Public and private colleges, universities and technical/vocational schools. 
[Amended 3-14-2007 by Ord. No. 07-035] 
3.  Parking garages. 
4.  Retail sales of goods and services. 
5.  Offices. 
6.  Hotels. 
7.  Conference centers. 
8.  Restaurants, category one and two. 
9.  Financial institutions without drive-thru facilities. 
10.  Theaters. 
11.  Billboards on buildings. 
12.  Mid-rise apartments. 
13.  High-rise apartments. 
14.  Medical offices. 
[Added 3-14-2007 by Ord. No. 07-035] 
15.  Child Day Care Centers. 
[Added 3-14-2007 by Ord. No. 07-035] 
16.  Any combination of the above. 
C.  Uses incidental and accessory to the principal uses, such as: 
1.  Parking garages. 
2.  Meeting rooms, conference facilities, gymnasiums and exercise rooms and pools. 
3.  Signs. 
4.  T.V., radio, and/or stereo systems accessory to bars and restaurants. [Added 1-25-2012 by Ord. No. 12-002] 
5.  Live entertainment accessory to Category One restaurants only, subject to issuance of a "Restaurant Entertainment License" by the Division of Commerce and the restrictions as to decibel level, hours of operation, and location of entertainment providers attached to that license (see Ordinance #12-001). [Added 1-25-2012 by Ord. No. 12-002] 
D.  Bulk Standards for Central Business District. 
 
1.  Minimum Lot Size: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
2.  Minimum Lot Width: One hundred (100) feet. 
3.  Minimum Lot Depth: One hundred (100) feet. 
4.  Front Yard Setback: None if under eight stories; fifteen (15) feet if over eight stories. 
5.  Rear Yard: None. 
6.  Side Yard: None. 
7.  Maximum Building Height: One hundred ten (110) feet. 
8.  Minimum Building Height: Four (4) stories. [Added 11-24-2009 by Ord. No. 09-116] 
9.  Maximum Building Coverage: One hundred percent (100%). 
E.  Standards for Billboards. 
 
1.  Maximum height: Sixty (60) feet above grade at their highest point when erected on the roof of a building. 
2.  Setback from roof edge: Five feet. 
3.  Maximum area: Six hundred (600) square feet with maximum vertical dimension of twelve (12) feet for each sign. When billboard has more than one lace, the maximum area shall be seven hundred fifty (750) square feet. 
F.  Parking Standards for Central Business District. 
 
1.  Offices (except medical offices), financial institutions, brokerage houses, governmental uses and colleges and universities: 0.7 space per one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area. 
[Amended 3-14-2007 by Ord. No. 07-035] 
2.  Medical Offices: One space per five hundred (500) square feet, excluding the first two thousand (2,000) square feet of ground floor area. 
[Added 3-14-2007 by Ord. No. 07-035] 
3.  Hotels: One space per one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area including all-purpose rooms such as banquet, meeting and conference rooms. 
4.  Mid-rise and high-rise apartments: 0.7 spaces per unit. 
5.  Retail sales of goods and services, restaurants, bars, theaters and night dubs: One space per six hundred (600) square feet of gross floor area, excluding the first five thousand (5,000) square feet of gross floor area.  
§ 345-48. - HC Highway Commercial District. 
 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this district is to promote the development of desirable highway commercial uses, improve the appearance of the streetscape, buffer adjacent neighborhoods and reinforce the area's function as a gateway to Jersey City. 
B.  Permitted principal uses are as follows: 
1.  Retail sales of goods and services. 
2.  Offices. 
3.  Financial institutions and brokerage houses. 
4.  Hotels. 
5.  Restaurants, all categories. 
6.  Nightclubs and bars. 
7.  Service stations. 
8.  Governmental uses. 
9.  Auto and truck sales. 
10.  Theaters. 
11.  Child Day Care Centers. [Added 3-14-2007 by Ord. No. 07-035] 
12.  Self Storage Facilities. [Added 3-11-2015 by Ord. No. 15-023 ] 
C.  Uses incidental and accessory to the principal uses, such as: 
1.  Off-street parking, garages and off-street loading. 
2.  Fences and walls. 
3.  Signs. 
4.  Auto service ancillary to retail car dealership. 
5.  Outdoor garden centers. 
6.  T.V., radio,, and/or stereo systems accessory to bars and restaurants. [Added 1-25-2012 by Ord. No. 12-002] 
7.  Live entertainment accessory to Category One restaurants only, subject to issuance of a "Restaurant Entertainment License" by the Division of Commerce and the restrictions as to decibel level, hours of operation, and location of entertainment providers attached to that license (see Ordinance #12-001). [Added 1-25-2012 by Ord. No. 12-002] 
D.  Conditional Uses. 
1.  Car washes, all categories, subject to the following conditions [Amended 4-25-2007 by Ord. No. 07-064] : 
a.  A minimum of twelve (12) on-site holding or queuing spaces with minimum space dimensions eighteen (18) feet by nine feet must be provided as an approach lane or lanes to the car wash. 
b.  A minimum of four holding or queuing spaces (min. twenty-five (25) feet by ten (10) feet) after the car passes through the complete wash cycle. 
c.  Holding and/or queuing spaces on multiple use sites shall be designed so as not to conflict with the ingress or egress of any pumping island that may be located on the same site, or with ingress/egress and/or parking aisles required for circulation pertaining to any use on the site. 
E.  Bulk Standards Highway Commercial District. [Amended 4-25-2007 by Ord. No. 07-064] 
 
1.  Minimum Lot Size: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
2.  Minimum Perimeter Setback: Thirty (30) feet. 
3.  Maximum Building Height: Six stories. 
4.  Maximum Building Coverage: Fifty percent (50%). 
5.  Maximum Lot Coverage: Ninety percent (90%). 
F.  Parking Standards for Highway Commercial District. [Added 4-25-2007 by Ord. No. 07-064] 
1.  A minimum of one space for every five hundred (500) square feet of gross floor area. 
2.  Surface parking should be distributed around the building, and no more than sixty percent (60%) of required on-site parking shall be located between the front façade of any principal building and the primary abutting street. 
G.  Cross Easements and Access. In order to allow improved access to parking and loading functions, appropriate legal instruments as well as site plans shall be presented to the Planning Board to show that cross easements are in place and are safe and secure. Any alteration of a site plan which has received approval from the Jersey City Planning Board by the New Jersey Department of Transportation will require the developer to apply for amended site plan approval. 
  
§ 345-49. - C/A Commercial/Automotive District. 
 
A.  Purpose. 
1.  The purpose of this district is to upgrade the appearance and function of Communipaw Avenue through screening and buffering, sensitive site planning, selective acquisition of properties and the relocation of parking. 
2.  The Commercial Automotive district is along both sides of Communipaw Avenue, extending easterly from Route 440 to Bergen Avenue. 
B.  Permitted principal uses are as follows: 
1.  Retail sales of goods and services. 
2.  Auto sales. 
3.  Auto repair and services. 
4.  Service stations. 
5.  Auto body shops. 
6.  Financial institutions. [Added 1-25-2012 by Ord. No. 12-004] 
7.  Restaurants, all categories. [Added 1-25-2012 by Ord. No. 12-004] 
8.  Offices. [Added 1-25-2012 by Ord. No. 12-004] 
C.  Uses incidental and accessory to the principal use, such as: 
1.  Offices. 
2.  Fences and walls. 
3.  Signs. 
4.  Parking. 
5.  Car washes, all categories. 
D.  Bulk Standards for Commercial/Automotive District. 
 
1.  Minimum Lot Size: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
2.  Minimum Lot Width: One hundred (100) feet. 
3.  Minimum Lot Depth: One hundred (100) feet. 
4.  Maximum Front Yard Setback: Five (5) feet; setback may exceed five (5) feet if the entire yard adjacent to the right-of-way is fully landscaped and provides a pedestrian pathway to the building entrance. Additionally, garage bays with overhead doors must be set back twenty (20) feet to allow for queuing. Garage bays shall be limited to fifty percent (50%) of the front building façade width. [Amended 1-25-2012 by Ord. No. 12-004] 
5.  Side Yard: Zero feet. On corner lots, setback may exceed zero feet if the entire yard adjacent to the right-of-way is fully landscaped and provides a pedestrian pathway to the building entrance. [Amended 1-25-2012 by Ord. No. 12-004] 
6.  Minimum Rear Yard: Five feet. 
7.  Maximum Building Height: Thirty (30) feet. 
8.  Maximum Building and Lot Coverage: Ninety percent (90%). 
9.  A six foot high decorative brick wall is required along the rear lot line if the parcel abuts residential uses or zones. [Amended 1-25-2012 by Ord. No. 12-004] 
E.  Minimum Parking Standards for Commercial/Automotive District. [Amended 1-25-2012 by Ord. No. 12-004] 
 
1.  Auto sales: One space per one hundred (100) square feet of showroom floor area plus one space for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area other than showroom area. 
2.  Service stations: Three spaces per lift, wheel alignment pit, bay, or similar work area; spaces shall be separate from the driveway and apron areas which give access to pumps, service areas and areas for display of merchandise. Where no repair services are provided a minimum of three spaces shall be required. Where retail sales are provided a minimum of one space per one hundred fifty (150) square feet of retail space shall be provided. 
3.  Car washes: Fifteen (15) on site holding or queuing spaces as an approach lane to the car wash, and a minimum of three queuing spaces after the car passes through the wash cycle. All spaces shall be on site. Where a carwash is associated with a service station, the holding or queuing lane shall not conflict with the ingress or egress of any pump island. 
4.  Financial institutions: One (1) space per five hundred (500) square feet of gross floor area. [Added 1-25-2012 by Ord. No. 12-004] 
5.  Restaurants: One (1) space per five hundred (500) square feet of gross floor area. [Added 1-25-2012 by Ord. No. 12-004] 
6.  Offices: One (1) space per five hundred (500) square feet of gross floor area. [Added 1-25-2012 by Ord. No. 12-004] 
7.  Retail sales of goods and services: One (1) space per five hundred (500) square feet of gross floor area. [Added 3-25-2015 by Ord. No. 15-031 ]  
§ 345-50. - I Industrial District. 
 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this district is to acknowledge areas where there is an existing concentration of industrial activity or where future industrial activity is planned. This district accommodates a broad range of industrial uses in appropriate locations with enhanced provisions for screening and buffering to protect nearby development. 
B.  Permitted principal uses are as follows: 
1.  Assembly and packaging. 
2.  Manufacturing. 
3.  Warehousing, wholesaling and distribution. 
4.  Printing. 
5.  Cyber hotels. 
6.  Offices. 
7.  Service stations. 
8.  Car washes, all categories. 
9.  Industrial parks. 
10.  Self storage facilities. [Added 3-11-2015 by Ord. No. 15-023 ] 
C.  Uses incidental and accessory to the principal use, such as: 
1.  Off-street parking and loading. 
2.  Fences and walls. 
3.  Signs. 
4.  Guardhouses and employee cafeterias. 
5.  On site service and maintenance operations for equipment and operations conducted on site. 
6.  Garages for parking and storage of vehicles. 
D.  Bulk Standards for Industrial District. 
 
1.  Minimum Lot Size: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
2.  Minimum Lot Width: One hundred (100) feet. 
3.  Minimum Lot Depth: One hundred (100) feet. 
4.  Minimum Front Yard Setback: Fifteen (15) feet. 
5.  Minimum Side Yard: Ten (10) feet. 
6.  Minimum Rear Yard: Fifteen (15) feet. 
7.  Maximum Building Height: Fifty (50) feet. 
8.  Maximum Building Coverage: Sixty percent (60%). 
9.  Maximum Lot Coverage: Ninety percent (90%). 
10.  Minimum Buffer to a residential zone or use: Twenty (20) feet. 
11.  A six foot high decorative brick wall is required along the rear lot line if the parcel abuts residential uses or zones. 
E.  Parking Standards for Industrial District. 
 
1.  Manufacturing, assembly, printing, packaging: One space per three thousand (3,000) square feet of gross floor area. 
2.  Warehousing, wholesaling and distribution: One space per five thousand (5,000) square feet of gross floor area. 
3.  Offices: One space per six hundred (600) square feet of gross floor area. 
4.  Car washes: See CA parking standards. 
5.  Service stations: See CA parking standards. 
6.  Cyber hotels: One space per ten thousand (10,000) of gross floor area. 
7.  Self storage facilities: One (1) space per five thousand (5,000) square feet of gross floor area. [Added 3-11-2015 by Ord. No. 15-023 ]  
§ 345-50a. - Marion Works Office/Residential District. 
[Amended 3-24-2010 by Ord. No. 10-037] 
A.  Purpose 
1.  The Marion Works Office/Residential District (MWORD) shall apply to the area depicted on the revised Zoning Map of the City of Jersey City. The area encompassed by the MWORD is an older Industrial District located at the periphery of the Journal Square community. The purpose of this district is to encourage the redevelopment, rehabilitation and conversion of older industrial structures in the area to higher intensity residential and mixed-use buildings, and the construction of new residential and mixed-use buildings on vacant and underutilized land, while incorporating much needed public open space for district residents and the surrounding community. Ancillary commercial facilities are also encouraged to serve the surrounding community. 
2.  The MWORD shall apply as an overlay district, which means that it applies as alternative zoning regulations, when and if chosen by the property owner. Property owners within the MWORD may also continue to maintain uses of the property that were permitted at the time of the adoption of this amendment. However, it is recognized that the size and configuration of the existing blocks and lots are the result of the industrial and railroad use and development of this area. Therefore, if a property owner/developer chooses to utilize the Office/Residential Overlay Zoning, then the property owner I developer shall be required to provide new and/or re-opened streets rights of way. These may include the re-opening of previously vacated streets, such as Dey Street and/or the creation of new public streets and rights-of-way to accommodate the new residential and commercial re-use of property within the MWORD. It is specifically anticipated that new street connections will be necessary from the western end of Dey Street to both Saint Paul's Avenue and Newark Avenue. The location of new streets and rights-of-way should be located so as not to destroy existing or modified structures within the district. The intent of requiring these new and/or re-opened streets is to extend the street pattern into the district in order to better integrate the district into the surrounding street grid and urban fabric of the community, and to better disperse traffic from new developments. 
3.  Because of the nature and scale of the existing industrial buildings within the MWORD, the conversion from industrial to residential and mixed-use land uses may occur in a phased fashion, wherein a portion of a building and/or property may continue to be used for uses permitted at the time of adoption of this amendment, as other portions of the building and/or property are rehabilitated and used for residential and/or mixed-use purposes; provided that all building, health, safety, fire and other applicable codes are complied with. 
B.  Permitted principal uses are as follows: 
1.  Residential dwelling units within existing structures. 
2  Work/Live Units. 
3.  High-Rise Apartments. 
4.  Mid-Rise Apartments. 
5.  Townhouses. 
6.  Offices, provided that not more than 10% of the floor area of any development project may be dedicated to office uses. 
7.  Financial institutions and brokerage houses. 
8.  Retail sales of goods and services, including health clubs. 
9.  Restaurants, category one and two. 
10.  Theaters. 
11.  Hotels. 
12.  Colleges and Universities. 
13.  Governmental uses, including public parks. 
14.  Child Care Centers. 
15.  Any combination of the above. 
C.  Uses incidental and accessory to the principal use, such as: 
1.  Off-street parking garages and lots and off-street loading. 
2.  Recreation facilities and areas, including pools, active recreation uses, gymnasiums, exercise rooms, etc. 
3.  Meeting rooms, banquet facilities, conference centers. 
4.  Fences and walls. 
5.  Home occupations. 
6.  Signs. 
D.  Bulk Standards: (Note: Townhouses shall follow R-2 Standards.) 
1.  Minimum Lot Size: 10,000 square feet 
2.  Minimum Lot Width: 100 feet 
3.  Minimum Lot Depth: 100 feet 
4.  Minimum Front Yard: None 
5.  Maximum Front Yard: 10 feet 
6.  Minimum Rear Yard: 
a.  Buildings up to 25 feet tall: 10 feet 
b.  Buildings up to 50 feet tall: 20 feet 
c.  Buildings over 50 feet tall: 30 feet 
7.  Minimum Side Yard: None 
8.  Minimum Building Height: 2 stories or 20 feet 
9.  Maximum Building Coverage: 
a.  Not including enclosed parking: 65% 
b.  Inclusive of enclosed parking: 85% 
10.  Maximum Lot Coverage: 90% 
11.  Maximum Building Height: 
It is recognized that the MWORD district is located on a slope wherein the highest elevation of the district is located on the eastern side of the district and the lowest elevation is located to the western side of the district. It is also recognized that taller buildings and the Pulaski Skyway are located on the north of the district and that there is an existing low-rise residential community located just to the east of the district between Dey Street and Van Winkle Avenue. Therefore, in order to accommodate the higher intensity residential and mixed-use development envisioned for the MWORD district, while at the same time respecting the existing community to the east and the opportunities afforded by the existing topography of the district, the following height regulations shall apply. 
a.  Sub-district A: Four (4) stories. The first residential floor shall be at least one (1) foot taller than the floors above, and no floor shall be less than eight (8) feet tall as measured from floor to ceiling. 
b.  Sub-district B: Existing building height at the time of adoption of the MWORD overlay zoning shall be considered conforming. In addition, the height of the eastern most building within the former American Can Company complex and the existing industrial buildings located on Newark Avenue, may be increased by one (1) story, but not more than 15 feet, provided that the additional story is setback a minimum of 15 feet from the exterior walls of the building and are designed in conformance with paragraph G of this section "Building Design Standards for Rehabilitation of Existing Industrial Structures". New buildings shall not exceed 110 feet. 
12.  Maximum Density and Floor Area Ratio: 
Similar to height, maximum density and floor area ratio shall be regulated within each sub-district as follows: 
a.  Sub-district A: 
Max Density - 80 units per acre 
b.  Sub-district B: 
Max Density — The number of units permitted within any existing building shall be determined by dividing the gross floor area of that building, which shall include any permitted additional floor area or mezzanines, by 1,200 square feet. The maximum permitted density within newly constructed buildings shall be 125 units per acre. 
Max Floor Area Ratio — N/A for existing buildings, rather, the permitted floor area shall be the existing floor area within any existing building and any additional floor area permitted pursuant to the regulations found in the MWORD. The maximum permitted floor area ratio for newly constructed buildings shall be 4.5. Areas dedicated to parking, loading areas and mechanical rooms shall be excluded from the calculation of gross floor area. 
c.  Density Bonus for additional Open Space: 
A residential density bonus is available for new residential construction projects only, not renovation projects. A project shall qualify for the density bonus when open space is provided in excess of the minimum ten percent (10%) requirement and when these new open spaces are improved as a public park and deed restricted as publicly accessible open space. The available bonus and conditions that must exist to receive the bonus are further described in Section D.14 of this plan. 
13.  Required Publicly Accessible Open Space: 
At least 10% of the net land area of any development (less any area provided for public streets, rights-of-way or easements) shall be dedicated as publicly accessible open space/vest pocket parks. All such open spaces shall be at least 5,000 square feet in area. 
Development projects consisting of multiple phases or parcels may provide such publicly accessible open space at a later date and on another parcel or parcels within the MWORD district other than the parcel that is the subject of the development application. Projects consisting of the rehabilitation of existing buildings shall provide five percent (5%) of the net land area of any development (less any area provided for public streets, rights-of-way or easements) as publicly accessible open space. Phased and/or larger development projects shall group the proposed open spaces so as to create larger more effective and usable areas. 
14.  Specific Bonus Requirements: 
a.  Sub-district A: 
i.  A density bonus of an additional seventy (70) units per acre shall be permitted (for a total of one hundred fifty (150) units per acre) when a new construction project provides an additional five percent (5%) improved open space park (to total at least fifteen percent(15%)) of the net land area of new construction. Net land area shall be the lot area, less any area provided for public streets or rights-of-way. [Amended 2-22-2012 by Ord. No. 12-016] 
ii.  Number of stories shall be permitted to increase to six (6) levels of residential over one level of parking, but only for the portion of the building having frontage along Senate Place. This higher portion of the building shall not be greater than seventy-five (75) feet in depth as measured from the Senate Place frontage building facade. 
iii.  Direct pedestrian ingress and egress to individual ground floor units shall be provided along Senate Place. 
iv.  Required Conditions to Qualify for Sub-District A Bonus: 
•  The land shall be deed restricted as public open space and dedicated to the city as a public municipal park. 
•  This open space shall be located at the corner of Dey Street and Senate Place so as to provide a centrally located recreational focal point within the district. 
•  Site plan approval by the Planning Board for the park design, configuration, amenities and materials shall be pursued and received in order to receive the bonus. 
•  The open space improvements shall be constructed prior to the issuance of any Certificate of Occupancy for the project. 
b.  Sub-district B: 
i.  A density bonus of an additional fifty-five (55) units per acre shall be permitted (for a total of one hundred eighty (180) units per acre) where a development project provides an additional five percent (5%) improved open space and park (to total at least fifteen percent (15%)) of the net land area of any development net land area shall be the lot area, less any area provided for public streets or rights-of-way. 
ii.  Because the street elevations are so varied within and adjacent to Block 613.1 Lot 2, a portion of open space associated with this new construction at this location, if it is proposed, may be located on a roof top provided that the roof-top open space has at least one twenty-foot wide connection to an adjacent street at the elevation of the public sidewalk and the roof-top open space is publicly accessible and identified as such within the project deed and through signage at the street level. 
iii.  Direct pedestrian ingress and egress to individual units shall be provided along Senate Place, Dey Street and Newark Avenue. 
iv.  Required Conditions to Qualify for Sub-District B Bonus: 
•  The land shall be deed restricted as open space and dedicated to the City or remain in private ownership and protected for perpetual public access through an easement attached to the deed. 
•  This open space shall be located at the corner of Dey Street and Senate Place so as to provide a centrally located recreational focal point within the district. 
•  Site plan approval by the Planning Board for the park design, configuration, amenities and materials shall be pursued and received in order to receive the bonus. 
•  The open space improvement s shall be constructed prior to the issuance of any Certificate of Occupancy for the project. 
E.  Exceptions to Bulk Standards: 
1.  Existing buildings and structures shall be exempt from all Bulk Standards. However, any expansion of an existing building or structure must be in conformance with the Bulk Standards listed above. 
2.  On development sites containing multiple parcels or lots; individual parcels or lots may exceed the above bulk standards provided that the development site taken as a whole is in compliance with the above bulk standards. For lots with frontage on multiple streets, all frontages shall be treated as a front lot line/yard. 
3.  Any open space or open area on a development site that is dedicated or set aside as public open space, such as a park, and which is accessible to the public at grade shall be utilized in calculating the Maximum Density, F.A.R., Maximum Building Coverage and Maximum Lot Coverage of said development site. 
4.  Any area on a development site that is dedicated or set aside as a street or public right-of-way, shall be utilized in calculating the permitted Maximum Density, F.A.R., Maximum Building Coverage and Maximum Lot Coverage of said development site. 
5.  Within any existing building, interior spaces may be modified to include new interior floors and/or mezzanine levels where ceiling heights permit. Interior spaces may also be modified to provide interior courtyards to provide air and light in compliance with applicable building codes. 
F.  Minimum Parking Standards: [Amended 2-22-2012 by Ord. No. 12-016] 
1.  Residential and Work/Live Units: 
a.  In Rehab Buildings 0.5 space per unit. 
b.  New Construction in Sub-District A - Minimum of one hundred twenty (120) new off-street parking spaces constructed for the new building in Sub-District A. 
c.  New Construction in Sub District "B" - 1 Bedroom - 0.5 space per unit; 2 Bedrooms and above - 1.0 space per unit. 
2.  Offices: 1 space per 1,000 square feet. 
3.  Retail Sales of Goods and Services: 1 space per 1,000 square feet. 
4.  Restaurants and Theaters: 1 space per 1,000 square feet. 
5.  Hotels: One-half (0.5) space per hotel room. 
6.  Colleges and Universities: 2 spaces per classroom. 
7.  Shared parking and valet parking arrangements are permitted upon submission of a parking plan by the developer demonstrating that such alternative parking arrangements are appropriate and approval by the Planning Board of such parking plan. 
G.  Building Design Standards for Rehabilitation of Existing Industrial Structures: 
1.  General: Rehabilitation and renovation of existing industrial structures shall be done in a manner that respects the individual architectural style and character of the particular building being renovated. The Dominant features or characteristics of these buildings shall be maintained. For example, many larger industrial structures were designed as a series of bays consisting of a repetition of building units along the streetscape, broken up by recessed areas or voids intended to bring air and light to inner portions of the building. These voids shall not be filled in. 
2.  Materials: It is preferable to repair, rather than replace, materials on the facades of the buildings. However, if materials must be replaced, they must be carefully selected to match the appearance of existing materials to the greatest extent practical. 
3.  Windows: Windows are a major component of a building's appearance, therefore all windows that are visible along street facades must be treated in a manner that are consistent with the architectural character of the building. Such window openings must not be reduced or modified. Although it is recognized that replacement windows must conform to contemporary standards for energy efficiency; replacement windows must be selected to be compatible with the character of the existing windows (including muntins and mullions) and the architectural style and character of the building being renovated. 
4.  Entrances: Care must be taken in locating new entrances into the buildings to accommodate the re-use of these structures. All buildings must relate to the streetscape and orient their primary entrance to the public right-of-way. Pedestrian access points shall be located on less trafficked streets and designed in manner that relates to the adjoining street and encourages pedestrian activity along the street. Conversely, vehicular access points shall be located and designed to limit their impact on the pedestrian environment and to the appearance of the building. 
5.  Roofscape: Many older industrial buildings contained skylights, water towers and other rooftop appurtenances that add to the architectural style and character of the structure. These features shall be retained and incorporated into the design and reuse of the structure. New necessary mechanical equipment and rooftop appurtenances may be located on the roof, but shall be screened and/or incorporated into the roofscape design. 
6.  Other Design Features: Many older industrial structures contained unique features such as tall smoke stacks, which became familiar features in the landscape. These features shall be retained and incorporated into the design of the building. However, other smaller or minor buildings, or minor portions of buildings, which may have been accessory to the previous use, but are no longer appropriate to the new reuse; may be removed. 
7.  Additions/Expansions: New additions/expansions of existing structures must be done in a manner that is complimentary to the existing building's design and architecture in term of size, scale, materials, etc. However, new additions should not seek to copy the existing building, as each building is a product of its own time. Additional floors may be added to the top of existing buildings provided that such construction is not contrary to the intent of paragraph G. 5. above and is in compliance with the height requirements of paragraph D. 11. of this section. 
8.  New Construction: New buildings constructed as part of the reuse and/or redevelopment of industrial sites, either as accessory to the new reuse or as infill buildings, must be designed to compliment the architecture of the existing major buildings on the site. It is recognized that each building is a product of its own time. Therefore, the new buildings should not be copies of the architectural style of the existing buildings. 
H.  Parking Structure Design Standards 
1.  Along all street rights-of-way within sub-district B, any all parking levels shall be screened by an intervening use (i.e. residential, office, retail, lobby, etc.) between the parking and the building façade. Parking levels below grade shall be exempt from this requirement. In addition, parking levels fronting onto Saint Paul's Avenue west of Van Wagenen Avenue shall also be exempt from this requirement. The design of parking levels within sub-district A shall adhere to the requirements of paragraph 2. below. 
2.  The façades of all parking structures or levels within buildings that are not screened by an intervening use shall be architecturally screened so as to not give the apparent perception of garage space from the exterior. The façade of the parking structure shall be designed to disguise the parking use to the greatest degree possible. The exterior wall of the parking structure shall be architecturally designed to mimic and reflect the occupied portions of the building in terms of style and materials. All openings in the parking structure facade shall be of the punched style. These openings shall be consistent with the rhythm of the window openings serving the principal uses within the building. They shall be covered by glass or metal in such a way that the exterior design is compatible with the design of the building and the actual windows of the building. The glass tint and/or reflectivity may be different so as to decrease the visibility of the garage use within. In lieu of glass, the openings may be covered by a hinged solid metal plate/shutter, or recessed decorative grill over a louvered opening as described below. Blind windows, where appropriate shall also be permitted. Where louvers are needed or proposed, decorative grills shall be installed over functional louvers, or other comparable decorative material shall be used in openings or portions of the openings resembling the windows provided above and/or below parking levels. The intent of the above regulations is that no exposed garage exterior wall shall be detectable as a garage. 
3.  The design of parking structures and levels shall be consistent with paragraph G of this section "Building Design Standards for Rehabilitation of Existing Industrial Structures". 
4.  Garage doors shall be provided at the ingress and egress to the parking garage and shall be designed to reflect the architecture of the building. Open metal grates and similar type doors are prohibited. Garage doors shall be kept to the minimum height and width possible so as to limit their visual impact on the streetscape and the façade of the building. 
I.  Signage: The signage regulations as found in section 345-68 of this ordinance, and as applied to the O/R District shall apply to the MWORD district. In addition, the following signage may be permitted by the Planning Board after site plan review and approval. 
1.  A roof sign or wall sign on an existing building that has been or is being renovated for a mixed use development, indicating the name of the mixed-use development; provided that it can be evidenced by photographs or other historical documentation that a similar sign previously existed on the building. Such signage must conform to the size, shape, lettering style and design of the historically documented sign. 
2.  Signs that were historically used on certain mechanical elements or architectural features of a building or complex, such as watertowers, smokestacks and chimneys, provided that said signage is not used to advertise businesses or services outside the building or complex (i.e. no outdoor advertising signs).  
§ 345-51. - PI Port Industrial District. 
 
A.  Purpose. 
1.  The purpose of the district is to enhance and accommodate the City's working waterfront and to provide an area for current port activity and future port development in an appropriate location served by extensive transportation facilities with adequate buffering to protect nearby residential neighborhoods. 
2.  Jersey City's port industrial district is located in Greenville in the southeastern section of the City. 
B.  Permitted principal uses are as follows: 
1.  Offices. 
2.  Warehousing and distribution. 
3.  Manufacturing, processing, research and assembly operations. 
4.  Terminal facilities for rail, truck and waterborne transportation, including storage and containerization facilities. 
5.  Marinas and the construction and repair of boats. 
6.  Service stations. 
7.  Surface parking. [Added 3-11-2015 by Ord. No. 15-023 ] 
C.  Uses incidental and accessory to the principal use, such as: 
1.  Fences and walls. 
2.  Signs. 
3.  Garages for the parking and storage of vehicles. 
4.  Boat sales and rentals, repair facilities and sales of marine supplies associated with marinas. 
D.  Bulk Standards for Port Industrial District. 
 
1.  Minimum Lot Area: Eighty thousand (80,000) square feet. 
2.  Minimum Lot Width: Two hundred (200) feet. 
3.  Minimum Landscaped Buffer adjacent to residential uses and zones: Fifty (50) feet. 
4.  Maximum Lot Coverage: Ninety percent (90%). 
5.  Minimum Perimeter Setback: Sixty (60) feet. 
6.  Maximum Height of Principal and Accessory buildings: Fifty (50) feet. 
E.  Parking Standards for Port Industrial District. 
 
1.  Terminal facilities: One space per five thousand (5,000) square feet of gross floor area. 
2.  Marinas and construction and repair of boats: 0.33 space per berth plus six hundred (600) square feet of gross floor area for other service uses. 
3.  Other Uses. See Industrial zone parking standards.  
§ 345-52. - U University District. 
 
 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this district is to accommodate existing colleges and universities while preserving neighborhood stability and residential quality of life, especially in areas bordering institutions of higher education. 
B.  Permitted principal uses are as follows: 
1.  Colleges and universities. 
2.  Parks and playgrounds. 
3.  Dormitories, fraternity and sorority houses. 
4.  Meeting halls. 
C.  Uses incidental and accessory to the principal use, such as: 
1.  Parking structures and lots. 
2.  Fences and walls. 
3.  Signs. 
D.  Bulk and Parking Standards for University District. 
1.  Maximum Height: Four stories and forty (40) feet; provided, however, that where necessary because of topographical conditions the height may be increased establish a uniform height with existing buildings on the same street. 
2.  Maximum Building Coverage: Sixty percent (60%). 
3.  Maximum Lot Coverage: Eighty percent (80%). 
4.  Maximum Height of Parking Garage: Four stories. 
5.  Minimum buffer adjacent to residential uses and zones: Ten (10) feet. 
6.  Parking: Ten (10) spaces for each classroom, plus one space per ten (10) seats for each auditorium, gymnasium and lecture hall.  
§ 345-53. - M Medical District. 
 
A.  Purpose. [Amended 3-25-2015 by Ord. No. 15-031 ] 
1.  The purpose of this district is to recognize the existing medical facilities in the city and other medical related uses traditionally associated with these facilities. 
2.  The medical district encompasses Christ Hospital in the Heights and Greenville Hospital in Greenville. 
B.  Permitted principal uses are as follows: 
1.  Hospitals. 
2.  Medical offices. 
3.  Ambulatory care facilities. 
4.  Offices. 
5.  Diagnostic centers. 
6.  Rehabilitation centers. 
7.  Assisted living residences. 
8.  Nursing homes. 
9.  Senior housing. 
10.  Public utilities, except that natural gas transmission lines shall be prohibited. 
[Added 12-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-164] 
11.  Schools, limited to the Medical District in Greenville. [Added 7-20-2011 by Ord. No. 11-073] 
C.  Uses incidental and accessory to the principal use, such as: 
1.  Parking garages and off-street parking. 
2.  Meeting rooms, conference facilities, gymnasiums and exercise rooms and pools. 
3.  Staff housing. 
4.  Medical training including nursing and therapists. 
5.  Fences and walls. 
6.  Signs. 
D.  Bulk and Parking Standards for Medical District. 
 
1.  Maximum Height: Ten (10) stories and one hundred (100) feet, provided, however, that in the Medical District in Greenville, the maximum height shall be limited to five (5) stories. [Amended 7-20-2011 by Ord. No. 11-073] 
2.  Maximum Building and Lot Coverage: Eighty percent (80%). 
3.  Maximum Height of Parking Garage: Four stories. 
4.  Minimum Buffer adjacent to residential uses and zones: Ten (10) feet. 
5.  Parking Standards: One space for five thousand (5,000) square feet of gross floor area.  
§ 345-54. - G Government District. 
 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this district is to recognize the presence of government uses in neighborhoods throughout the City and identify existing and planned government facilities of City-wide significance. 
B.  Permitted principal uses are as follows: 
1.  Offices. 
2.  Governmental uses. 
C.  Uses incidental and accessory to the principal use, such as: 
1.  Fences and walls. 
2.  Parking. 
3.  Signs. 
D.  Bulk and Parking Standards for Government Uses. See R-1 Bulk and Parking Standards.  
§ 345-55. - P/OS Parks/Open Space District. 
 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of the parks and open space district is to acknowledge the City's existing inventory of parks and open space. 
B.  Permitted principal uses are as follows: 
1.  Parks and playgrounds. 
2.  Public utilities, except that natural gas transmission lines shall be prohibited. 
[Added 12-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-164] 
C.  Uses incidental and accessory to the principal use, such as: 
1.  Off-street parking. 
2.  Recreation, entertainment and educational programs. 
3.  Signs. 
4.  Dog runs. 
D.  Bulk and Parking Standards for Parks/Open Space District. None.  
§ 345-56. - WPD Waterfront Planned Development District. 
 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of the Waterfront Planned Development District is to identify areas where the redevelopment of water oriented commercial, residential and recreational uses has occurred or has the potential to occur including high cube warehousing uses in designated areas. The intent of the District is to accurately reflect existing conditions, endorse ongoing redevelopment activity, accommodate a broad range of new uses, promote the creative reuse of large tracts of land and to continue to provide public access to an enhanced waterfront. [Amended 9-27-2006 by Ord. No. 06-037] 
B.  Permitted principal uses are as follows: 
1.  Marinas. 
2.  Offices. 
3.  Townhouses. 
4.  Multi-family dwellings. 
5.  Retail sales of goods and services. 
6.  Theaters. 
7.  Restaurants, All Categories. 
[Added 9-8-2004 by Ord. No. 04-094] 
8.  High-Cube warehousing and distribution subject to the following requirements 
[Added 9-27-2006 by Ord. No. 06-037]: 
a.  Location. High cube warehousing shall only be permitted north of Duncan Avenue with frontage on State Highway Routes 1 & 9 truck route. 
b.  Minimum development area: Thirty (30) acres. 
c.  Site/building design requirements: In addition to the zoning and non-residential design standards contained herein, the following additional design standards shall apply: 
(1)  Minimum building size: Three hundred thousand (300,000) square feet gross floor area. 
(2)  Minimum internal building height: Thirty (30) feet clear height. 
(3)  Minimum building column spacing/loading dock design: Fifty (50) feet wide on-center column bay spacing module to accommodate four truck loading berths per column bay module. 
(4)  Minimum staging bay design: Sixty (60) feet measured from dock door to first interior column line. 
(5)  Fire suppression system: An "Early Safety Fast Response" (ESFR) internal fire sprinkler system or a comparable system where required by the large size of a building's design shall be provided. 
(6)  Maximum automobile parking: One-half space per one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area. 
(7)  Maximum trailer storage parking: Two spaces per one loading dock doors. 
(8)  Loading dock location: No areas specifically intended for loading or trailer storage shall be located between the front building line and a public street line. 
(9)  Building design: Architectural design features shall reduce the visual impact of large warehouse buildings when viewed from a public street. 
C.  Uses incidental and accessory to the principal use, such as: 
1.  Fences and walls. 
2.  Signs. 
3.  Off-street parking and loading. 
4.  T.V., radio, and/or stereo systems accessory to bars and restaurants. [Added 1-25-2012 by Ord. No. 12-002] 
5.  Live entertainment accessory to Category One restaurants only, subject to issuance of a "Restaurant Entertainment License" by the Division of Commerce and the restrictions as to decibel level, hours of operation, and location of entertainment providers attached to that license (see Ordinance #12-001). [Added 1-25-2012 by Ord. No. 12-002] 
D.  Bulk and Parking Standards for Waterfront Planned Development District. 
1.  Marinas: See PI Bulk and Parking Standards. 
2.  Offices: See HC Bulk and Parking Standards. 
3.  Townhouses: See R-2 Bulk and Parking Standards. 
4.  Multi-family dwellings: See R-3 Bulk and Parking Standards. 
5.  Retail sales of goods and services: See HC Bulk and Parking Standards. 
6.  Theaters: See HC Bulk and Parking Standards. 
7.  Restaurants, All Categories: See HC Bulk and Parking Standards. 
[Added 9-8-2004 by Ord. No. 04-094] 
8.  High-Cube Warehousing: See I-Industrial District Bulk and Parking Standards. 
E.  Conditional Uses. 
1.  Animal shelter, subject to the following standards and conditions 
[Added 5-16-2001 by Ord. No. 01-161]: 
a.  Maximum two stories in height. 
b.  Minimum lot size shall be one acre. 
c.  No outdoor kennels to be located within twenty (20) feet of the property lines, and only if screened by a double, staggered planting of evergreen material which shall reach a minimum of five feet height after two growing seasons. 
d.  A minimum of five percent of the surface area of each wall shall be comprised of brick, tile or other decorative masonry element or treatment. 
e.  Any accessory building shall be of the same material and style as the principal building. 
f.  Signs shall be as regulated for retail uses in this district. 
g.  All areas to which animals have access shall be securely fenced. 
h.  A dog run shall be provided, which shall be fenced and screened. 
i.  Hose bibs shall be provided on at least two exterior walls.  
§ 345-57. - C Cemetery District. 
 
A.  Purpose. The City has established the cemetery district to recognize the presence of large and smaller historic cemeteries and the influence they have upon land use in the areas where they are located. 
B.  Permitted principal uses are as follows: 
1.  Cemeteries. 
C.  Uses incidental and accessory to the principal use, such as: 
1.  Mausoleums. 
2.  Signs. 
3.  Fences and walls. 
D.  Bulk Standards for Cemetery Uses. 
1.  Maximum Height for mausoleums: Thirty (30) feet. 
2.  Minimum Setback of mausoleums from property line: Thirty (30) feet.  
§ 345-58. - H Historic District. 
 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this district is to recognize the special significance of these neighborhoods because of their varied and well-preserved historic character. They reflect Jersey City's past and its unique geographic location. Historic Districts include: Hamilton Park, Harsimus Cove, Paulus Hook and Van Vorst Park. 
B.  Permitted principal uses in all Historic Districts are as follows (Paulus Hook Historic District, north of York Street only, shall refer to the O/R district for principal permitted uses and bulk standards) 
[Amended 9-10-2003 by Ord. No. 03-114]: 
1.  Townhouses. 
2.  Schools. 
3.  Governmental uses. 
4.  Houses of worship. 
5.  Mortuaries. 
6.  Parks and playgrounds. 
7.  Home occupations (See 345-60.G.2. Standards for Specific Accessory Uses. a. Home Occupations). 
[Added 4-25-2007 by Ord. No. 07-064] 
C.  Accessory uses permitted in all Historic Districts. 
[Amended 9-10-2003 by Ord. No. 03-114] 
1.  Private garages, for projects of ten (10) dwelling units or more. 
2.  Screened off-street parking, for projects of ten (10) dwelling units or more. 
3.  Live entertainment accessory to Category One restaurants only, where permitted as conditional uses or where O/R use standards apply, subject to issuance of a "Restaurant Entertainment License" by the Division of Commerce and the restrictions as to decibel level, hours of operation, and location of entertainment providers attached to that license (see Ordinance #12-001). [Added 1-25-2012 by Ord. No. 12-002] 
D.  Conditional Uses Permitted in Harsimus Cove Historic District. 
1.  Retail sales, retail services and offices, limited to the ground floors and parlor floors of attached dwelling units having direct pedestrian access from one of the following streets or parts thereof: Erie Street between Bay and Fifth Streets, limited to those properties where a commercial use is already in place. 
2.  Bed and breakfasts. 
E.  Conditional uses permitted in Paulus Hook Historic District. [Amended 9-10-2003 by Ord. No. 03-114] 
 
1.  Retail sales, retail services and offices, including medical offices, limited to the ground floors and parlor floors of attached dwelling units having direct pedestrian access from one of the following streets or parts thereof: west side of Washington Street between Morris and York Streets; east side of Washington Street between Sussex and Morris Street; subject to the following conditions [Amended 9-10-2003 by Ord. No. 03-114; 6-9-2010 by Ord. No. 10-075] : 
a.  No business dealing in the sale of fresh food products (including produce, meats, processed or prepared foods) of any kind shall be permitted to occupy new retail spaces. 
b.  New or expanded uses shall meet the bulk and yard requirements for townhouses. (Conditional use application to the Planning Board shall be required for any new retail or office use or the expansion of an existing use). 
2.  Restaurants, category one and two, limited to the ground floor of buildings located on corner lots where a ground floor commercial use is already in place at the time of adoption of this ordinance and having direct pedestrian access from Washington Street between Sussex and Morris Streets. New or expanded restaurants shall meet the bulk and yard requirements for townhouses. (Conditional use application to the Planning Board shall be required for a new restaurant or for the expansion of an existing restaurant). [Added 9-10-2003 by Ord. No. 03-114] 
3.  Sidewalk cafes and front yard seating areas accessory only to those restaurants and delicatessens permitted under subsections (B), (E)(1) and (E)(2) of this section, subject to the following conditions [Added 9-10-2003 by Ord. No. 03-114] : 
a.  A Certificate of Appropriateness shall be obtained from the Historic Preservation Commission for the design (including style of furniture, partitions and overhead covering) of any sidewalk café and/or front yard seating area. This approval shall be subject to enforcement by the Division of Zoning and/or the Division of Commerce. 
b.  Any front yard seating area (i.e., within the property line) shall meet the following standards: 
i.  The front yard seating area shall be partitioned by a three-sided, movable structure separating the seating area from the public right-of-way, and which is no less than thirty (30) inches in height and no more than thirty-six (36) inches in height, providing one opening for entrance and exit which is no less than forty-two (42) inches in width and no more than sixty (60) inches in width, and whose boundaries allow patrons and pedestrians to clearly ascertain the entrance and exit to the front yard seating area. 
ii.  The front yard seating area shall have an overhead covering, consisting of either an individual umbrella over each table or a retractable awning covering all tables and chairs. 
iii.  The front yard seating area partition and overhead covering shall not contain advertising. 
iv.  The front yard seating area partition, overhead covering, and all tables, chairs, and other café furniture shall be removed from the front yard at the close of business each day. 
v.  Food service shall be available during all times in which the front yard seating area is open for business. 
vi.  Alcoholic beverages, when permitted under any other ordinance, shall not be served or consumed in any public area which is outside the partitioned seating area of the front yard. 
vii.  All areas comprising the front yard seating area, including tables and chairs, shall remain clean and orderly at all times. 
viii.  No persons other than those consuming food prepared on the premises or personnel pertaining to the establishment preparing the food shall be within the front yard seating area except for those persons passing through the seating area to enter or exit the establishment. 
ix.  Front yard seating shall be permitted to operate from April 1 through October 31, inclusive, and between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. Sunday through Wednesday; between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. Thursday; and 8:00 a.m. and midnight Friday and Saturday; except that no alcoholic beverages, when permitted under any other ordinance, shall be served or consumed in a front yard seating area before noon on any day. 
c.  A sidewalk café license shall be obtained from the Division of Commerce for any seating area which extends beyond the property line, and all standards of Article XII (Sidewalk Cafes), Sections 296-80(B), 296-81(B), 296-82, 296-83, 296-85 of the Jersey City Municipal Code, shall be met. These standards shall be enforced by the Division of Commerce. 
d.  Sidewalk cafes located at corner properties shall be permitted to occupy the entire primary lot frontage to the extent feasible, but shall only be permitted to occupy the first fifty percent (50%) of the length of the secondary lot frontage, as measured from the corner of the property line along the primary frontage. 
e.  No sidewalk cafes shall be permitted within the public right-of-way fronting any property which is located within one hundred (100) feet of a school or house of worship as measured from lot line to lot line. 
4.  Bed and breakfasts. 
F.  Conditional uses permitted in Van Vorst Park Historic District: 
1.  Retail sales, retail services, and offices, limited to the ground floors and parlor floors of attached dwelling units having direct pedestrian access from one of the following streets or parts thereof: Grove Street between York Street and the northern boundary of the historic district; number 24 through number 28 Mercer Street, number 239 Luis Munoz Marin Boulevard to the south side of Montgomery Street; Jersey Avenue south of York Street to the southern boundary of the historic district; Jersey Avenue north of Mercer Street to the northern boundary of the historic district. New commercial uses cannot be introduced into existing exclusively residential buildings. 
[Amended 9-10-2003 by Ord. No. 03-114; 8-16-2006 by Ord. No. 06-090] 
2.  Restaurants, Category One and Two, limited to the ground floor of properties from 297 to 311 Grove Street along the west side of Grove Street (in addition to those restaurants permitted from 273 to 295 Grove Street under either the Majestic Theater Redevelopment Plan or the Grove Mercer Redevelopment Plan), from 290 to 304 Grove Street along the east side of Grove Street, and number 24 through number 28 Mercer Street, where a commercial use is already in place at the time of adoption of this ordinance and having direct pedestrian access from Grove Street or Mercer Street. 
[Added 9-10-2003 by Ord. No. 03-114; Amended 8-16-2006 by Ord. No. 06-090] 
3.  Bed and Breakfasts. 
4.  Sidewalk cafes accessory to restaurants permitted under subsection (F)(2) of this section, subject to the following conditions 
[Added 8-16-2006 by Ord. No. 06-090]: 
a.  A Certificate of Appropriateness shall be obtained from the Historic Preservation Commission for the design (including style of furniture, partitions and overhead covering) of any sidewalk café. This approval shall be subject to enforcement by the Division of Zoning. 
b.  A sidewalk café license shall be obtained from the Division of Commerce for any seating area which extends beyond the property line, and all standards of Article XII (Sidewalk Cafes), shall be met. These standards shall be enforced by the Division of Commerce. 
G.  Bulk and Parking Standards for Townhouses. 
 
1.  Minimum Lot Size: One thousand eight hundred (1,800) square feet. 
2.  Minimum Lot Width: Eighteen (18) feet. 
3.  Minimum Lot Depth: One hundred (100) feet. 
4.  Minimum Front Yard Setback: Must meet adjacent setback on either side. 
5.  Maximum Front Yard Setback: Ten (10) feet. 
6.  Minimum Rear Yard Setback: Thirty (30) feet. 
7.  Side Yard Setbacks: None. 
8.  Maximum Building Height: 
Residential/mixed use: Four stories and forty (40) feet. 
9.  Maximum Building Coverage: Sixty percent (60%). 
10.  Maximum Lot Coverage: Eighty percent (80%). 
11.  Maximum Dwelling Units Per Acre: Seventy-five (75). 
12.  Rehabilitation, infill or new residential construction (including mixed-use buildings), projects of ten (10) dwelling units or more shall provide, on-site, a minimum of one-half and a maximum of one parking space per dwelling unit. 
13.  On-site parking for projects of less than ten (10) dwelling units is prohibited. 
H.  Bulk and Parking Standards for Schools. 
 
1.  Minimum Lot Size: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
2.  Minimum Lot Width: One hundred (100) feet. 
3.  Minimum Lot Depth: One hundred (100) feet. 
4.  Minimum Front Yard Setback: Must meet adjacent setback on either side. 
5.  Maximum Front Yard Setback: Twenty (20) feet. 
6.  Minimum Rear Yard Setback: Forty-two (42) feet. 
7.  Minimum Side Yard Setbacks: Ten (10) feet. 
8.  Maximum Building Height: Four stories and forty (40) feet. 
9.  Maximum Building Coverage: Seventy-five percent (75%). 
10.  Maximum Lot Coverage: Eighty percent (80%). 
11.  Parking: One space per four teachers and/or teacher's aides. 
I.  Bulk and Parking Standards for Governmental Uses. 
 
1.  Minimum Lot Size: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
2.  Minimum Lot Width: One hundred (100) feet. 
3.  Minimum Lot Depth: One hundred (100) feet. 
4.  Minimum Front Yard Setback: Must meet adjacent setback on either side. 
5.  Maximum Front Yard Setback: Twenty (20) feet. 
6.  Minimum Rear Yard Setback: Thirty-six (36) feet. 
7.  Minimum Side Yard Setbacks: Ten (10) feet. 
8.  Maximum Building Height: Five stories and fifty (50) feet. 
9.  Maximum Building Coverage: Seventy-five percent (75%). 
10.  Maximum Lot Coverage: Eighty percent (80%). 
11.  Parking: One-half spaces per one thousand (1,000) square feet. 
J.  Bulk and Parking Standards for Houses of Worship Districts. 
 
1.  Minimum Lot Size: Five thousand (5,000) square feet. 
2.  Minimum Lot Width: Fifty (50) feet. 
3.  Minimum Lot Depth: Ten (10) feet. 
4.  Minimum Front Yard Setback: Must meet adjacent setback on either side. 
5.  Maximum Front Yard Setback: Twenty (20) feet. 
6.  Minimum Rear Yard Setback: Eighteen (18) feet. 
7.  Side Yard Setbacks: Ten (10) feet. 
8.  Maximum Building Height: Four stories/forty (40) feet. 
9.  Maximum Building Coverage: Fifty percent (50%). 
10.  Maximum Lot Coverage: Eighty percent (80%). 
11.  Parking: One space per each ten (10) seats, excluding the first one hundred (100) seats. One seats hall be considered twenty-four (24) inches in calculating the capacity of pews or benches. Houses of worship without seats or pews shall provide parking at a rate of one stall for each sixty (60) square feet of prayer space excluding the first six thousand (6,000) square feet. 
[Amended 9-10-2003 by Ord. No. 03-114] 
K.  Bulk and Parking Standards for Mortuaries. 
 
1.  Minimum Lot Size: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
2.  Minimum Lot Width: One hundred (100) feet. 
3.  Minimum Lot Depth: One hundred (100) feet. 
4.  Minimum Front Yard Setbacks: Must meet adjacent setback on either side. 
5.  Maximum Front Yard Setback: Twenty (20) feet. 
6.  Minimum Rear Yard Setback: Eighteen (18) feet. 
7.  Minimum Side Yard Setbacks: Ten (10) feet. 
8.  Maximum Building Height: Four stories and forty (40) feet. 
9.  Maximum Building Coverage: Fifty percent (50%). 
10.  Maximum Lot Coverage: Eighty percent (80%). 
11.  Parking: One space per employee and one space per every five square feet of floor area exclusive of administrative and preparation areas.  
§ 345-59. - DT Destination Tourism District. 
 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this district is to further develop this area as a national tourist attraction. 
B.  Permitted principal uses are as follows: 
1.  Convention centers. 
2.  Conference centers. 
3.  Hotels. 
4.  Parks and playgrounds. 
5.  Retail sates of goods and services. 
6.  Restaurants, all categories.  
§ 345-60. - Supplementary zoning regulations. 
[Amended 12-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-166] 
A.  General. 
1.  No building or structure shall be erected and no existing building or structure shall be moved, altered, reconstructed, added to or enlarged, nor shall any land, building or structure be designed or used for any purpose or in any manner other than as specified among the uses listed as permitted, accessory or conditional in the zone in which such building, structure or land is located, and subject to all area, yard and building requirements of this Chapter. 
2.  No yard or open space surrounding any building or structure shall be encroached upon or reduced in any manner, except in conformity with the yard, area or building regulations designated for zone(s) in which such building or structure and yard or open space is located. 
3.  The area and dimensions of any lot, yard, parking area or other space shall not be reduced to less than the minimum required by this Chapter; and, if already less than the minimum required by this Chapter, such area and/or dimension shall not be further reduced. 
4.  The provisions and restrictions contained in this Chapter shall not apply to or be binding upon the City. 
B.  Principal Structures. Only one principal structure may be located on a single lot in the R-1, R-2, R-1A, R-1F, R-3, R-4, NC, OR zones, and residential and mixed-use residential zones in Redevelopment Plans. In all other zones, related compatible principal structures under one management may be erected, used or occupied provided that all yard, setback, and coverage requirements of this Chapter are met. [Amended 8-1-2012 by Ord. No. 12-101 ] 
C.  Lot Regulations. 
1.  Every lot shall include front, side and rear yards having the areas and dimensions required within the particular zone in which such lot is located, excepting through lots which shall have no rear yard. [Amended 2-23-2011 by Ord. No. 11-022] 
2.  No yard or other open space provided for any building or structure for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this Chapter shall be considered as providing a yard or other open space for any other building or structure. 
3.  No land in a residential zone shall be used to fulfill open space, minimum area, minimum yard and/or setback requirements, parking or other similar requirements for any nonresidential use in a nonresidential zone. 
4.  Whenever title to two or more contiguous lots is held by the same owner, regardless of whether or not each of said lots may have been approved as portions of a subdivision or acquired by separate conveyance or other operation of law, and one or more of the said individual lots shall not conform with the minimum lot area and/or dimension requirements for the zone in which it is located, the contiguous lots of said owner shall be considered as a single lot and the provisions of this Chapter shall apply. 
5.  Whenever land has been dedicated or conveyed to the City by the owner of a lot existing at the time of adoption of this Chapter in order to meet the minimum street width requirements of the City, the zoning officer shall not withhold a building and/or occupancy permit for the building or use on the lot whose depth and/or areas are rendered substandard in area only because of such dedications and where owner has no other adjacent land to provide the minimum requirements. 
6.  In the case of corner lots, side yard setback regulations shall apply to the secondary front façade. [Amended 2-23-2011 by Ord. No. 11-022] 
D.  Yard Regulations. 
1.  Projections and Encroachments: Minimum required yards shall be entirely free of buildings, structures (excluding parking, patios and walkways) or parts thereof and no building or structure shall project into any minimum required front, side or rear yard nor shall any use be made of any such yard, except as follows: 
a.  Cornices and eaves may project not more than two feet into any required yard. 
b.  Sills, leaders and similar ornamental or structural features may project six inches into any required yard. 
c.  An open fire escape, where required by fire code, may project into a required rear yard not more than five feet and shall be the minimum width necessary to meet fire code. Enclosed fire escapes shall not be permitted to encroach into the rear yard. [Amended 12-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-150] 
d.  Uncovered steps may project not more than four feet into any required front and rear yard. 
e.  Television and radio aerials masts, outdoor fireplaces and children's playground equipment are permitted in any required rear yard. 
f.  Window wells affording light and air to basement and cellar areas are permitted in all required yards. 
g.  Balconies, as defined in this chapter, may project into a required rear yard not more than five feet, may project into a required sideyard not more than eighteen (18) inches, and may project into a required front yard not more than twelve (12) inches, provided that no single balcony shall extend along more than fifty (50) percent of the width of the building. 
[Added 8-16-2006 by Ord. No. 06-090; Amended 11-8-2006 by Ord. No. 06-131] 
2.  Any addition(s), vertical or horizontal, to a structure which is nonconforming with respect to yard requirements at the time of adoption of this ordinance shall adhere to the yard requirements for the district in which said structure is located. 
[Amended 10-8-2003 by Ord. No. 03-134] 
3.  In the case of a through lot, the building setback from each street, whether considered front, side or rear yard shall adhere to the front yard setback requirements for the district in which said lot, or applicable portion of the lot, is located. 
4.  Service stations shall not be used for storage of unregistered vehicles. 
E.  Zoning Standard Calculations. When a numerical calculation of zoning standards for a particular lot results in a fractional number, such numbers shall be rounded down to the next whole number for fractions less than .500 and rounded up for fractions .500 and above. 
[Added 1-27-2010 by Ord. No. 10-007] 
F.  Frontage Upon a Street. Every principal building shall be built upon a lot having minimum street frontage equal to the required minimum lot width upon an approved street which shall be improved in accordance with street standards established by the City of Jersey City. 
G.  Height Exceptions. 
[Amended 6-13-2007 by Ord. No. 07-103; 8-1-2012 by Ord. No. 12-101 ; 4-24-2013 by Ord. No. 13-040 ; 9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-095 ; 1-14-2015 by Ord. No. 14-172 ; 4-8-2015 by Ord. No. 15-041 ; 7-18-2018 by Ord. No. 18-074 ] 
1.  Roof structures and appurtenances for the housing of stairways, tanks, ventilating fans, air-conditioning equipment, dust collectors or similar equipment required to operate and maintain the building as well as skylights, spires, cupolas, flagpoles, chimneys, water tanks or similar structures may be erected above the height limits prescribed by this Chapter but in no case more than the following distances above the maximum height permitted in the district, except spires for houses of worship shall have no height restrictions. 
Building Height (feet) 	Maximum Height of the Exceptions 
(permitted to accommodate appurtenances and roof structures) 
Up to 45 	10 feet 
45 to 100 	12 feet or 20% of building height, whichever is greater for buildings without common rooftop amenity space. For buildings with common rooftop amenity space, a total of 20 feet shall be permitted 
101 and over 	20 feet or 20% of building height, whichever is greater for buildings without common rooftop amenity space. For buildings with common rooftop amenity space, a total of 30 feet or 20% of building height, whichever is less shall be permitted 
 
2.  Any rooftop structure or appurtenance covered by this section must be set back from any front facade (primary or secondary) by a distance of one foot one inch for every foot of rooftop structure or appurtenance height. 
3.  Fire or parapet walls may be erected above the height limits prescribed by this Chapter up to a maximum height of six feet from the roof of the top story and with a minimum of 42 inches from the floor of the rooftop deck, if provided. 
4.  Mechanical and other roof appurtenances and structures shall not exceed 20 percent of the roof area and shall be properly shielded. 
5.  There is no coverage limit on roof decks used for residents' open space; however, roof decks in historic districts shall not be visible from the street and shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from any front facade (primary or secondary). 
6.  Where a property is located within the "One Percent (1%) Annual Chance Flood Hazard Area," the number of feet required to reach the base flood elevation plus one foot shall be added to the maximum permitted height of the building. This provision shall apply to all property within any regular zone district or within any duly adopted redevelopment plan area. Where property is located within an historic district, or where an historic district and redevelopment plan overlap, this exception shall not apply. 
7.  Requirements for roof structures used as enclosed amenity spaces: 
a.  In historic districts, enclosed amenity spaces are limited to a floor area maximum of 100 square feet. 
b.  For buildings without elevator service to the roof, enclosed amenity spaces are limited to a floor area maximum of 100 square feet. 
c.  For buildings with elevator service to the roof, enclosed amenity spaces are limited to a maximum of 100 square feet or ten percent of the floor area of the roof, whichever is greater. 
d.  Enclosed amenity spaces include, but are not limited to, the following: storage closets, trash rooms, bathrooms, common spaces, recreational spaces, lounges, communal spaces, lobbies, and vestibules. 
e.  Should Roof Structures used as enclosed amenity spaces exceed the floor area maximums of this section then the top of any such roof structure shall be considered the highest point of the building and shall be considered a story in determining the height of the building. 
H.  Solar Panels. 
[Added 12-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-166; amended 12-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-150; 8-1-2012 by Ord. No. 12-101 ] 
1.  Solar panels are exempt from the rooftop area limits of 20%, as outlined in G.3 above. 
2.  Ancillary solar equipment located on the roof is subject to height and rooftop area limits of 20% of rooftop area as outlined in G.1 and G.3 above. 
3.  Any solar array equipment design which satisfies the criteria as outlined in § 345-16B(4) is not subject to review before the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment. 
I.  Accessory Structures and Uses Unless Regulated Elsewhere in this Chapter. 
1.  General Requirements. 
a.  No accessory structure shall be built upon any lot on which there is no principal building or structure. 
b.  In the NC, O/R, CBD, HC, C/A and residential zones, no accessory structure shall exceed fifteen (15) feet in height. 
c.  The distance between the accessory structure and a principal building on the same lot shall meet the minimum requirements for fire, health and safety regulations of any City and/or State regulations. 
d.  No accessory structure(s) shall be located in a required front yard or in any area, such as the "side" front yard of a corner lot, where front yard setbacks apply. On through lots, no accessory structure erected in the rear yard shall be nearer to the "rear" street line than the minimum front yard setback for the zone in which such lot is located. 
e.  Any accessory structure attached to the principal building shall be considered a part of the principal building regardless of the technique of connecting the principal and accessory building and shall adhere to the yard requirements of the principal building. 
f.  Unless specified elsewhere, minimum setbacks from side and rear lot lines for accessory structures shall be set back the minimum side yard of the principal building, but in no case less than three feet. [Amended 10-8-2003 by Ord. No. 03-134] 
2.  Standards for Specific Accessory Uses. 
a.  Home Occupations. 
i.  The practitioner must be the owner or lessee of the residence in which the home occupation is contained. 
ii.  The practitioner must reside in the home as his or her principal residence. 
iii.  There shall be no external evidence of the home occupation. 
iv.  The practitioner shall not utilize the services of more than one non resident employee. 
v.  There shall be no retail sales, manufacturing or industrial operations conducted on the site. 
vi.  No more than one business visitor shall be permitted at any one time. 
vii.  There shall be no sign identifying the home occupation and there shall be no identification of such home occupation upon any mailbox. 
viii.  The residential character of the neighborhood and the premises shall not be subordinated to the home occupation use. 
ix.  The home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the dwelling for residential purposes. The maximum area devoted to the home occupation shall be limited to not more than forty percent (40%) of the total area of the floor where the home occupation use is located, excluding space used for a private garage, or nine hundred (900) square feet, whichever is smaller. 
x.  No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation which creates glare, fumes, odors, electrical interference, medical waste, or other nuisance factors detectable to the human senses outside the lot on which the home occupation is conducted. 
b.  Swimming Pools. 
i.  Pools for private use shall be located on a lot containing a residential building. Pools shall be located in the rear yard only. Setbacks shall be measured from the water's edge and no pool shall occupy more than seventy-five percent (75%) of the rear yard. A deck around the pool shall be a separate structure and such decks shall also meet the setback standards for the pool. All pools shall adhere to the setbacks as set forth in this Chapter for accessory structures. 
ii.  Pools in multi-family developments and in hotels shall not be located within the front yard. All pools shall be landscaped to be below grade with setbacks measured from the water's edge adhering to the requirements for a principal structure. No pool shall occupy more than fifty percent (50%) of the area part of the yard in which it is located. [Amended 12-14-2011 by Ord. No. 11-150] 
iii.  All lighting shall be screened from dwelling units in the area to prevent direct or reflected light from being a nuisance. No public address system shall be erected with any pool. All health and safety codes shall be met in the erection and maintenance of a pool. 
iv.  Enclosure of swimming pools shall be required as set forth in the Uniform Construction Code. 
c.  Decks and Patios. 
i.  Decks attached to a principal structure shall meet the setbacks of principal structures. 
ii.  A six foot high screen shall be required if the deck projects beyond the rear building line of the adjacent lot. 
d.  Restaurants, Category Two. 
[Amended 4-22-2015 by Ord. No. 15-048 ] 
i.  Zones citywide that permit restaurant, category two shall permit restaurant, category two mobile food vendors on surface parking lots and private rights-of-way with minimum lot frontage of fifty (50) feet. 
J.  Conditional Uses. All conditional uses shall be subject to site plan review in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
K.  Murals. 
[Added 1-27-2010 by Ord. No. 10-007; amended 2-9-2011 by Ord. No. 11-018] 
1.  Murals that advance or promote a business product and/or activity contained within the building to which it is adhered, or the primary purpose of which is to advertise any product and/or business activity, shall be subject to municipal commercial signage regulation under Section 345-68. 
2.  Murals proposed to be adhered to buildings or structures located within a designated Historic District, or designated as a municipal, state and/or national landmark shall be referred to the Jersey City Historic Preservation Commission for review and recommendation prior to installation. Such review recommendations shall be limited to the size of the installation and/or the appropriateness of the structure for the placement of art, and shall not be content-based. 
3.  Murals that are not painted directly on the host structure and thus require the installation of panels, canvases, or other means of display may require review and approval by the Division of Zoning and/or the Office of Construction Code prior to installation. 
L.  Child Care Centers. Child care centers are permitted uses in all nonresidential zones in accordance with the following requirements: 
1.  Such use shall meet the area requirements of the zone where located. 
2.  The floor area occupied in any building or structure as a child care center shall be excluded in calculating the following: 
a.  Any parking requirements otherwise applicable to that number of units or amount of floor space, as appropriate, as required under this Article. 
b.  The permitted density allowable for that building or structure under the applicable zone requirements. 
M.  Family Daycare Homes. Family Daycare Homes are permitted as accessory uses in all residential zones. 
N.  Senior Housing. Senior Housing shall be permitted in all residential zones in accordance with the Federal Fair Housing Act. 
O.  Essential Services. Public utility lines for the transportation, distribution and/or control of water, electricity, gas, oil, steam and telegraph and telephone communications, and their supporting members, other than buildings and structures, including pipes, shall not be required to be located on a lot, nor shall this Chapter be interpreted to prohibit the use of a property in any zone for the above uses. Essential services shall not include wireless communications facilities. All new construction shall require lines for essential services to be underground, and transformers to be underground or housed within the building. 
[Amended 2-23-2011 by Ord. No. 11-022] 
P.  Community Residences. Community residences for the developmentally disabled, community shelters for victims of domestic violence, community residences for the terminally ill and community residences for persons with head injuries shall be a permitted use in all residential districts, and the requirements shall be the same as for single family dwelling units located within such districts. 
Q.  Conversions of First Floor Commercial Uses to a Dwelling Unit. Not more than one dwelling unit shall be created. 
R.  Wireless Communications. Wireless Communication Antennas are permitted second principal uses on existing structures and new Wireless Telecommunication Towers are conditional uses. 
[Amended 6-9-2010 by Ord. No. 10-074] 
1.  Purpose. The overall purpose of these provisions is to provide specific zoning conditions and standards for the location and operation of antennas used for the transmission and reception of wave frequencies for the purposes of any wireless telecommunication (e.g., telephone, radio, paging and/or television communication) within the City of Jersey City, which recognize the need to safeguard the public good and preserve the intent and purposes of the Jersey City Master Plan and Zone Plan. 
2.  Overall Objective. The overall objective of these ordinance provisions is to enable the location within the City of Jersey City of those antennas which are necessary to provide adequate wireless communication services while, at the same time, limiting the number of supporting towers to the fewest possible and minimizing the impact of the antennas, accessory equipment, and supporting structures on residences, streetscapes, and view corridors throughout the municipality. 
3.  Specific Goals. 
a.  To encourage the location of antennas upon, or within, existing structures, including existing buildings, existing wireless communication towers, existing water towers, and existing telephone and electric towers, especially those existing structures situated in non-residential districts; 
b.  To encourage the configuration of telecommunication facilities in a manner that minimizes and mitigates any adverse impacts upon affected properties, streetscapes, and vistas through careful design, siting, screening, landscaping, and innovative camouflaging techniques; 
c.  To encourage the colocation of as many antennas as possible, of as many wireless telecommunication carriers as possible, on existing towers and other structures in industrial districts; 
d.  To discourage the construction of new towers which do not have the likelihood of being used by a number of wireless telecommunication carriers; 
e.  To minimize the total number of wireless telecommunications towers within the City of Jersey City; 
f.  To discourage adverse impacts on scenic corridors and historic sites and districts; 
g.  To enhance the ability of the carriers of wireless communications services who adhere to the specific requirements and intent of these ordinance provisions to provide such services quickly, effectively, and efficiently; and 
h.  To comply with the mandate of the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996, 47 U.S.C. Section 332 (c)(7), which preserves local government authority to enforce zoning requirements which protect public safety, public and private property, and community aesthetics. 
4.  Exemptions of Applicability. Wireless Communications Antennas provisions shall not apply to the following: 
a.  These provisions shall not govern any tower, or the installation of any antenna, that is under seventy (70) feet in height and is owned and operated only by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator or is used exclusively to receive transmissions; 
b.  Preexisting towers or antennas shall not be required to meet the requirements of this section, except that in the case of enlargement, structural modification, or addition to any existing tower or antenna facility which shall result in an increase of ten percent (10%) or more in tower height or facility floor area, the provisions of this section shall apply; and 
c.  These provisions shall not govern any parabolic satellite antennas. 
5.  "Wireless communication antennas" shall be permitted as second principal uses on existing structures with the following exemptions: 
a.  No wireless communication antennas shall be permitted in any historic district. 
b.  No wireless communication antennas shall be permitted on any new or existing billboards. 
6.  New "wireless telecommunication towers" along with the antennas and equipment facilities associated with such new towers shall be permitted as conditional uses in the industrial districts, provided that: 
i.  The location of a new tower within an industrial district shall be considered as a last resort to locating an antenna on an existing structure. 
ii.  Colocation shall be required for no less than three carriers and a letter of intent by the applicant to meet the colocation requirement shall be provided to the Planning Board; and 
iii.  All of the separation distance, area, setback, height, and design criteria requirements listed herein shall be met. 
7.  "Wireless communication antennas" shall be permitted on existing or proposed structures in any Redevelopment Area district. 
8.  Area and Setback Requirements. 
a.  If the proposed antenna(s) will be supported by a new wireless telecommunication tower: 
i.  The proposed antenna(s) and proposed supporting tower and ancillary related electronic equipment shall be located on a land area equal to or larger than one-third the "minimum lot area" specified for the I District; 
ii.  The minimum required land area shall either be a separate undeveloped lot or a leased portion of an already developed lot; 
iii.  The proposed antenna(s) and proposed supporting tower and ancillary related electronic equipment and any approved building housing the electronic equipment and any approved camouflaging of the tower shall be the only land uses located on the proposed tower site, whether a separate lot or a leased portion of a lot; and 
iv.  Excepting for any access driveway into the property, any required landscaping, and any underground utility lines reviewed and approved by the Planning Board as part of the site plan submission, no building structure and/or disturbance of land shall be permitted within one hundred (100) feet from any street line, from any other existing or proposed property line, or from any "lease line," provided that if a tower will exceed one hundred (100) feet in height, the tower shall be set back from any street line and from any other existing or proposed property line a distance equal to or greater than the height of the tower, except that, in any case the tower shall be required to be setback a minimum distance of only one hundred (100) feet from any line demarcating the leased premises. 
9.  Maximum Height. 
a.  The maximum height of any proposed antenna extending above any existing building or existing structure shall be the minimum height necessary for the proposed installation to satisfactory operate; and 
b.  The height of any proposed new supporting tower shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) feet unless it can be demonstrated by the applicant, to the satisfaction of the Planning Board, that a higher height is necessary for the proposed installation of the antenna(s) to satisfactorily operate and is necessary for the colocation of at least three other carriers on the tower. 
10.  Design Criteria. All applications for wireless communication antennas shall adhere to the following design criteria: 
a.  For location on an existing building or structure: 
i.  Minor site plan application to the Planning Board shall be required. 
ii.  To the greatest extent possible, any antenna(s) located on an existing building shall be surface-mounted on the building façade at the roofline or along the exterior parapet wall so as to reasonably blend in with the architectural features of the building and painted to match the color of the material on which it is mounted, or pole mounted to the back of the parapet wall without horizontal supports. 
iii.  Antenna(s) and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment shall be of a color that matches, as closely as possible, the background color of the façade on which it is mounted so as to make the antenna(s) and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. 
iv.  All ancillary electronic and mechanical equipment shall be housed either within an enclosed area inside the existing building or on the roof top of the building, provided: 
(A)  The height of roof top equipment facilities shall not exceed the height of the tallest accessory rooftop structure such as a stair or elevator housing by more than ten (10) feet, and shall be fully enclosed in a cabinet which shall be constructed of a material and color which will match those of the existing roof top accessory structures, or enclosed in a radio frequency transparent material designed to blend architecturally with the building's design; and 
(B)  Documentation by a qualified expert that any existing structure will have sufficient structural integrity to support the proposed antennas and ancillary equipment shall be provided to the Planning Board. 
(C)  The roof is at least thirty-five (35) feet above grade and documentation by a qualified expert that ancillary equipment cannot be physically located inside the building. 
v.  Antenna(s), supporting structures, and ancillary equipment and housing shall not be visible from any property or public right-of-way within a historic district, to the greatest extent possible. 
vi.  Any additional public utility lines and/or cables deemed necessary for the operation of the proposed antenna facility shall be located underground. The applicant shall provide documentation to the Planning Board as to the necessity of the additional lines. 
vii.  No signage shall be permitted that is visible from adjacent properties or from the public right-of-way. 
b.  For a new tower: 
i.  Preliminary and Final Site Plan application shall be required for any proposed new wireless telecommunication tower. 
ii.  Any proposed new tower shall be a "mono-pole" unless the applicant can demonstrate, and the Planning Board agrees, that a different type of pole is necessary for the colocation of additional antennas on the tower. 
iii.  Unless otherwise required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) or the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), all towers shall be either constructed of a neutrally colored material or painted a neutral color so as to reduce the visual obtrusiveness. All applicable FAA or FCC standards regarding color or materials that may apply to the proposed tower shall be provided to the Planning Board. 
iv.  No lighting is permitted on a tower except lighting that is specifically required by the FAA and any such required lighting shall be focused and shielded, to the greatest extent possible, so as not to project towards adjacent and nearby properties. All applicable FAA standards regarding lighting that may apply to the proposed tower shall be provided to the Planning Board. 
v.  All ancillary electronic and other equipment shall be located within a building or enclosed structure which structure shall meet the following design criteria: 
(A)  Each provider of wireless communication services located on the site may have a maximum of one cabinet enclosing required electronic equipment, which cabinet shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height nor more than two hundred fifty (250) square feet in area. All such cabinets shall be located within a building which shall not exceed one and one-half stories and twenty (20) feet in height nor one thousand (1,000) gross square feet in area. 
(B)  The building shall use materials, textures, and colors that together with required screening and landscaping will cause it to blend into the natural setting and surroundings, to the greatest extent possible. 
(C)  Provision for colocation of equipment shall be incorporated into the design of the building/structure. 
(D)  No electronic equipment shall be designed in such a way as to interfere with any public safety communication. 
(E)  All equipment shall be automated so that, to the greatest extent possible, the need for on-site maintenance and associated vehicular trips to and from the site will be minimized. 
(F)  Lighting shall be limited to a single light at the entrance to the building which shall be focused downward. 
vi.  Landscaping shall be provided between the tower and also between any building or structure used to house ancillary equipment and any public street or residential dwelling unit or residential zoning district in accordance with the following: 
(A)  Required landscaping shall consist of sufficient density of evergreen planting to effectively screen the view of the tower base and, in addition, sufficient other plantings which may consist of a combination of shrubs and deciduous trees to screen the tower and enhance the appearance of, to the maximum extent reasonably possible, from any surrounding residential properties and from any public street. 
(B)  Any newly planted evergreen trees shall be at least eight feet high at the time of planting and any newly planted deciduous trees shall be a minimum caliper of three and one half inches at the time of planting. 
(C)  No signage shall be permitted except "warning" and/or equipment information signs as deemed necessary or as required by state and/or federal regulatory agencies for safety purposes and are specifically approved by the Planning Board. 
vii.  Minimal off-street parking shall be permitted as needed to provide maintenance at the site and as specifically approved by the Planning Board. 
viii.  No antenna shall be located on any tower in order to provide non-cellular telephone service; such service shall be provided via existing telephone lines if available to the site or by the underground extension of telephone lines to the site if necessary. 
ix.  Any new tower shall be located behind existing buildings and/or natural topographic elevations in order to screen the tower's base from being visible from adjacent properties and from any street right-of-way; to the greatest extent possible, no new tower shall be visible from a public street in any residential district. 
x.  Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing consisting of eight foot high one-inch chain link "non-climbable" mesh which shall be fully screened by the required landscaping. 
xi.  Documentation by a qualified expert that any existing structure will have sufficient structural integrity to support the proposed antennas and ancillary equipment shall be provided to the Planning Board. 
11.  Radio Frequency Emissions. Applicants shall provide current FCC information concerning wireless telecommunication towers and Radio Frequency (RF) emission standards to the Planning Board, whenever applicable. Upon documentation by a qualified expert, proposed wireless communication antenna projects which meet the current FCC standards shall not be conditioned or denied on the basis of RF impact. 
12.  Removal of Abandoned/Obsolete Antennas and Towers. 
a.  Any "wireless communication antenna" facility not used for its intended and approved purpose for a period of one year shall be considered "no longer operative" and shall be removed by the responsible party within sixty (60) days thereof. 
S.  Group Homes. Group Homes, containing twelve (12) children or less shall be permitted in all zones where residential uses are permitted subject to the residential standards of the specific zone. 
T.  Restaurant Overlay. 
1.  Restaurant Overlay Zones (ROZ) shall apply to the areas depicted on the Jersey City Zoning Map. The ROZ is intended to apply as an overlay, which means that it applies an alternative zoning pattern when and if chosen by the property owner. Within a ROZ, existing zoning regulations continue unchanged. The application of ROZ zoning provides for a new, additional permitted principal use restaurants. 
2.  Restaurant Overlay Zoning Regulations. [Amended 1-25-2012 by Ord. No. 12-002] 
 
a.  Permitted Principal Uses. 
i.  Restaurants, category one and two. 
b.  Permitted Accessory Uses. 
i.  Sidewalk Cafés (subject to the provisions of Chapter 296, Article XII, Sidewalk Cafés). 
ii.  Live entertainment subject to issuance of a "Restaurant Entertainment License" by the Division of Commerce and the restrictions as to decibel level, hours of operation, and location of entertainment providers attached to that license (see Ordinance #12-001). 
c.  Minimum Building Separation. 
i.  No setback from any lot line shall be required for existing structures that are not to be enlarged. However, in the event that a separation of structures exists, or is proposed in the event of new construction, the minimum distance between any rear wall of a building proposed for a ROZ restaurant use and any rear wall of an adjacent building containing any residential uses shall be fifteen (15) feet, as measured from building face to building face, except in the case of corner lots, where no minimum or maximum separation shall apply. 
U.  Satellite Earth Stations. 
1.  A satellite earth station shall be permitted as an accessory use in all zone districts. Satellite earth stations shall require site plan approval from the Planning Board, except where accessory to a one- or two-family residential use. 
2.  Performance Standards. 
a.  No satellite earth station may be placed in the front yard of any lot in the City. A corner lot shall be deemed to have a front yard facing each street. 
b.  Receive-only satellite earth stations thirty-six (36) inches in diameter or less shall be located on the roof. Receive-only satellite earth stations greater than thirty-six (36) inches in diameter shall be placed on a lot only in the rear yard; provided, however, that on a clear and convincing showing by an applicant that a reasonably satisfactory signal cannot be obtained from a rear yard location, the Board may permit the antenna to be located in the side yard, and if such signal cannot be obtained in either rear or side yard, the Board may permit the antenna to be located on the roof of any principal or accessory building on the lot. 
c.  A transmit/receive satellite earth station shall be placed on the roof of the principal building of the lot; provided, however, that on a clear and convincing showing by an applicant that this requirement is impracticable or would cause undue hardship, the Planning Board may permit the antenna to be located in the rear yard of the lot. If a ground-mounted transmit/receive-type antenna is proposed, the site plan shall include the proposed location of a protective fence, a minimum of four feet in height, surrounding the antenna on all sides. The proposed fence shall be constructed in accordance with the fence provisions of this Chapter. 
d.  All satellite earth stations shall not be closer to the side property line than a distance equal to the diameter of said antenna or side yard setback requirement for the principal structure on the lot, whichever results in the greatest setback. 
e.  All satellite earth stations shall not be closer to the rear property line than a distance equal to the diameter of said antenna or rear yard setback requirement for the principal structure on the lot, whichever results in the greatest setback. 
f.  When mounted on the ground, the overall height from the surrounding ground level to the lowest point of the antenna shall not exceed two feet, except in instances where additional clearance is needed to satisfactorily receive and/or transmit signals. No ground-mounted satellite earth station shall exceed twelve (12) feet in height, as measured from the average grade of the base of the antenna to the highest point of the antenna. 
g.  Roof-Mounted Antennas. 
i.  Flat roofs and mansard-style roofs. No roof-mounted satellite earth station may extend above the roofline more than nine feet six inches when mounted on a flat roof or mansard-style roof. However, upon a showing that such a roof-mounted antenna will not receive adequate reception under the restrictions of this subsection, the minimum height necessary for reasonable satisfactory reception my be allowed. Roof-mounted antennas on a flat roof shall be located in the center of the roof structure to reduce visibility. 
ii.  All other style roofs. No roof-mounted satellite earth stations may extend above the highest point of the roof more than three feet when mounted on all other style roofs, and the roof-mounted satellite earth station must be located on the portion of the roof facing the rear yard or, if this would unreasonable limit signal reception, the side yard. However, upon a showing that such a roof-mounted antenna will not receive adequate reception under the restrictions of this subsection, the minimum height necessary for reasonably satisfactory reception may be allowed. 
h.  All satellite earth stations shall be of the mesh type only, with not more than eighty-five percent (85%) of the surface being solid. 
i.  All satellite earth stations shall be painted a solid, dark, nonmetallic, non-glossy color if ground mounted. Roof-mounted antennas mounted on a flat roof or mansard-style roof shall be painted a solid, dark, nonmetallic, nonglossy light to medium gray. When mounted on all other style roofs, the satellite antenna shall be painted the color of the surface to which it is attached. 
j.  The ability of the applicant to install a satellite earth station in an unobtrusive location and to minimize the visual and health impacts on neighboring properties shall be a major factor in determining whether or not a permit is issued. 
k.  The number of allowable satellite earth stations is as follows: 
i.  For single-family and two-family dwellings, one per building. 
ii.  For attached dwellings, patio homes and duplex, townhouse and multifamily dwellings, one per building. 
iii.  For all other uses permitted in residential zones not specifically provided for otherwise (e.g., schools, churches, nursing, homes, etc.), one per building. 
l.  The satellite earth station may only be used for occupants of the building located on the property. 
m.  When the use of a satellite earth station is abandoned it shall be removed. 
n.  Satellite earth stations may not be mounted on a portable or movable structure, such as a trailer. 
o.  To the extent permitted by law, no satellite earth station shall be located on or abutting any property which is located in the National of State Register or Historic Places. 
p.  No satellite earth station shall be erected on a public utility easement without the consent of the easement holder. 
q.  The proposed earth satellite station shall be the smallest commercially available equipment based on the current technology so as to minimize the visual impact on the surrounding areas. 
r.  The satellite earth station may not be used as a sign. 
s.  All wiring or connecting cables between the satellite earth station and the principal building on the site shall be buried underground. 
t.  Screening. Ground-mounted antennas shall be screened as to minimize visibility from public streets and adjoining properties. Screening shall be accompanied by the installation of landscaping and/or fencing or in the form of a wall or structure enclosing the antenna. The species, quantity, size and spacing of plant materials shall be specified on the site plan. In order to reduce the height of plant materials, soil berms may be used in conjunction with the proposed landscaping. Any walls or structure shall be constructed of plastic, fiberglass, or other approved materials which will not impede the function and operation of the antenna. Any walls or structures shall be constructed to be consistent with the surrounding site characteristics. The requirements of this subsection shall not impose unreasonable limitations on, or prevent, reception of satellite-delivered signals by satellite and receiving/transmitting antennas or impose costs on the users of such antennas that are excessive in light of the purchase and installation cost of the equipment. 
3.  Such satellite earth stations, appurtenances, landscaping and fencing shall be kept and maintained in good condition. 
V.  Nonconforming Uses, Structures and Lots. 
[Amended 6-15-2016 by Ord. No. 16-096 ] 
1.  Continuance of existing nonconforming uses and structures. Any nonconforming use or structure which lawfully existed at the time of the passage of this Chapter may be continued, and any legally existing nonconforming building or structure may be reconstructed or structurally altered, but only in accordance with the requirements of this Chapter. Land on which a nonconforming use or structure is located shall not be reduced in size. 
2.  Abandonment. A nonconforming use of a building or land, which has been abandoned, shall not thereafter be revived. A rebuttable presumption of intention to abandon a nonconforming use shall arise whenever any of the following circumstances are found to exist: 
a.  The owner has made representations in any public forum that the (non-conforming) use of the property has been abandoned; or 
b.  The intent to abandon is manifested by the conduct and/or statements of the owner and is evidenced by an external act or omissions to act, which is consistent with such intent and contrary to any interest in preserving or continuing the non-conformance; or 
c.  The property is vacant and is not the subject of any current development approvals and has been vacant and substantially unused and inactive for a period of twelve (12) consecutive calendar months. 
d.  The characteristic equipment and furnishings of the non-conforming use have been removed from the premises and have not been replaced by similar equipment within twelve (12) months, unless other facts show intention to resume the non-conforming use; or 
e.  Such non-conforming use has been replaced by a conforming use. 
3.  Alteration, Extension or Enlargement of Non-Conforming Use or Structure. 
a.  A non-conforming use of any building, structure or land shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or changed in any manner whatsoever. 
b.  No building or structure in which a nonconforming use exists shall be enlarged, extended or structurally altered in any manner, provided, however, that: 
i.  Nothing herein shall prevent the repair and maintenance of any building wherein there exists a non-conforming use, provided that such maintenance and repair does not in any way constitute or result in a further extension of a non-conforming use. 
ii.  Alterations and improvements which do not constitute or require structural changes may be in or to a building wherein a non-conforming use exists, provided that such non-conforming use will not be increased, extended or enlarged thereby. 
iii.  Nothing herein shall prevent the strengthening or restoration to a safe and lawful condition on any part of any building which is non-conforming. 
c.  A non-conforming use changed or altered to a conforming use may not thereafter be changed back to a non-conforming use. 
4.  Restoration. 
a.  In the event that the owner and Zoning Officer are unable to agree with respect to any non-conforming structure or use which has been damaged by fire, explosion, flood, windstorm or act of God, or condemned, said structure shall be examined by the following three people: the Zoning Officer; the owner or architect or engineer selected by the owner; and a third person agreed to by the Zoning Officer and the owner whose fee shall be agreed to and shall be paid in equal portions by the City and the owner. If in the opinion of a majority of the above three people the damage or condition warranting condemnation is greater than fifty percent (50%) of the value of replacing the entire structure, the structure or use shall be considered completely destroyed and may be rebuilt to the original non-conforming structure or use specifications only upon approval of a use variance as provided by state statute. 
b.  In the event of a condemned structure, or where the damage is less than fifty percent (50%) of the value of replacing the entire structure in the opinion of the majority of the above three people, the non-conforming structure or use rebuilt and the property used for the same non conforming structure or use, provided that it does not exceed any height, area and volume of the original structure, the site plan application shall be filed within ninety (90) days of the receipt of written notice of the determination of damage by the above three people and the reconstruction shall commence within one year and ninety (90) days from the date the building was damaged or condemned and the reconstruction shall be carried on without interruption. 
c.  In the event of a condemned structure, or where the damage is less than fifty percent (50%) of the value of replacing the entire structure in the opinion of the majority of the above three people, the non-conforming structure or use may be rebuilt and the property used for the same non-conforming structure or use, provided that it does not exceed any height, area and volume of the original structure, the site plan application shall be filed within ninety (90) days of the receipt of written notice of the determination of damage by the above three people, and the reconstruction shall commence within one year and ninety (90) days from the date the building was damaged or condemned and the reconstruction shall be carried on without interruption. 
d.  The total value of the structure shall be based on the current cost of replacing those portions damaged or condemned to their original status plus the current cost of replacing the remaining usable elements of the structure. The percent damaged shall then be current replacement costs of the portion damaged or condemned computed as a percentage of the current total replacement cost of the entire structure. 
5.  Nonconforming Lots. 
a.  Any existing lot which does not meet the minimum lot size, or a structure which violates any yard requirements, may have additions to the principal building and/or construct an accessory building without an appeal to the Board of Adjustment, provided that: the total permitted lot and building coverage is not exceeded; the accessory building and/or any addition to the principal building do not violate any other requirements of this Chapter such as, but not limited to, height, setback and parking. 
b.  Any vacant lot existing at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Chapter whose area or dimensions do not meet the requirements of the district in which the lot is located may have a building permit issued for a use permitted for that zoning district without an appeal to the Board of Adjustment, provided that the building and lot coverage limit is not exceeded, parking requirements are met and the yard and height provisions are met and provided no adjacent lot is in common ownership. 
V.1.   Agriculture. 
[Added 4-13-2011 by Ord. No. 11-041] 
1.  Community gardening: Shall be permitted in all zones and redevelopment plan areas, and it is exempt from site plan approval. When community gardening is done on city owned land, it is subject to the Jersey City "Adopt-A-Lot" Program standards and requirements. 
2.  Commercial agriculture: Shall be permitted in all commercial, industrial and mixed use redevelopment plan area zones. Commercial greenhouses of five thousand (5,000) sq. ft. or less in area are exempt from site plan approval but shall be subject to the maximum, but not the minimum, height regulations of the zone they are located within. Greenhouses shall be required to meet minimum setback requirements of two (2) feet for each sideyard, five (5) feet for the rear yard and five (5) feet for the front yard. 
3.  Rooftop gardens and raised planters: Shall be permitted in all zones and redevelopment plan areas, and shall be exempt from setback requirements and site plan approval. 
W.  Green Roofs. 
[Added 4-13-2011 by Ord. No. 11-041] 
1.  Green roofs shall be exempt from the rooftop area limit of twenty percent (20%) for rooftop appurtenances, as per Section 345-60.G.2. 
2.  Green roofs shall be exempt from site plan approval, unless their installation is part of a project that exceeds the threshold for Site Plan review as per Section 345-16. 
3.  Ancillary green roof equipment and structures, including but not limited to the installation of a greenhouse, shall be subject to the maximum height for exceptions for roof appurtenances, as is outlined in Section 345-60.G.1. of the Land Development Ordinance. 
X.  Café - Category Two, Restaurant. 
[Added 9-9-2015 by Ord. No. 15-115 ] 
1.  Conditional use permitted in all districts, except on the east side of Washington between Sussex and Morris, but to include the corner properties on that block. 
a.  Shall only be located where there is an existing legal storefront. 
b.  In no instance shall alcohol be served or consumed on premises. 
c.  In no instance shall a hooded ventilation system, exhausting outside the building, be permitted. 
d.  Seating shall be limited to no more than twenty (20) seats total, both inside and outside. 
e.  In no instance shall rear yard seating be permitted. 
f.  In no instance shall food preparation create grease-laden vapors. 
g.  Garbage receptacles shall be kept within the building for storage, so that it is not stored on any street, sidewalk, areaway, front yard or within any public right-of-way. The owner shall provide for the daily collection, haulage and disposal of their own refuse with a private contractor, pursuant to Chapter 287-6, 7, 8, and 9. 
h.  Café shall not stay open any later than 10:00 p.m., and not open to the public before 5:00 a.m. 
Y.  Art Gallery. 
[Added 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. 15-132 ] 
1.  Permitted in all existing non-residential spaces or zoned non-residential spaces. In no instance shall an art gallery be considered a theater. 
2.  Studio workspace is prohibited where not already permitted. 
3.  All noise and entertainment shall be regulated by Chapters 157 (Entertainment License) and 222 (Noise) of the Jersey City Code. 
4.  Signage shall be regulated by 345-68. The type and size of the signage shall be limited to the retail use signage standards for the zone where the space exists. If there are no applicable retail standards, signage shall be limited to a maximum six (6) square feet. 
5.  Any work on a building which is an individual landmark or is within a Historic District shall first be subject to approval from the Historic Preservation Commission under the provisions of Section 345-30, Historic preservation review procedures. 
Z.  Short Term Rental. 
[Added 10-28-2015 by Ord. No. 15-137 ] 
1.  Short term rentals are permitted as art accessory use to a permitted principal residential use in all zoning districts and redevelopment plan areas where residential uses are permitted. 
a.  The person offering a dwelling unit for short-term rental use must be the owner or lessee of the residence in which the short-term rental activity occurs. Short-term rental activity may occur in a habitable accessory building located on the same premises as the residence. 
b.  No person offering a dwelling unit for short-term rental use shall be required to obtain any license for such use, including but not limited to licenses that would otherwise be required by Section 188 or Section 254-82, unless such person offers more than five (5) separate dwelling units for short-term rental use in the City. Any person offering more than five (5) separate dwelling units for short-term rental use in the City must: 
i.  Obtain a license pursuant to Section 254-82 to offer each dwelling unit for short-term rental. The City shall have discretion to accept and reject such licenses. 
ii.  Ensure that the short-term rental use is clearly incidental to the principal residential uses permitted in the zone where each such dwelling unit is located. 
c.  There shall be no sign identifying the short-term rental use, and there shall be no identification of such short-term rental use upon any mailbox. 
d.  The short-term rental use shall be conducted in a manner that does not materially disrupt the residential character of the neighborhood. 
e.  No equipment or process shall be used in such short-term rental which creates glare, fumes, odors, or other nuisance factors detectable to the human senses outside the lot on which the short-term rental is conducted.  
§ 345-60.1. - Palisades Preservation Overlay District—Establishment, procedures and standards. 
[Renumbered 4-11-2007 by Ord. No. 07-056] 
A.  Establishment of District. 
1.  There is hereby established within the City of Jersey City an area which shall be known as the Palisades Preservation Overlay District (PPOD), in which land development and construction shall be subject to the special regulations contained in this Section. 
2.  The PPOD shall be designated on the Zoning Map of the City of Jersey City, and shall run along the Palisades from Montgomery Street north to the Union City boundary line. 
3.  The PPOD shall prevail upon all land regulated under this Chapter, as well as those properties within a duly adopted redevelopment area. Redevelopment plans shall be amended, or initially written, as the case may be, to refer to or include the requirements of this Subsection. 
4.  All uses permitted in the zone or redevelopment plan in which the property is located shall be permitted in the PPOD, provided, however, that the setback and procedural regulations and performance standards of this Article shall apply to any such uses, whether permitted as of right, by conditional use or by use variance. 
B.  Procedural Regulations. The following information shall be submitted in addition to any information required to be submitted in the Site Plan Checklist: 
1.  A topographic map of the site at two foot contour intervals (drawn in a lighter line weight) where the slope is less than ten percent (10%), and ten (10) foot contour intervals (drawn in a heavier line weight) where the slope exceeds ten percent (10%). 
2.  A land form analysis which shows the location and extent of the site's major landforms including the top of the cliff, the cliff face, the side slope and the base of the slope. Any exposed cliff face shall be shown. The area in each land form category shall be calculated and shown on the land form analysis. 
3.  A physical description of the site which shall include a technical summary of site characteristics such as soils, load bearing capacity, erosion potential, depth to bedrock, etc. 
4.  Site grading and development data which shall include the type and location of development activity, procedures for grading, excavation, construction access and stockpiling, extent and phasing of construction and cut and fill operations. 
C.  Performance Standards. 
1.  The minimum building setback line from the edge of the cliff face at the top of the cliff shall be thirty (30) feet . The minimum building setback line from the edge of the cliff face at the base of the cliff shall be sixty-five (65) feet. 
2.  For purposes of preservation of the Palisades cliff face, no portion of any building or structure shall be constructed on that portion of a lot which has a grade, prior to such construction, in excess of thirty percent (30%), or on any portion of the lot, which lies within ten (10) feet of the portion having such grade. 
3.  No portion of a building built below the Palisades within the PPOD and within four hundred fifty (450) feet of the cliff face, including all bulkheads, parapets and penthouses, shall extend into the area occupied by the top twenty-five percent (25%) of the distance between the top of cliff and the lowest portion of existing grade of a development site.  
§ 345-60.2. - Required setbacks for zones and redevelopment plans that abut or are in close proximity to Route 440, Route 1&9T, and a portion of Communipaw Avenue. 
[Added 8-31-2011 by Ord. No. 11-094] 
A.  The purpose of this Subsection is to reserve land for a future boulevard and complete street along Route 440 and Route 1&9T that is necessitated by the multi-modal mobility, safety, access, and circulation needs of anticipated future development along the roadway. 
B.  There is hereby established within the City of Jersey City required setbacks for all zones and redevelopment plans that abut or are in close proximity to New Jersey State Route 440, New Jersey State Route 1&9T, and a portion of Communipaw Avenue, which shall be known as the "Route 440/Route 1&9T and Communipaw Avenue Required Setbacks." 
C.  The Route 440/Route 1&9T and Communipaw Avenue Required Setbacks are established on the map entitled, "Route 440/Route 1&9T/Communipaw Avenue Required Setbacks," prepared by Jacobs Engineering, and dated July 12, 2011, which includes required setbacks, lot lines, measurements and coordinates, and which is attached hereto and made a part hereof, and which a 1" = 200' scale paper copy of the map shall be kept on file and available for public inspection at the office of the Jersey City Division of City Planning. [Amended 3-28-2012 by Ord. No. 12-039] 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-039 adopts maps which replace the maps adopted by Ord. No. 11-04. 
D.  The Route 440/Route 1&9T and Communipaw Avenue Required Setbacks shall prevail upon all land regulated under this Chapter, as well as those properties within a duly adopted redevelopment area. Redevelopment Plans shall be amended, or initially written, as the case may be, to refer to or include the requirements of this Subsection. 
E.  The Zoning map of the City of Jersey City shall be annotated as follows: "Pursuant to § 345-60.2, the Route 440/Route 1&9T and Communipaw Avenue Required Setbacks shall prevail upon all land regulated under this Chapter, as well as those properties within a duly adopted redevelopment area. 
F.  The Route 440/Route 1&9T and Communipaw Avenue Required Setbacks shall be delineated on the survey and site plan for all proposed development on all property with frontage on Route 440 or Routes 1&9T, or on Communipaw Avenue where it is within eight hundred (800) feet of Route 440, or within one hundred (100) feet of Route 440 or Routes 1&9T, or within one hundred (100) feet of Communipaw Avenue where it is within eight hundred (800) feet of Route 440.  
§ 345-60.3. - Arts District Overlay Zone. 
[ Added 2-27-2013 by Ord. No. 13-021 ; 3-25-2015 by Ord. No. 15-031 ] 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of the overlay zone is: 
1.  To recognize the extensive location and relocation of artists' homes and/or studios into a portion of the "Heights" section formerly designated by the Municipal Council as the Riverview Arts District in 1984 and subsequent land use approvals pertaining to arts-related uses; and 
2.  To encourage the further development of this section of the city as an additional viable arts enclave. 
B.  Arts District Overlay Zoning Regulations: 
1.  Permitted Principal Uses: 
a.  Work/live artist studio; 
b.  Work/live unit; 
c.  Artist studio workspace. 
2.  Existing bulk and parking regulations as regulated in underlying zoning districts shall remain unchanged and shall apply to any of the above new uses within the overlay zone. 
3.  See definition for each of the above uses for additional standards.  
§ 345-61. - Performance standards. 
A.  Air Pollution. 
1.  General. No substance shall be emitted into the atmosphere in quantities which are injurious to human, plant or animal life or to property or which interfere unreasonably with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property anywhere in the Town. All provisions of Title 7, Chapter 27 of the New Jersey Administrative Code, (N.J.A.C.), or the regulations contained in this section, whichever shall be more stringent, shall apply. 
2.  Smoke. In any non-residential zone, no smoke, the shade or appearance of which is darker than No. 1 on the Ringelmann Smoke Chart, shall be emitted into the open air from any fuel-burning equipment; provided, however, that smoke emitted during the cleaning of a firebox or the building of a new fire, the shade or appearance of which is not darker than No.2 on the Ringelmann Smoke Chart, may be permitted for a period or periods aggregating no more than three minutes in any fifteen (15) consecutive minutes. Smoke emissions from the combustion of fuel and mobile sources and from stationary internal combustion engines shall not exceed the limits set forth in N.J.A.C. 7:27. 
3.  No open burning shall be permitted in any district. 
4.  Odors. In any zone, no odorous material may be emitted into the atmosphere in quantities sufficient to be detected. 
B.  Wastes. 
1.  Liquid Wastes. No liquid waste shall be discharged into the watercourse in the City without all necessary permits from the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP). No liquid waste shall be discharged into the public sewage collection and disposal system unless the appropriate City official shall have first investigated the character and volume of such wastes and shall have certified that the City will accept the discharge of such waste material into the system. The applicant shall comply with any requirements of said officials, including the pretreating of such wastes, the installation of processing methods, separation or screening of wastes, control of pH and other methods of improving such wastes prior to discharge, as a condition of approval of such facilities. 
2.  Solid Waste. Each property owner shall be responsible for: 
a.  Adequate and regular collection and removal of all refuse, except where the City assumes such responsibility. No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot in such a manner that they can be transferred off the lot, directly or indirectly, by natural forces such as precipitation, evaporation or wind. 
b.  Compliance with all applicable provisions of the NJDEP. 
c.  Compliance with all provisions of Title 7, Chapter 26, of the N.J.A.C., where applicable. 
d.  No accumulation on the property of any junk or other objectionable materials except in designated trash receptacles. 
e.  All materials or waste which might create a pollutant, a hazard, or be attractive to rodents or insects shall be stored indoors and/or be enclosed in appropriate containers to eliminate such pollutant potential, hazard or attraction. 
C.  Noise. All applications shall comply with the provisions of N.J.A.C. 7:29. 
D.  Vibration. In any zone, vibrations discernible without instruments at the measuring location shall not be permitted. 
E.  Glare. No single standard for glare is promulgated in this Chapter due to the impracticality of establishing such standards. It is the intent of these performance standards to ensure that both direct and indirect glare, to the extent possible, are eliminated or that activities producing such glare are carried on within a structure. Necessary glare-producing devices such as roadway and walkway lighting shall be designed, constructed and maintained in such a manner as not to be a nuisance to surrounding uses. 
F.  Temperature Change. Any use or process shall not produce a temperature change greater than three degrees Celsius at the measuring location. 
G.  Fire and Explosive Hazards. If it appears that any proposed use, structure, process or resulting product or material may constitute a fire or explosion hazard, the Board shall require the applicant to supply proof of: 
1.  Approval of the use, structure, process or resulting product or material from the State Department of Labor indicating that adequate safeguards against fire and explosion have been taken or installed. 
H.  Electricity. Electricity and electronic equipment shall be shielded so there is no interference with any radio or television reception at the lot line or beyond or in the case of multi-family dwellings, beyond the operator's dwelling unit, as a result of the operation of such equipment.  
§ 345-62. - Residential design standards. 
 
 
 
A.  The design and layout of buildings and parking areas shall provide an aesthetically pleasing appearance and efficient arrangement compatible with the character of surrounding development. To the greatest extent possible, new residential development in existing neighborhoods shall be integrated with the housing units in the adjacent area. New development in existing neighborhoods shall incorporate distinctive architectural characteristics of surrounding development, such as window and door detailing, decoration, material, roof style and pitch, height and porches. 
B.  All additions, alterations and accessory buildings shall be compatible with the principal structure, and shall share a common architectural theme. 
C.  Building proportions shall be compatible with the predominant proportional relationship along a street. Mass, scale, height, orientation, porches, entries and parking shall be consistent with the neighborhood. 
D.  Roof line design shall be consistent with the existing block or neighborhood patterns where appropriate. Roof design shall be an integral part of the overall building design. 
E.  Rooftop, outdoor living spaces such as decks and gardens shall be integrated into the building architecture. Stepbacks, parapets or other features shall be used to provide privacy and screening. 
F.  Monotonous uninterrupted expanses of walls shall be avoided. Facade articulations such as recesses, projections, columns, openings, ornamentation, decorative materials and colors shall be used to add texture and detail. 
G.  Materials and colors shall be compatible with the neighborhood character, streetscape and adjacent structures. 
H.  Building entries, windows and other openings shall be compatible in location, scale and pattern to other structures on the street. 
I.  Stilted buildings are prohibited. [Added 11-24-2009 by Ord. No. 09-116] 
J.  Where garages must be located facing streets, they shall whenever feasible be minimized by placement at a lower elevation than the street or recessed within the building façade and framed by balconies, porches, trellises or other architectural elements. Garage doors shall not dominate the front façade. 
K.  Mechanical equipment, whether mounted on the roof, within the building, or on the ground shall be screened from view. All screening devices shall be compatible with the material, architecture and color of the adjacent structures. Electrical transformers shall be underground or housed within the building. 
L.  Window and door security grates shall be as inconspicuous and as complementary to the front façade facing a Street as possible and shall not be permitted above the first floor or parlor floor of any facades facing the street. No security or decorative grates shall be permitted to enclose porches. 
M.  Fire escapes shall be constructed only against the side or rear wall of a building and shall be located and/or screened so as not to detract from the appearance of such buildings. 
N.  Cellar apartments are not permitted. 
O.  Trash containers and outdoor storage areas shall be screened from public streets, pedestrian areas and neighboring properties. The screen shall be designed to be compatible with the architectural character of the development and shall be constructed of durable materials. 
P.  Recycling Facilities for New Multi-Family Housing Developments. There shall be included in any new multi-family housing development that requires site plan approval an indoor or outdoor recycling area for the collection and storage of residentially generated recyclable materials. The dimensions of the recycling area shall be sufficient to accommodate recycling bins or containers which are of adequate size and number and which are consistent with anticipated usage and with current methods of collection in the area in which the project is located. The recycling area shall be conveniently located for the disposition of source-separated recyclable materials by residents of the multi-family housing development, preferably near, but clearly separated from, a refuse dumpster. The recycling area shall be well lit and shall be safely and easily accessible by recycling personnel and vehicles. Collection vehicles shall be able to access the recycling area without interference from parked cars or other obstacles. Reasonable measures shall be taken to protect the recycling area, and the bins or containers placed therein, against theft of recyclable materials, bins or containers. Any bins or containers which are used for the collection of recyclable paper or cardboard and which are located in an outdoor recycling area shall be equipped with a lid, or otherwise covered, so as to keep the paper or cardboard dry. Signs clearly identifying the recycling area and the materials accepted therein shall be posted adjacent to all points of access to the recycling area. Individual bins or containers shall be equipped with signs indicating the materials to be placed therein. Landscaping and/or fencing shall be provided around any outdoor recycling area and shall be developed in an aesthetically pleasing manner. 
Q.  Conversions of first floor commercial uses to a dwelling unit: 
1.  The design features of the storefront architecture shall be preserved to the maximum degree possible. 
2.  Storefront display windows shall be maintained. Residential privacy may be achieved by shades and curtains, blinds and the use of translucent glass such as sandblasted or etched glass, patterned glass and privacy glass. 
3.  If the existing storefront incorporates a second tier of windows behind the storefront glass this second layer of glass may be clear or obscured. 
4.  Solid bulkheads shall not exceed two-fifths of the first floor height. 
5.  Original bulkhead designs should be preserved to maintain the historic character of the street. Original materials to be maintained included wood, cast iron, cast aluminum, pigmented structural glass, terra cotta, porcelain enamel, ceramic tile, decorative brick, marble and granite. 
6.  For security, the use of retractable security grilles and solid wooden doors is preferred to external grilles. 
7.  If shielding of sunlight is a concern, awnings may be mounted above or below the transom. 
8.  Recommended replacement windows for the transom area include hopper, sliding and awning windows. 
9.  Recommended replacement windows for the display area include fixed glass and casement windows. 
10.  Recessed entries shall be maintained and "outer" doors shall not be added. 
R.  All sidewalks shall be tinted Scofield Charcoal Grey or equivalent. [Added 2-23-11 by Ord. No. 11-022] 
S.  Both primary and secondary front façades shall be designed with quality materials and details, such as masonry. [Added 2-23-11 by Ord. No. 11-022] 
T.  Front yard regulations for landscaping and fencing shall apply to both primary and secondary front façades. [Added 2-23-11 by Ord. No. 11-022]  
§ 345-63. - Non-residential design standards. 
 
 
A.  The height and scale of new development shall be compatible with the surrounding development. 
B.  In retail structures, storefront windows shall cover a minimum of sixty percent (60%) of the ground floor façade area. On corner lots, the secondary storefront facade shall be consistent with the alignment, location and amount of glazing of the primary storefront window facade. 
C.  Blank walls shall be avoided at the ground floor level. Facade articulations such as windows, trellises, recesses, projections, ornamentations, color, arcades, changes of material, landscaping and other features shall be used to lessen the impact of blank walls. 
D.  Stilted buildings are prohibited. [Added 11-24-2009 by Ord. No. 09-116] 
E.  Trash containers and outdoor storage areas shall be screened from public streets, pedestrian areas and neighboring properties. The screen shall be designed to be compatible with the architectural character of the development and shall be constructed of durable materials. 
F.  The primary access to the building shall be from the front. If necessary, the rear of the building shall be enhanced where appropriate to improve public access from parking tots and service alleys. 
G.  In developments requiring loading areas, service and loading areas shall be separated from main circulation and parking areas and away from public streets. 
H.  Clearly defined, highly visible entrances shall be provided through the use of features such as canopies, awnings, arches, decorative doors and integral planters. 
I.  Store window security grates shall be of open mesh design except the lowest one foot may be of solid construction. 
J.  Fire escapes shall be constructed only against side or rear walls of the building. 
K.  Rooftop/mechanical equipment shall be screened with visual barriers from adjacent properties, public roadways, parks and other public areas. The architectural design of buildings shall incorporate design features that screen, contain and conceal all heating, ventilation and air conditioning units. All screening devices shall be compatible with the architecture and color of the principal structures. 
L.  Electrical transformers shall be underground or housed within the building. [Added 2-23-11 by Ord. No. 11-022] 
M.  Recycling and solid waste disposal areas shall be enclosed. These enclosures shall be screened with landscaping where feasible. Locations shall be conveniently accessible for trash collection and maintenance and shall not block access drives during loading operations. 
N.  Sight Triangles. On a corner lot in any district, sight triangles shall be required in which no grading. planting or structure shall be erected or maintained more than three feet above the street centerline or lower than twelve (12) feet above the street centerline except that intersections controlled by a traffic signal and intersections having either a stop sign or flashing light or where the structure is set back at least twelve (12) feet from the curbline shall not require a sight triangle. Traffic control devices, street name poles and utility poles shall be exempt. 
O.  All sidewalks shall be tinted Scofield Charcoal Grey or equivalent. [Added 2-23-11 by Ord. No. 11-022] 
P.  Both primary and secondary front façades shall be designed with quality materials and details, such as masonry. [Added 2-23-11 by Ord. No. 11-022] 
Q.  Front yard regulations for landscaping and fencing shall apply to both primary and secondary front façades. [Added 2-23-11 by Ord. No. 11-022]  
§ 345-64. - Public or private common open space design standards. 
 
A.  All open space shall incorporate several elements such as lawn, landscaping including shrubbery and trees, attractive paving materials, street furniture, decorative lighting, low walls, fountains and other architectural and artistic amenities so as to produce and provide a pleasant environment at all levels and to complement the surrounding buildings. 
B.  Adequate lighting shall be provided to promote a sense of security in the open space. 
C.  Open spaces shall be so located as to provide for maximum usability and to create a harmonious relationship between buildings.  
§ 345-65. - Buffers. 
[Amended 12-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-170 ] 
 
A.  Zoning Standards. Any parking, loading, outside equipment and storage area that adjoins a street open space or residential use shall have a landscaped buffer area along all applicable property lines, except in those instances where a building intervenes and where it impedes safe vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
B.  Design Standards. 
1.  No activity, storage of materials or parking of vehicles shall be permitted in the buffer area except access driveways, directional signs, and permitted signs. 
2.  Any buffer area shall be at least three feet in depth and planted and maintained with massed evergreens, deciduous trees and shrubs of such species and sizes which will produce within two growing seasons a living screen at least four feet in height and of such density so as to obscure throughout the full course of the year the glare of automobile headlights emanating from the premises. All plantings shall be in accordance with 345-66.B. The screen plantings shall be placed so that at maturity they will not protrude across any street or property line and so that a clear sight triangle shall be maintained at off street intersections and at all points where private accessways intersect public streets. 
3.  Where spatial restrictions or traffic safety concerns do not provide sufficient width for screen planting, a four-foot high decorative fence or brick wall or any combination of plantings and walls or decorative fences may be provided.  
§ 345-66. - Landscaping. 
[Amended 12-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-170 ] 
 
 
A.  General Standards. 
[Amended 9-10-2003 by Ord. No. 03-113; 8-16-2006 by Ord. No. 06-090; 11-8-2006 by Ord. No. 06-131] 
1.  All areas not occupied by buildings or structures shall be appropriately landscaped in addition to required City trees as defined in Chapter 321 and buffer areas (see maximum lot coverage requirement in each zone). 
a.  Street trees shall be required for all development in accordance with the standards found under Section 345-66.C except where it can be demonstrated to the Municipal Forester that it is not possible to plant trees for one of the following reasons: (1) constraints such as utility lines; (2) danger to public health safety or property; (3) the project location will not allow for the healthy growth of a street tree. 
b.  If replacement of removed City trees as defined in Chapter 321 or planting of new City trees is determined not to be practical at a given location by the Municipal Forester, the applicant will be required to make a monetary contribution to the City for each tree equivalent to the replacement cost per tree, as determined annually by the Division of Parks and Forestry. 
2.  Front Yard Landscaping. 
a.  At least 60 percent of the area between the building line and street line on residential lots shall be landscaped, provided, however, that for new construction in the R-1 District, or for construction of three-family detached housing in the R-3 District, which includes either a front garage and driveway, or driveway access through the front yard to a side or rear yard parking area, or rear yard garage in lieu of a front yard garage access, a minimum of 30 percent of the area shall be landscaped. 
b.  In the event of removal of front yard landscaping existing at the time of the adoption of this ordinance for rehabilitation, or required repair/replacement, or for any other purpose, restoration of the originally landscaped area is required in accordance with percentage requirements of subsection A.2.a of this section. 
3.  Surface parking lots, principal or accessory. All surface parking lots must adhere to the requirements of Chapter 345-65. In outdoor parking lots with ten or more spaces not less than five percent of the parking area shall be suitably landscaped and maintained with trees. At least one shade tree is required to be planted for every ten parking spaces. Planting methods and materials for shade trees shall be according to current Jersey City Forestry Standards, published by the Division of Parks & Forestry. The landscaping shall be disbursed throughout the parking area bounded by the limits of curbing or from the outside perimeter of the paved parking area. 
B.  Design Standards for On-Site Landscaping. 
[Amended 12-18-2013 by Ord. No. 13-138 ] 
1.  Landscaping for all uses shall define entrances to buildings and parking lots, define the edges of various land uses, provide transition between neighboring properties and provide screening for loading and equipment areas to the maximum extent feasible. 
2.  All plant materials shall be suitable for the site, free of disease and insects, and shall conform to the American Standard for Nursery Stock (ASNS) of the American Nursery and Landscape Association for the quality and installation of that plant. 
3.  Plants listed on any Jersey City or state government list of invasive or prohibited species shall not be installed and shall not be counted towards meeting any landscaping requirement. 
4.  In all areas where landscaping is required, a minimum of 75 percent of the surface area shall be covered by living plants, rather than mulch, bark, gravel, or other non-living material. 
5.  The use of synthetic vegetation (plastic plants, etc.) shall not be used to meet any of the required landscaping or buffering standards. 
6.  In the Highway Commercial and Community Automotive zones, at least one-half of the required landscaping shall be located along the street right-of-way. 
7.  Landscaping shall be in scale with adjacent structures and be of appropriate size at maturity to accomplish its intended purpose. 
8.  Foundation plantings are recommended to soften the edge between the parking lot and the structure. 
9.  The use of non-invasive vines and climbing plants on buildings and the perimeter of garden walls is encouraged. 
10.  Plants in containers shall be used for enhancement of sidewalk shops, plazas and courtyards. 
11.  Landscaping shall not obstruct visibility for vehicular and pedestrian traffic at all 90-degree angle intersections of public rights-of-way and private driveways. 
12.  All plantings shall be with species with proven resistance in an urban environment. 
13.  Use of shade trees is encouraged to minimize the temperature and purify the City's air and water. 
14.  Rain gardens and/or other practices that mimic natural hydrology and increase effective perviousness are encouraged. 
15.  Green roofs and green walls are encouraged citywide. Such features shall be exempt from roof coverage and lot line setback requirements of subsections 345-60.D and H. 
C.  Design Standards for Street Trees. 
1.  Street trees shall be required for all development projects (including all new construction and all rehabilitation projects subject to site plan review. Project developers shall provide one street tree, either new or existing, for every 25 feet of street frontage. 
2.  Tree removals and plantings for development projects shall follow the requirements of Chapter 321. 
3.  All new City trees shall be selected from the most current Recommended Street Tree List of the Jersey City Forestry Standards, as published and undated by the Division of Parks and Forestry and shall receive site and species approval from the Division of Parks & Forestry. 
4.  Planting methods and materials and tree-pit specifications shall be according to current Jersey City Forestry Standards, as published by the Division of Parks & Forestry. 
5.  With regard to maintenance, the provisions of Section 345-75 shall apply.  
§ 345-67. - Fences and walls. 
[Amended 2-27-2013 by Ord. No. 13-020 ; 1-29-2014 by Ord. No. 14-007 ] 
 
 
A.  Zoning Standards. 
1.  Location and Height Standards. 
a.  Residential Districts Maximum Height. 
i.  Front Yard. Four (4) feet except for parking areas of six (6) spaces or more developed in accordance with the ordinance, then the maximum height shall be six (6) feet; 
ii.  Side Yard. Six (6) feet maximum height; 
iii.  Rear Yard. Eight (8) feet maximum height. 
b.  Commercial Districts Maximum Height. 
i.  Front Yard. Four (4) feet except for parking areas of six (6) spaces or more developed in accordance with the ordinance, then the maximum height shall be six (6) feet; 
ii.  Side Yard. Six (6) feet maximum height; 
iii.  Rear Yard. Eight (8) feet maximum height. 
c.  Industrial Districts Maximum Height. 
i.  All yards. Twelve (12) feet. 
d.  Corner Lots. Fences on corners shall maintain clear lines of sight for vehicular traffic and shall be subject to the requirements of sight triangles. On corner lots, the fencing shall have matching fence heights on both frontages. 
2.  Chain link fences shall not be permitted in the front yard. 
3.  Vacant Lots shall be exempt from the standards listed above. Vacant lots shall be permitted to have six-foot high chain link fence along the front and side yard and eight (8) feet along the rear yard. All chain link fencing is to be removed upon development of the property. 
4.  Barbed wire/razor wire fencing is prohibited. 
B.  Design Standards. 
1.  Fences and walls shall complement the architectural character of the principal building. 
2.  A finished side of all fences shall face "out" from the property. All structural supporting members of the fence must face the interior portion of the lot and no portion of any at-grade fence may extend beyond or across the property line. 
3.  For fences on roof deck, a finished side of all fences shall face "out" from the area which it is enclosing. 
4.  Fence height shall be measured from finished grade. Up to an additional ten (10) percent of height may be added to the maximum permitted fence height in order to accommodate lots with irregular grade. 
5.  All fences shall be consistent in appearance. Posts are to be separated by equal distances and constructed of fencing material conforming to a definite pattern in size. 
6.  All gates within any given type of fence shall be of the same material, design, type, height and color as the fence (e.g., a chain link gate may not be attached to a tubular metal fence). 
7.  No fence shall permanently preclude access to abutting properties for maintenance of the abutting properties. Gates or openings shall be required to be placed in locations where adjoining property owners may require access to the rear of their properties. 
8.  Gates shall not swing outward into the public right-of-way. Gates may only swing outward if they are set back far enough from a property line so as not to extend into the right-of-way at any point. 
9.  Where chain link is permitted in industrial zones, one-inch non climbable vinyl clad fencing shall be used. 
10.  Wooden board-on-board fencing is recommended for screening and privacy in the rear and side yards, but may not be located between the building line and street line. 
11.  Solid or perforated, corrugated, or flat sheet metal is prohibited for use as fencing material. 
12.  Single ply, vinyl slats which are inserted diagonally are prohibited as screening material for fences. 
13.  Mechanical gates with overhead bars are prohibited. 
14.  Decorative front yard fences defining a front yard private space shall be provided if the predominant character of the block contains such fencing. The front yard fence must line up with the predominant fence line on the street. No encroachment beyond the predominant fence line shall be permitted. 
15.  Fences shall only be permitted within the public right-of-way provided such fences are consistent with the established fence line on the street. No fencing shall be permitted in the right-of-way solely for purposes of providing for off-street parking. Such fences must comply with the design standards outlined below. 
16.  If the fence application is part of any application in front of either Board, the reviewing Board shall review and approve or deny. If the threshold for Board review is not met, the City Planning staff shall review the application and report its findings to the Office of the Construction Code Official, whereupon a construction permit may be issued. 
a.  All proposed fences in the public right-of-way must be either wrought iron, mild steel, tubular steel or aluminum, or a combination of brick columns and steel/iron fences. Fences shall be painted and maintained with a dark color to reduce visibility of rust. 
b.  Height Restrictions. The height of bars and columns of fences constructed in the public right-of-way shall not exceed forty-eight (48) inches, as measured from finished grade to the top of the bars or columns. 
c.  Size and Spacing Material. 
i.  Minimum width of vertical bars—one-half (½) inch. 
ii.  Maximum spacing of bars—four (4) inches. 
d.  Freestanding Gates. All freestanding gates must swing into the fenced area, not into the public right-of-way. 
e.  No fence in a right-of-way shall disturb any existing sidewalk. 
f.  The right-of-way inside the fence shall be landscaped.  
§ 345-68. - Signs. 
 
 
A.  Exempt Signs. [Amended 1-29-2014 by Ord. No. 14-006 ] 
1.  Any public notice or warning required by a valid and applicable federal, state, county or local law, regulation or ordinance. 
2.  Any sign which is inside a building, not attached to a window or door, and is not readable from a distance of more than three (3) feet beyond the lot line of the lot or parcel nearest to where such sign is located. 
3.  Holiday lights and decorations with no commercial message. 
4.  Any sign describing the history of the building with tablets, cornerstones or similar, plaques embedded on the façade below four (4) feet. 
5.  Traffic control signs on private property, which meet Department of Transportation standards, and which contain no commercial message of any sort. 
6.  Flags of the United States, New Jersey, the City of Jersey City and flags of foreign nations. 
7.  Signs or banners advertising public or quasi-public events that are posted with the permission of the City Council or of any person to whom the City Council has delegated this authority according to guidelines set by City Council. 
8.  Pump mounted fuel price information signs subject to the following: 
a.  Only one (1) fuel price informational sign shall be permitted per fuel pump. 
b.  Fuel price informational signs shall be limited in size to an area of two hundred sixteen (216) square inches in accordance with State and Federal regulations. 
c.  Each fuel price informational sign shall be affixed directly and firmly to a fuel pump and shall be stationary. 
d.  Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the advertisement of fuel prices on any other sign meeting the requirements of this section. 
9.  U.S. Postal Regulation Mailboxes. 
10.  Political Signs. Such signs may be displayed for a period of not more than thirty (30) days before the election and not more than three (3) days after the election. 
B.  Zoning Standards. [Amended 5-8-2013 by Ord. No. 13-053 ; 1-29-2014 by Ord. No. 14-006 ] 
1.  Individual Sign Area Measurement. 
a.  The area of a sign face (which is also the sign area of a wall sign or other sign with only one (1) face) shall be computed by means of the smallest square, circle, rectangle, triangle, or combination thereof that will encompass the extreme limits of the writing, graphic, illustration, picture, symbol or other display, together with any material or color forming an integral part of the background of the sign. For purposes of calculating sign area, any illuminated border including those which may frame a window shall be included in the sign area calculation and used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is placed. This does not include any supporting framework, bracing or decorative fence or wall when such fence or wall otherwise meets zoning regulations and is clearly incidental to the sign itself. 
b.  No sign shall have more than two (2) display faces. The sign area for a sign with two (2) display faces shall be computed by adding together the area of all the sign's faces which are visible from any one (1) point. When a sign has two (2) display faces such that both faces cannot be viewed from any one (1) point at the same time, the sign's area shall be computed by the measurement of the larger of the two (2) faces. 
2.  In cases where sign standards are not established, standards from the most similar zone and use shall apply. 
3.  Glazed Area. Any glazing in doorways shall be considered part of the glazed area. For purposes of calculating window signs, a window shall be considered the glazed area. Signs which are required by county, state, or federal agencies are exempt from calculation of permanent signage. 
4.  Measurement of Height. The height of a freestanding sign shall be computed as the distance from the base of the sign at normal grade to the top of the highest attached component of the sign. Normal grade shall be considered to be the lower of existing grade prior to construction or the newly established grade after construction, exclusive or any filing, berming, mounding or excavation solely. 
5.  The following signs are prohibited: 
a.  No billboards or other off-site advertising signs shall be erected, used or maintained within the City of Jersey City except in the CBD Central Business District. 
b.  No signs shall be placed on fences, walls, utility poles, trees, railway or road bridges, bridge supports or abutments, retaining walls, parking meters or water towers unless approved by the City Council. 
c.  No roof signs, also known as "sky signs" shall be allowed except in the CBD. 
d.  No signs above the second floor of any building other than hotels. 
e.  No sign shall be placed on an accessory building. 
f.  No sign shall be lighted by means of a varied illuminated light, nor shall any sign be in whole or in any part moving, mobile, revolving and/or electrically or mechanically activated except in the CBD Central Business District. Signs displaying the time and/or temperature shall be permitted in non residential districts. 
g.  No sign shall be allowed with the optical illusion of movement by means of a design which presents a pattern capable of reverse perspective, giving the illusion of motion or changing copy except in the CBD. 
h.  No signs shall be allowed that are placed on or affixed to vehicles and/or trailers which are parked on a public right-of-way, public property or private property so as to be visible from a public right-of-way where the apparent purpose is to advertise a product, service or activity or direct people to a business or activity. This is not intended, however, to prohibit signs placed on or affixed to vehicles, buses or trailers where the sign is incidental to the primary use of the vehicle or trailer. 
i.  No sign shall be allowed to obstruct any window or door opening used as a means of egress, interferes with an opening required for legal ventilation, or is attached to or obstructs any standpipe, fire escape or fire hydrant. 
j.  No sign shall be allowed which obstructs the view of vehicle operators or pedestrians entering a public roadway from any parking area, service drive, public driveway, alley or other thoroughfare. 
k.  No building sign shall be greater than four (4) feet from the building face. 
6.  The following signs and the standards and conditions that govern such signs are set forth in the sign matrix. All other signs are expressly prohibited. 
C.  Design Standards. 
1.  Signs shall be in harmony and consistent with the architecture of the building and relate to the features of the building in terms of location, scale, color, lettering, materials, texture and depth. Signs shall not be dominant but shall be proportionate and shall complement the building, existing signs and surroundings. 
2.  There shall be consistent sign design throughout a particular project. The design elements include style of lettering, construction materials, size and illumination. 
3.  Building signs shall not obscure, conflict with or cover any architectural element and must be aligned with major building elements such as windows, trim and structure lines. 
4.  No sign shall extend or project above the highest elevation of the wall to which it is attached or above the lowest part of the roofline of the building, whichever is less. 
5.  Illuminated signs. 
a.  Internally illuminated signs shall only be permitted in the HC, and C/A zones. 
b.  Signs lit by external sources shall be allowed but shall be located in such a manner so as to avoid any glare on adjacent property. Sources of sign illumination shall be completely shielded from the view of vehicular traffic using the road or roads abutting the lot on which the sign is located. 
c.  External lights used for the illumination of any sign on a mounted building, whether or not such light fixtures are attached to or separate from the building, shall not extend above the highest elevation of the front wall of the building or more than eighteen (18) feet above the street level of the premises, whichever is less. 
6.  Signs and sign structures of all types shall be located to allow a clear, unobstructed line of sight for three hundred (300) feet from the stop line of any intersection of streets and/or driveways. No sign shall project into a sight triangle below the second story floor level or the height of a traffic signal or traffic directional sign in the intersection, whichever is higher. 
D.  Nonconforming Signs. 
1.  No nonconforming sign may be enlarged or altered in a way which would increase its nonconformity. Existing nonconforming permanent signs may continue to exist; however, when the sign is modified either in shape, size, illumination or structure, the sign shall be altered to conform to the provisions of this section. 
2.  Should any nonconforming sign be damaged by any means to an extent of more than fifty (50) percent of its replacement cost at time of damage, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this section. 
[Amended 11-10-2010 by Ord. No. 10-132; 8-31-2011 by Ord. No. 11-093] 
Use 	Type of Signage 	Max. Area (sq. feet) 	Max. 

Number 	Max. Height of Sign from Grade (feet) 	Min. Setbacks of Freestanding Signs (feet) 	Notes 
R-1 	One and Two Family Housing 					Design standards in § 345-68 shall apply 
One and Two Family Dwelling 					
	Nameplate only 	1 	1 	N/A 	N/A 	Nameplate must be attached to the dwelling 
Houses of Worship, Schools, Governmental uses 					
	Freestanding (Monument only) or Building 	24 	1 	4 	½ of the required front yard setback 	
Mortuaries 					
	Freestanding (Monument only) or Building 	20 	1 	4 	½ of the required front yard setback 	
Assisted Living 					
	Freestanding (Monument only) or Building 	24 	1 	4 	½ of the required front yard setback 	
Senior Housing 					
	Building only 	20 	1 	N/A 	N/A 	
Nursing Homes 					
	Freestanding (Monument only) or Building 	24 	1 	4 	½ of the required front yard setback 	
R-2 	Multi-Family Attached Housing 					Design standards in § 345-68 shall apply 
Townhouses 					
	Nameplate only 	1 	1 	N/A 	N/A 	Nameplate must be attached to the dwelling 
Commercial 					
	Primary façade (building only) 	20 sq. ft. or 5% of the ground floor area of that portion of the primary façade applicable to the commercial use, whichever is smaller 	1 			Must be attached to the building 
On corner lots 					
	Secondary façade (building only) 	½ the allowable rear for primary façade 	1 	N/A 		On corner lots, the length of any building sign on the secondary facade shall not exceed ½ the width of the primary façade or 12 ½ feet, whichever is smaller 
Houses of Worship, Schools, Governmental uses 					
	Freestanding (Monument only) or Building 	24 	1 	4 	½ of the required front yard setback 	
Mortuaries 					
	Freestanding (Monument only) or Building 	20 	1 	4 	½ of the required front yard setback 	
Assisted Living 					
	Freestanding (Monument only) or Building 	24 	1 	4 		
Senior Housing 					
	Building only 	20 	1 	N/A 	N/A 	
Nursing Homes 					
	Freestanding (Monument only) or Building 	24 	1 	4 	½ of the required front yard setback 	
R-3 	Multi-Family Mid-Rise 					Design standards in § 345-68 shall apply 
Multi-Family Mid-Rise Apartments 					
	Building only 	12 	1 	N/A 	N/A 	
Houses of Worship, Schools, Governmental uses 					
	Freestanding (Monument only) or Building 	24 	1 	4 	½ of the required front yard setback 	
Ground Floor Office uses 					
	Building only 	10 	1 	N/A 		
Mortuaries 					
	Freestanding (Monument only) or Building 	20 	1 	4 	½ of the required front yard setback 	
Assisted Living 					
	Freestanding (Monument only) 	24 	1 	4 	½ of the required front yard setback 	
Senior Housing 					
	Building only 	20 	1 	N/A 	N/A 	
Nursing Homes 					
	Freestanding (Monument only) or Building 	24 	1 	4 	½ of the required front yard setback 	
R-4 	Multi-Family High-Rise 					Design standards in § 345-68 shall apply 
Townhouses 					
	Nameplate only 	1 	1 	N/A 	N/A 	Nameplate must be attached to the dwelling 
Mid-Rise Apartments 					
	Building only 	12 	1 	N/A 	N/A 	
High-Rise Apartments 					
	Building only 	12 	1 	N/A 	N/A 	
Houses of Worship, Schools, Governmental uses 					
	Freestanding (Monument only) or Building 	24 	1 	4 	½ of the required front yard setback 	
Mortuaries 					
	Freestanding (Monument only) or Building 	20 	1 	4 	½ of the required front yard setback 	
Assisted Living 					
	Freestanding (Monument only) or Building 	24 	1 	4 	½ of the required front yard setback 	
Senior Housing 					
	Building only 	20 	1 	N/A 	N/A 	
Nursing Homes 					
	Freestanding (Monument only) or Building 	24 	1 	4 	½ of the required front yard setback 	
Commercial 					
	Primary façade (building only) 	20 sq. ft. or 5% of the ground floor area of that portion of the primary façade applicable to the commercial use, whichever is smaller 	1 			
On corner lots 					
	Secondary façade (building only) 	½ the width for primary façade 	1 			On corner lots, the length of any building sign on the secondary facade shall not exceed ½ the width of the primary façade 
Waldo 						Design Standards in § 345-68 shall apply 
Building only 	20% of the area of the 1st story of the wall not to exceed 20 sq. ft. per user to which it is attached 	3 	N/A 		
NC 	Neighborhood Commercial 					Design Standards in § 345-68 shall apply 
Retail Offices, Financial Institutions, Restaurants, Bars 					
	Primary façade (building only) 	20 sq. ft. or 5% of the ground floor area of that portion of the primary façade applicable to the commercial use, whichever is smaller 	1 			
	Projecting only 	8 	1 			May project a maximum of 4 ft. from the building. Minimum distance between the ground and bottom of the sign is 8 feet; must be hung by brackets at right angles to the façade 
	Window 	No more than 25% of total glazed area of a storefront or of any individual window signage shall be calculated into the maximum building signage area 		N/A 		
	Canopies, marquees, and awnings 	Signage shall be calculated into the maximum building signage area 	N/A 	N/A 		
	Secondary façade or corner lots (building only) 	½ the width of the primary façade 	1 			On corner lots, the length of any building sign on the secondary façade shall not exceed ½ the width of the primary façade 
Theatres, Museums, Governmental uses, Parking Garages and lots 					
	Building only 	24 	1 	N/A 	N/A 	
Colleges and Universities 					
	Building only 	10 	1 	N/A 	N/A 	
O/R 	Office/Residential 					Design standards in § 345-68 shall apply 
Retail Office, Financial Institutions, Restaurants, Bars, Hotels, Theatres and Indoor Entertainment uses 					
	Primary façade (building only) 	20 sq. ft. or 5% of the ground floor area of that portion of the primary façade applicable to the commercial use, whichever is smaller 	1 			
	Projecting only 	8 	1 			May project a maximum of 4 ft. from the building. Minimum distance between the ground and bottom of the sign is 8 feet; must be hung by brackets at right angles to the façade 
	Window 	No more than 25% of total glazed area of a storefront or of any individual window signage shall be calculated into the maximum building signage area 		N/A 	N/A 	
	Canopies, marquees, and awnings 	Signage shall be calculated into the maximum building signage area 	N/A 	N/A 		
	Secondary façade or corner lots (building only) 	½ the width of the primary façade 	1 			On corner lots, the length of any building sign on the secondary façade shall not exceed ½ the width of the primary façade 
Colleges and Universities 					
	Building only 	10 	2 	N/A 	N/A 	
Residential Apartments 					
	Building only 	12 	1 	N/A 	N/A 	
CBD 	Central Business District 					Design standards in § 345-68 shall apply 
Nonresidential Uses 					
	Primary façade (building only) 	20 sq. ft. or 5% of the ground floor area of that portion of the primary façade applicable to the commercial use, whichever is smaller 	1 			
	Projecting only 	30 				Must be hung by brackets at right angles to the facade, maximum distance between floor and bottom of the sign shall be 8 feet 
	Window 	No more than 25% of total glazed area of a storefront or of any individual window signage shall be calculated into the maximum building signage area 	N/A 	N/A 	N/A 	
	Canopies, marquees, and awnings 	Signage shall be calculated into the maximum building signage area 	N/A 	N/A 	N/A 	
	Secondary façade or corner lots (building only) 	½ the width of the primary façade 	1 			On corner lots, the length of any building sign on the secondary façade shall not exceed ½ the width of the primary façade 
Residential Apartments 					
	Building only 	12 	1 	N/A 	N/A 	
Billboards 					See § 345-46. 
HC 	Highway Commercial 					Design standards in § 345-68 shall apply 
Permitted Uses except service stations 					
	Building (per tenant or store) 	10% of the wall to which its attached Side or rear entrance - ½ the area of the primary sign area 	1 per primary entrance; 1 per frontage; 1 per side or rear entrance 	25% of the height of the wall 		
	Freestanding (which only identifies name of center area and/or key tenants 	150 	1 per multi-user center 	25 	½ of the required front yard setback 	Letter height: 12 inches 
	Window 	10% of total glazed area of a storefront of any individual window 	N/A 	N/A 	N/A 	
Service Station 					
	Freestanding 	80 	1 per frontage 	18 	10 	
	Building 	50 	1 	not to exceed height of roof line 	N/A 	
	Canopy (including logo) 	5 per frontage 	1 per frontage 	N/A 	N/A 	
C/A 	Commercial/Automotive 					Design standards in § 345-68 shall apply 
Service Station 					
	Free standing 	80 	1 per frontage 	18 	10 	
	Building 	50 	1 	not to exceed height of roof line 	N/A 	
	Canopy (including logo) 	5 per frontage 	1 per frontage 	N/A 	N/A 	
Permitted Uses except service stations 					
	Freestanding 	80 	1 	15 	½ of the required front yard setback 	
	Building (per tenant) 	10% of the wall to which it is attached. Side or rear entrance - ½ the area of the primary sign area 	1 per primary entrance; 1 per frontage; 1 per side or rear entrance 	Maximum 25% of the height of the wall 		
	Window 	10% of total glazed area of a storefront or any individual window 				
I 	Industrial 					Design standards in § 345-68 shall apply 
Permitted uses 					
	Building 	10% of area of the 1st story of the wall to which it is attached or 200 sq. ft, whichever is less 				
	Building on corner lot 	300 sq. ft. with no more than 200 sq. ft. facing any one street 	3 per frontage 			
	Freestanding (Monument only) 	80 	1 	6 	½ of the required front yard setback 	
PI 	Port Industrial 					Design standards in § 345-68 shall apply 
Permitted uses 					
	Building 	10% of area of the 1st story of the wall to which it is attached or 200 sq. ft, whichever is less 	3 per frontage 			
	Building on corner lot 	300 sq. ft. with no more than 200 sq. ft. facing any one street 	3 per frontage 			
	Freestanding (Monument only) 	80 sq. ft. 	1 	6 	½ of the required front yard setback 	
U 	University 					Design standards in § 345-68 shall apply 
Permitted uses 					
	Building 	10% of area of the 1st story of the wall to which it is attached or 200 sq. ft, whichever is less 	1 per building 	N/A 		
	Freestanding (if building has a minimum of 10 feet setback) Monument only 	50 sq. ft. 	1 	5 	½ of the required front yard setback 	
M 	Medical 					Design standards in § 345-68 shall apply 
Permitted uses 					
	Building 	10% of area of the 1st story of the wall to which it is attached or a maximum of 50 sq. ft. 	1 per building 	N/A 		
	Freestanding (if building has a minimum of 10 feet setback) Monument only 	50 sq. ft. 	1 	5 	½ of the required front yard setback 	
G 	Government 					Design standards in § 345-68 shall apply 
Permitted uses 					
	Freestanding (Monument only) 	24 	1 	4 	5 	
P/OS 	Parks/Open Space 					Design standards in § 345-68 shall apply 
Permitted uses 					
	Freestanding 	20 	1 per entrance 	5 		
WPD 	Waterfront Planned Development 					Design standards in § 345-68 shall apply 
Townhouses 					
	Nameplate only 	1 	1 	N/A 	N/A 	Nameplate must be attached to the building 
Multi-Family Mid-Rise Apartments 					
	Building only 	12 	1 	N/A 	N/A 	
Retail, Office, Marinas, and Theatres 					
	Primary façade (building only) 	300 sq. ft. or 8% of the first story of that portion of the façade applicable to the non-residential use, whichever is smaller 	1 per use 			
	Window 	No more than 25% of total glazed area of a storefront 				
	Secondary façade (building only) 	½ the area of the primary façade sign 	1 per use 			
;b 
\b; 	Cemetery 					Design standards in § 345-68 shall apply 
Permitted uses 					
	Freestanding 	20 	1 per entrance 	6 		
H 	Historic District 					Design standards in § 345-68 shall apply 
Townhouses 					
	Nameplate only 	1 	1 	N/A 	N/A 	Nameplates must be attached to the building 
Schools, Houses of Worship, Governmental Uses 					
	Freestanding (Monument only) or 	20 	1 	4 	½ of required front yard setback 	no backlit signage on freestanding or building signage 
	Building 	20, sum of all signage 	2 	N/A 	N/A 	
Bed and Breakfast Inns 					
	Building 	4 	1 	N/A 	N/A 	
Commercial 					
	Building (primary façade) 	1 sf for each linear foot of frontage 	1 	N/A 	N/A 	
	Building (secondary façade) 	to match the size of historic sign as documented by site or photograph evidence. If no historic sign, .5 sf for each linear foot of secondary storefront 	N/A 	N/A 	N/A 	
	Window 		N/A 	N/A 	N/A 	Must be metal paint, etched glass, or other treatment aproved by HPO for CoNE or HPC for COA 
	Projecting Sign 	8 	1 per façade 	N/A 	N/A 	May project a maximum of 4 ft. from the building. Minimum distance between grade and the bottom of the sign shall be 8 feet; must be hung by brackets 
Destination Tourism 					Design standards in § 345-68 shall apply 
Permitted Uses except service stations 					
	Building (per tenant or store) 	10% of the wall to which it is attached. Side or rear entrance - ½ the area of the primary sign area 	1 per primary entrance; 1 per frontage; 1 per side or rear entrance 	maximum 25% of the height of the wall 		
	Freestanding (which only identifies name of center and/or key tenants) 	150 	1 	25 	½ of required front yard setback 	Minimum letter height: 12 inches 
	Window 	10% of total glazed area of a storefront or of any individual window 				
Service Station 					
	Freestanding 	80 	1 per frontage 	18 	10 	
	Building 	50 	1 	not to exceed height of roof line 		
	Canopy (including logo) 	5 	1 per frontage 			
Real Estate Signs 					Design standards in § 345-68 shall apply 
Residential 					
	Building only 	6 	1 			The lowest portion of the sign shall be no higher than 10 feet above ground level 
Non Residential 					
	Freestanding 	40 sq. ft. or 3% of the side of the building upon which it is located, whichever is less 	1 per frontage 			Shall not exceed maximum height of district 
	Building 	40 sq. ft. or 3% of the side of the building upon which it is located, whichever is less 	1 per frontage 			Shall not exceed maximum height of district 
  
§ 345-69. - Lighting. 
 
A.  Zoning Standards. The maximum height of freestanding lights shall not exceed the height of the principal building or twenty-five (25) feet whichever is less. 
B.  Design Standards. 
1.  The style of the light and the light standard shall be consistent with the architectural style of the principal building. 
2.  Lighting shall be adequate but not overly bright. All building entrances shall be well-illuminated. 
3.  All lighting shall be shielded to confine the illumination spread within the site boundaries. 
4.  Freestanding lights shall be so located and protected to avoid being damaged by vehicles. 
5.  All lights shall be shielded to restrict the maximum apex angle of the cone of illumination to seventy-five (75) degrees from vertical. 
6.  The following intensity and foot candies shall be maintained: 
a.  A minimum average of one foot candle and shall not exceed a maximum average of two foot candles throughout a parking lot. 
b.  Maximum at property lines: One-half foot candles. 
c.  Sidewalks: A minimum of one foot candle entire length. 
7.  All wiring shall be laid underground and the lighting fixtures shall be so arranged that the direct source of light is not visible from any adjacent residential area. Glare from light bulbs shall be eliminated through use of diffusers or the equivalent.  
§ 345-70. - Off-street parking and loading and bicycle parking. 
[Amended 12-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-170 ; 1-23-2013 by Ord. No. 13-001 ] 
 
A.  Automobile Zoning Standards. 
[Amended 5-23-2007 by Ord. No. 07-065; 11-10-2010 by Ord. No. 10-132; 4-11-2012 by Ord. No. 12-045 ; 3-13-2013 by Ord. No. 13-030 ] 
1.  Off-street parking shall not be located between the building and the street. 
2.  Parking lots are subject to landscaping regulations in § 345-66. 
3.  Where parking structures front on a public right-of-way, the structure shall be "faced" with commercial or mixed uses on the ground floor. 
4.  Stilted buildings are prohibited. 
5.  All off-street parking lots, except those of one and two-family residences, shall be provided with curbing of poured-in-place concrete, so that vehicles cannot be driven onto required landscaped areas, buffer zones, interior roadways, internal walkways and street rights-of-way so that each parking lot has controlled entrances and exits and proper drainage control. Curbing of poured-in-place concrete shall be located to prevent any part of the vehicle from overhanging the street right-of-way, property line, interior roadways or internal walkways. Vehicular access to street from the parking lot shall be limited to driveways. 
6.  All parking spaces except those permitted for one and two family housing shall be located with access to each space from an aisle. 
7.  Parking for Houses of Worship shall meet the standards of their zone. For all Houses of Worship, one seat shall equal 24 inches of pew/bench space. Houses of Worship that do not have seats shall be calculated at a rate of 10 square feet of prayer space equaling one seat. 
8.  Off-street loading facilities shall be located so that no vehicle being loaded or unloaded, maneuvering into a loading space or waiting to be parked into a loading space shall interfere with any traffic flow on a street, sidewalk, parking space, aisle, fire lane, driveway, railroad track or turning area nor shall they occupy any part of required lawn or buffer areas. 
9.  No parking space shall be less than eighteen (18) feet long and eight and one-half feet wide, with the following exceptions: 
a.  valet parking lots, where approved by the Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment, may have reduced stall and aisle sizes. The project applicant is responsible for demonstrating to the Board that the lot can function and accommodate vehicles as proposed. 
b.  compact car spaces, where approved by the Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment, shall not be less than sixteen (16) feet long and eight feet wide. Aisles providing access to parking spaces shall have the following minimum distances. Where the angle of parking is different on both sides of the aisle, the larger aisle width shall prevail. 
Angle of Parking Space (degrees) 	For Parking 

Spaces 8—8.5 Wide 1-Way Aisle (feet) 	For Parking 

Spaces 8—8.5 Wide 2-Way Aisle (feet) 	For Parking 

Spaces 9—9.5 Wide 1-Way Aisle (feet) 	For Parking 

Spaces 9—9.5 Wide 2-Way Aisle (feet) 
Aisle 				
90 	24 	24 	22 	22 
60 	20 	22 	18 	20 
45 	18 	20 	15 	18 
30 	15 	18 	12 	18 
Parallel 	12 	18 	12 	18 
 
10.  Except as otherwise regulated in this chapter, no more than a single 10-foot wide curb cut, driveway and/or garage door shall be permitted on any lot in the R-1, R-1A, R-1F, R-2, or R-3 zoning districts. 
11.  The number and design of off-street parking and loading spaces shall adhere to the following: 
a.  Where more than one use is on a lot, the total number of spaces shall be the sum of the component requirements. 
b.  All loading spaces shall have fifteen (15) feet of vertical clearance. 
12.  Minimum Standards for Number of Off-Street Loading Spaces. 
Land Use 	At which First Berth is Required (square feet) 	At Which Second Berth is Required (square feet) 3 more spaces be calculated at multiples 
Manufacturing, processing, assembly, marinas 	5,000 	40,000 
Warehouse, auto/truck sales 	5,000 	40,000 
Storage, shipping 	10,000 	25,000 
Schools 	10,000 	100,000 
Hospitals 	10,000 	100,000 
Terminals and transportation centers 	5,000 	40,000 
Auditoriums 	10,000 	40,000 
Funeral homes/mortuaries 	10,000 	100,000 
Retail 	10,000 	20,000 
Service establishments 	10,000 	40,000 
Indoor recreation 	10,000 	100,000 
Restaurants/ nightclubs 	10,000 	25,000 
Office building, financial institution and research 	10,000 	100,000 
Hotel/Motel 	10,000 	100,000 
 
13.  Minimum Dimensional Standards for Off-Street Loading. 
A. Overall Length of Berth (feet) 	B. Berth Width (feet) 	C. Apron Length (feet) 	D. Deck Approach (A and C) (feet) 
40 	10 	46 	86 
	12 	43 	83 
	14 	39 	79 
45 	10 	52 	97 
	12 	49 	94 
	14 	46 	91 
50 	10 	60 	110 
	12 	57 	107 
	14 	54 	104 
55 	10 	65 	120 
	12 	62 	117 
	14 	58 	113 
60 	10 	72 	132 
	12 	63 	123 
 
B.  Automobile Parking Design Standards. 
1.  Curb cuts shall be limited to the minimum number necessary. 
2.  Parking shall not be the dominant visual element of the site. 
3.  Parking which is visible from the street or other areas exposed to public view shall be screened and softened by landscaping, low screen walls or a combination of elements. 
4.  Broad expanses of paving shall be broken up with landscaping. 
5.  The use of common or shared driveways which provide access to more than one site is encouraged. 
6.  Parking structures shall be designed to be compatible with the architectural style, building scale, mass, building materials and colors of the principal building and adjacent area. The scale and mass of the parking structure shall be mitigated through wall offsets, arched openings and other distinctive design elements. 
7.  Cars parked within parking structures and on open top levels shall be screened as much as possible with architectural elements and landscaping. 
8.  Surface and Curbing. All parking and loading areas and access drives shall be paved as outlined below, or the equivalent, and approved as part of the site plan approval. All parking areas regardless of size and location shall be suitably drained and maintained. 
9.  The provisions of non-residential parking and loading spaces shall include adequate driveway and necessary turning areas for handling the vehicle for which provision is made. Parking and loading spaces shall be designed to permit each motor vehicle to proceed to and from the parking and loading space provided for it without requiring the moving of any other motor vehicle. 
C.  Bicycle Parking Zoning Standards. 
1.  The standards below shall apply to all zones, including all redevelopment plans, citywide, and standards shall supersede any standards listed in redevelopment plans. 
2.  Bicycle parking facilities shall be required, in accordance with the use schedule below, for any new principal structure, addition or enlargement of an existing principal structure in excess of ten percent (10%) of the gross floor area (gfa), or for any change in use of an existing structure. 
3.  Bicycle Parking Spaces are required as follows: 
  
Use Category 	Required 
	Outdoor Spaces 	Indoor Spaces 
All residential uses in buildings with 5 or more units 		0.5 space per unit 
Retail, service, and restaurants 6,000 sf to 20,000 sf 	4 spaces per 6,000 sf gfa 
Retail, service, and restaurants greater than 20,000 sf 	4 spaces per 15,000 sf gfa 
	80% 	20% 
Municipal/Cultural Facilities/Community Facilities 	1 space per 2,000 sf gfa 
	80% 	20% 
Houses of worship, theaters, and assembly spaces 	1 per 20 seats or equivalent 
Office (all types) 	1 per 25,000 sf gfa 	1 per 10,000 sf gfa 
Daycare and elementary school 	1.5 spaces per classroom 
Middle and high school 	4 per classroom 
College and university 	1 space per 10 students or employees, combined 
Hospitals/medical centers 	1 per 20,000 sf gfa 	1 per 50,000 sf gfa 
Manufacturing/production, warehouse 	1 per 50,000 sf gfa 
Parking garage or lot 	5% of auto parking 
Parks 	1 per 5,000 sf 
 
4.  Location and Design of Facilities. 
a.  Non-residential bike parking for certain uses must be provided both indoors and outdoors, as indicated in the use schedule above. Indoor parking may include bike lockers or sheds. 
b.  Requirements for indoor bicycle parking. 
1.)  Any required indoor bicycle parking/storage room must be located in a convenient and accessible location to a public sidewalk with no more than four vertical steps between the bicycle room and the sidewalk. Ramps and elevators may be utilized to provide access to bike storage not located at the first floor level. 
c.  Requirements for outdoor bicycle parking 
1.)  All required outdoor bicycle parking must be convenient and accessible to a main building entrance and street access without climbing stairs. 
2.)  Bicycle parking shall be sited in a highly visible location, such as within view of passers-by, retail activity, office windows, an attendant or other personnel to discourage theft and vandalism. 
3.)  Bicycle parking shall be located so as not to block the pedestrian path on a sidewalk or within a site. A minimum of six feet of unobstructed passage is required on public sidewalks. 
4.)  Parked bicycles are to be oriented parallel to the street and on the curb-side of the sidewalk. In plaza areas, bike parking location(s) and orientation shall be determined by the planning board. 
5.)  Where a minimum of six feet of unobstructed passage cannot be provided on the sidewalk, then the property shall be exempt from outdoor bicycle parking requirements. 
6.)  Bicycle parking facilities within an automobile parking area shall be separated by a physical barrier (i.e., bollards, reflective wands, curbs, wheel stops, poles, etc.) to protect bicycles from damage by cars. 
7.)  Bike racks must be securely attached to concrete footings and made to withstand severe weather and permanent exposure to the elements. Bike racks must permit the bicycle frame and one wheel to be locked to the rack with a high security, U-shaped lock. 
8.)  All bike racks shall be located at least twenty-four (24) inches in all directions from a wall, door, landscaping, or other obstruction that would render use of the racks difficult or impractical. 
d.  Requirements for all bicycle parking. 
1.)  An aisle or space that is at least five feet wide shall be provided for bicycles and riders to enter and leave the facility. 
2.)  Site plans shall show the proposed location of bike parking/storage facilities on the site and on the building floor plan design. A construction detail of the bike rack or facilities shall be provided.  
§ 345-71. - Historic design standards. 
A.  General standards below are considered inclusive and shall be considered in conjunction with the applicable provisions of any subsection of this section. 
1.  Every reasonable effort shall be made to provide a compatible use for a property that requires minimal alteration of the building structure or site and its environment or to use a property for its originally intended purpose. 
2.  The distinguishing original qualities or character of a building, structure or site and its environment shall not be destroyed. The removal or alteration of any historic material or distinctive architectural features should be avoided when possible. 
3.  All buildings, structures and sites shall be recognized as products of their own time. Alterations which have no historical basis and which seek to create an earlier appearance shall be discouraged. 
4.  Changes, which may have taken place in the course of time, are evidence of the history and development of a building, structure or site and its environment. These changes may have acquired significance in their own right, and this significance shall be recognized and respected. 
5.  Distinctive stylistic features or examples of skilled craftsmanship which characterize a building, structure or site shall be treated with sensitivity. 
6.  Deteriorated architectural features shall be repaired rather than replaced wherever possible. In the event that replacement is necessary, the new material shall match the material being replaced in composition, design, color, texture and other visual qualities. Repair or replacement of missing architectural features shall be based on accurate duplications of features substantiated by historical, physical or pictorial evidence rather than on conjectural design or the availability of different architectural elements from other buildings or structures. 
7.  The surface cleaning shall be undertaken with the gentlest means possible. Sandblasting and other cleaning methods that will damage the historic building materials shall not be undertaken. 
8.  Every reasonable effort shall be made to protect and preserve archaeological resources affected by or adjacent to any acquisition, protection, stabilization, preservation, rehabilitation, restoration or reconstruction project. 
9.  When the replacements are made, exterior architectural elements, such as but not limited to windows, doors, and siding, shall be replaced with a style and finish of the period of significance of the building. Use of original materials is preferred. 
B.  Standards for Protection. 
1.  Before applying protective measures, which are generally of a temporary nature and imply future historic preservation work, an analysis of the actual or anticipated threats to the property shall be made. 
2.  Protection shall safeguard the physical condition or environment of a property or archaeological site from further deterioration or damage caused by weather or other natural, animal or human intrusions. 
3.  If any historic material or architectural features are removed, they shall be properly recorded and, if possible, stored for future study or reuse. 
C.  Standards for Stabilization. 
1.  Stabilization shall reestablish the structural stability of a property through the reinforcement of load-bearing members or by arresting material deterioration leading to structural failure. Stabilization shall also reestablish weather resistant conditions for a property. 
2.  Stabilization shall be accomplished in such a manner that it detracts as little as possible from the property's appearance. When reinforcement is required to reestablish structural stability, such work shall be concealed wherever possible so as not to intrude upon or detract from the aesthetic and historical quality of the property, except where concealment would result in the alteration or destruction of historically significant material or spaces. 
D.  Standards for Preservation. 
1.  Preservation shall maintain the existing form, integrity and materials of a building, structure or site. Substantial reconstruction or restoration of lost features generally are not included in a preservation undertaking. 
2.  Preservation shall include techniques of arresting or retarding the deterioration of a property through a program of ongoing maintenance. 
E.  Standards for Rehabilitation. 
1.  Contemporary design for alterations and additions to existing properties shall not be discouraged when such alterations and additions do not destroy significant historic, architectural or cultural material and such design is compatible with the size, scale, color, material and character of the property, neighborhood or environment. 
2.  Wherever possible, new additions or alterations to structures shall be done in such a manner that if such additions or alterations were to be removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of the structure would be unimpaired. 
F.  Standards for Restoration. 
1.  Every reasonable effort shall be made to use a property for its originally intended purpose or to provide a compatible use that will require minimum alteration to the property and its environment. 
2.  Reinforcement required for structural stability or the installation of protective or code-required mechanical systems shall be concealed whenever possible so as not to intrude or detract from the property's aesthetic and historical qualities, except where concealment would result in the alteration or destruction of historically significant materials or spaces. 
3.  When archeological resources must be disturbed by restoration work, recovery of archeological material shall be undertaken in conformance with current professional practices. 
G.  Standards for Reconstruction. 
1.  Reconstruction of a part or all of a property shall be undertaken only when such work is essential to reproduce a significant missing feature in a historic district or site, and when a contemporary design solution is not acceptable. 
2.  Reconstruction of all or part of a historic property shall be appropriate when the reconstruction is essential for understanding and interpreting the value of a historic district or when no other building, structure, object or landscape feature with the same associative value has survived and sufficient historical documentation exists to ensure an accurate reproduction of the original. 
3.  The reproduction of missing elements accomplished with new materials shall duplicate the composition, design, color, texture and other visual qualities of the missing element. Reconstruction of missing architectural features shall be based upon accurate duplication of original features, substantiated by historical, physical or pictorial evidence rather than upon conjectural designs or the availability of different architectural features from other buildings. 
4.  Reconstruction of a building or structure on an original site shall be preceded by a thorough archaeological investigation to locate and identify all subsurface features and artifacts. 
5.  Reconstruction shall include measures to preserve any remaining original fabric, including foundations, subsurface and ancillary elements. The reconstruction of missing elements and features shall be done in such a manner that the essential form and integrity of the original surviving features are unimpaired. 
H.  Standards for New Construction. 
1.  In considering whether to approve or disapprove an application for a permit for new construction in an historic district, the Commission shall be guided by standards of the Secretary of the Interior and the following compatibility standards. 
2.  New construction need not replicate historic older buildings or structures, but may reflect contemporary design standards so long as the design and construction is compatible with surrounding historic structures. Building height, width, mass and proportion affect the degree of compatibility between the old and the new. 
a.  Site and Setting. A developer intending to utilize a historic resource as a part of a development must consider the context of the resource's original site by honoring the original historic intention of said resource and integrating it respectfully into the new development. Design elements shall have compatible rhythm and repetition with an emphasis on historically compatible materials and colors. 
b.  Building Height. Height shall be visually compatible with adjacent buildings. The apparent physical size, scale and height shall relate to existing resources. 
c.  Openings on Frontal Facades. The width and height of windows, doors and entries must harmonize in scale and proportion with the width and height of windows, doors and entries of buildings and structures of historic significance in the surrounding environment. 
d.  Relationship of Unbroken Planes to Voids (i.e., punctured planes) in Front Facades. The relationship of unbroken planes (i.e., walls) to voids (i.e., windows and doors) on the façade of a building or structure shall be aesthetically harmonious with that of buildings and structures of historic significance in the surrounding environment. 
e.  Relationship of Vacant Land to Buildings/Structures. The relationship of a building or structure to the vacant land between an adjacent building or structure shall not violate the existing paradigmatic spatial relationship of historically significant structures to the vacant land between said structures and adjoining buildings. The building mass in large architectural projects can be varied in form by using setbacks to create open spaces and landscaping when desirable to provide harmonious visual transitions between new construction and the adjacent historic properties. 
f.  Relationship of Exterior Projections to the Street. The relationship of exterior projections to the street in new construction shall be aesthetically harmonious with the relationship of exterior projections to the street in the surrounding existing buildings of historic significance. 
g.  Relationship of Major Exterior Building Materials. The major exterior building materials on the façade of a building or on a structure shall reflect the predominant major building materials existent on the facades of historically significant buildings and on structures in the surrounding environment. 
h.  Roof Forms. The roof form and slope of a building or structure is a major element in the visual image of the building. Therefore, designers must take care to honor paradigmatically in new construction the existing historic roof forms and slopes so as not to violate the aesthetic harmony of the whole. 
i.  Continuity in Visual Imagery of Appurtenances. Appurtenances of a building or structure such as walls, fences and landscaping shall honor the relationship of appurtenances to buildings of historic significance in the surrounding environment. 
j.  Scale of Buildings. The scale of buildings and structures shall be in scale with the buildings and structures of historic significance. 
k.  Signage. Signs which are out of keeping with the character of the environment in question shall not be used. Excessive size and inappropriate placement on buildings results in visual clutter and shall be designed to relate harmoniously to exterior building materials and colors. A good sign shall express a simple clear message with wording kept to a minimum. 
1.  Site Planning. The site planning of landscaping, parking facilities, utility and service areas, walkways and appurtenances must reflect the site planning of landscaping, parking facilities, utility and service areas, walkways and landscape features reticulate to buildings or structures of historic significance. 
m.  Accessory Garage Design. All garage facades shall be in character with the immediate surrounding historic properties and must be compatible with the significant historic features and characteristics of the facades and streetscape of the immediate block front on which the proposed structure is located as well as the block front directly across the street. 
n.  Off-Street Parking. All required off-street parking shall be enclosed, and the enclosure shall be in character with the design of the immediate surrounding historic structures as outlined in this chapter. Such parking shall be designed so as to be at least fifty percent (50%) below grade and covered and shall be located entirely under the building where feasible, but, if located within the rear yard area, at least fifty percent (50%) of the entire yard area, including the garage rooftop area, shall consist of landscaping which may be a combination of grass, groundcover and shrubs, and the remaining area shall be covered with decorative brick or concrete payers, or comparable, durable materials. 
I.  Relocation of a Landmark or Building, Object or Structure Located in a Historic District. In considering whether to recommend, approve or disapprove an application for a permit to relocate a building, object or structure designated a historic landmark or located in a historic district, the Commission shall be guided by the following considerations: 
1.  The historic character and aesthetic interest the building, structure or object contributes to its present setting. 
2.  Whether there are definite plans for the area to be vacated and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area will be. 
3.  Whether the building, structure or object can be moved without significant damage to its physical integrity. 
4.  Whether the proposed relocation area is compatible with the historical and architectural character of the building, object or structure. 
J.  Demolition. 
1.  The following shall be considered in regard to an application to demolish an individual landmark building, structure, site or object or any building, structure, site or object contained within a historic district [Amended 9-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-106] : 
a.  Its historic, architectural and aesthetic significance. 
b.  Its use. 
c.  Its importance to the city and the extent to which its historic or architectural value is such that its removal would be detrimental to the public interest. 
d.  The extent to which it is of such old, unusual or uncommon design, craftsmanship, texture or material that it could not be reproduced or could be reproduced only with great difficulty. 
e.  The probable impact of its removal upon the ambience of the historic district. 
f.  The structural soundness and integrity of the building so as to comply with the requirements of the state uniform code. 
g.  The effect on the remaining portion of the building, structure, site, object or landscape feature in cases of partial demolition. 
2.  In the event that the structure is unsafe or unsound so as to impose a danger to health or safety, the power and authority of the City of Jersey City to demolish the structure, as otherwise provided by law, shall not be impaired or altered in any way by the provisions of this chapter. The city shall be exempt from making an application to the Commission but shall notify the Commission prior to the demolition. 
3.  If an application to demolish is denied, the applicant shall follow the appeal process detailed herein for denial of certificates of appropriateness. 
K.  Other Guidelines. The commission shall utilize locally generated guidelines or historic preservation aids in addition to the Secretary of Interior's Standards. 
L.  Additional Regulations for Alterations and Additions to Buildings and New Construction. 
 
1.  Windows. 
a.  Repair. Deteriorated windows can often be repaired and made sound and fully operational. A Certificate of No Effect is required to undertake ordinary repairs including: 
i.  Replacing or rebuilding any parts of a window such as the sill and portions of the sash and frames using the same material and with the same configuration, shape and dimension. 
ii.  Scraping, priming and repainting of window sash and/or frame. 
iii.  Consolidating wood members with cellulose wood fillers or chemical materials. Change in shape, size or configuration require a Certificate of Appropriateness. 
b.  Replacement. 
i.  If historic windows have deteriorated to a point precluding repair, rehabilitation or restoration, based on documentation submitted by the applicant, or a field inspection by the Historic Preservation Officer, replacement windows may be approved under a Certificate of No Effect if they match the historic windows in terms of configuration, operation, details, material and finish. Variations in details will be permitted if such variations do not significantly affect the visual characteristics of the historic window, including the shadow effect of muntins and sash on the glazing. In evaluating "significant" effect, other factors to be considered shall be the age of the building and its architectural quality, as well as the extent of reduction in the total glazed area of the proposed sash compared to the existing sash. For narrow wood windows (less than fifteen (15) inches wide), the reduction shall be limited to ten percent (10%); for wood windows, fifteen (15) inches or wider, the reduction shall be limited to six percent; for metal double-hung windows (of any size), the reduction shall be limited to ten percent (10%). 
ii.  In buildings less than thirty (30) years old, the replacement windows need not match the historic window in terms of materials. The finish, however, must match the finish of the original windows. On secondary facades, windows which are visible from a public thoroughfare need only match the historic windows in terms of configuration and finish. 
iii.  Proposals for replacement windows which do not meet these conditions will require a Certificate of Appropriateness. 
c.  Storm Windows. The installation of exterior storm windows will be granted a Certificate of No Effect providing they meet the following conditions: 
 
i.  Exterior storm windows shall fit tightly within window openings without the need for a subframe or panning around the perimeter. 
ii.  The color of the frames of the storm windows shall match the color of the primary window frame. 
iii.  Glazing shall be clear. 
iv.  The storm sash shall be set as far back from the plane of the exterior wall surface as is practicable. 
v.  Muntins shall not be permitted. 
vi.  Meeting rails may be used only in conjunction with double-hung windows and shall be placed in the same relative location as in the primary sash. 
d.  Supporting Documentation. Applications for replacement windows must include photographs and dimensioned drawings of the existing condition of the windows. In addition, manufacturer's catalogue cuts or full or half-scale drawings of the proposed windows with comparative dimensions, details of construction and configuration and color and finish samples are required. Proposals for a change in material shall include a material sample. 
2.  Storefronts. 
 
a.  Repair. 
i.  Every effort should be made to retain and repair historic storefronts as well as significant surviving fragments of historic storefronts. While a non-original historic storefront may differ in style from the original building, it reflects the shifts in popular taste and documents the changes over time within an historic district and should be treated with sensitivity. 
ii.  A Certificate of No Effect is required for ordinary repairs to existing storefronts, both historic and non-historic. This would include replacing deteriorated, damaged or missing features with matching components and painting or refinishing. 
iii.  Changes in design or configuration of an historic storefront requires a Certificate of Appropriateness. 
b.  Replacement. 
i.  If replacement of a storefront is necessary, the design of the new storefront should reproduce the historic storefront in terms of its configuration, materials, placement, proportions and extent of glazed area. The design of the replacement store front may be based on surviving historic storefronts elsewhere on the building or another identical building, or on documentary evidence such as original architectural drawings or old photographs. 
ii.  In cases where the historic storefront has been replaced and there is no extant historic storefront elsewhere on the building, nor on another identical building, and no documentary evidence can be found, a contemporary design is permissible and should meet the following criteria: 
(A)  It fits entirely within the existing storefront opening(s); 
(B)  It incorporates any architecturally and/or historically significant surviving fragments of an historic storefront; 
(C)  It is compatible with the original materials and colors of the upper floors; and 
(D)  It includes traditional storefront elements (i.e. transoms, glass display windows, low bulkheads, recessed entrance, signband) which are appropriate to the age and style of the building. 
iii.  All applications for new storefronts require a Certificate of Appropriateness. 
c.  Signage. In accordance with other provisions in this chapter (See 345-68 and 345-71.M). 
[Amended 5-28-2008 by Ord. No. 08-072] 
d.  Awnings. Awnings are permitted on storefronts and should meet the following conditions: The awning is a retractable type with a sloped profile (exception may be made for buildings less than thirty (30) years old and non-historic storefronts); 
i.  The metal frame is covered with canvas fabric in an historically appropriate color and pattern to the building and the historic district; 
ii.  Lettering on the awning is limited to the skirt; however, logos may be printed on the sloped portion of the awning; 
iii.  The awning frame is attached to the building in such a way that it does not destroy or cause irreversible damage to significant architectural features; 
iv.  The awning fits within the storefront opening and has the same shape as the opening. 
e.  Security Gates. 
i.  Security gates should be installed in the interior of all storefronts and should be of the open-link variety. If new storefronts are to be installed, or in cases where the historic storefront had external security gates, the gate tracks should be recessed into the glazing reveal and the gate housing should be flush with the plane of the storefront, and should be contained within a plenum space above the storefront or behind a transom panel or signage panel. The gate housing, tracks or mechanical boxes should not protrude from the plane of the storefront or be apparent. Exterior scissor-type gates are also acceptable. 
ii.  Applications for open link interior security gates require a Certificate of No Effect. Applications for all other security gates require a Certificate of Appropriateness. 
f.  Supporting Documentation. Applications for replacement storefronts must include photographs of the existing storefront, to scale drawings of the proposed storefront, signage, awning and/or security gates (elevation, sections and full or half-scale details), and materials and color samples. 
3.  Additions. 
a.  Rear Yard Additions. 
i.  A Certificate of No Effect will be granted for applications for rear yard additions which meet the following criteria: 
(A)  The proposed addition is not visible from a public thoroughfare or right-of-way. 
(B)  The addition will not extend to the rear lot line, nor substantially eliminate the presence of a rear yard. 
(C)  Other rear yard incursions exist within the block. 
(D)  The proposed work complies with the Historic Zoning District regulations and will not require a variance. 
(E)  The rear addition does not rise to the full height of the building. 
(F)  The existing rear façade will not be removed from the entire width of the building. Instead, existing openings will be modified to provide access into the addition. (This approach retains original building fabric and reduces structural intervention.) 
ii.  Applications for rear yard additions which do not meet the criteria will most likely require a Certificate of Appropriateness. For proposed additions which will be visible from a public thoroughfare or right-of-way, the Commission will consider the effect of the addition on any significant architectural features on the building's rear façade, and the scale and architectural character of the addition's façade in relation to the building's front façade. 
b.  Rooftop Additions. A Certificate of No Effect will be granted for applications for rooftop additions which meet the following criteria: 
 
i.  The addition consists of mechanical equipment, egress or mechanical bulkheads or utilitarian skylights only; or the addition consists of living space and complies with the Historic Zoning regulations. 
ii.  The roof of the subject building is not a significant feature of its design. 
iii.  The addition is not visible from a public thoroughfare or right-of-way. 
iv.  If the building possesses a significant roof silhouette, the addition does not interrupt the roof or skyline. 
v.  The materials of the addition are in the nature of utilitarian rooftop accretions and are in keeping with the existing roofscape. 
vi.  The addition does not adversely affect the significant ensemble of buildings by creating a distracting element in an otherwise uniform roofscape. 
vi.  The addition does not adversely affect the significant ensemble of buildings by creating a distracting element in an otherwise uniform roofscape. 
vii.  Applications for rooftop additions which do not meet the above criteria will most likely require a Certificate of Appropriateness. 
c.  Supporting Documentation. Applications for rear yard or rooftop additions must include photographs of the existing buildings (including rear facade for rear additions), individually and in the context of the neighborhood, to-scale floor plans, elevations and sections of the building and addition, to-scale sight line drawings for rooftop additions, a site plan of the entire block for rear yard additions, full or half scale details of windows, doors and decorative trim, materials and color samples. 
[Amended 11-10-2010 by Ord. No. 10-129] 
4.  Restoration. 
 
a.  A Certificate of No Effect will be granted for applications for the restoration of a building or building façade features (such as stoops, cornices, window and door openings and enframements) to their historic appearance when the following criteria are met: 
i.  The restoration would not cause the removal of non-original historic building fabric (i.e., Victorian Period features on an early 19th Century structure). 
ii.  The restoration is based on documentation such as: 
(A)  Physical evidence on the building; 
(B)  Original drawings; 
(C)  Old photographs; 
(D)  An identical building. 
iii.  The restored features match the texture, color, profiles, details and dimensions of the original feature. 
iv.  Restoration work which does not conform to the above criteria will require a Certificate of Appropriateness. 
v.  Supporting documentation for restoration work shall include photographs of the existing conditions, documentation upon which the restoration is based, and the materials and methods proposed by the contractor in the form of specifications, a contract, or a letter. 
5.  Exterior Doors (Primary Facades). 
 
a.  Repair. Repair of historic doors including stripping, refinishing, replacing deteriorated parts-in-kind, replacing hardware matching the original, and replacing glazing in-kind, requires a Certificate of No Effect. 
b.  Replacement. Historic doors may not be removed, unless beyond repair. A Certificate of No Effect will be granted for replacing deteriorated historic doors or non-historic doors with new doors which match the historic doors. A Certificate of Appropriateness will be required for the following: 
i.  New doors which do not match the historic doors; 
ii.  Enlarging or reducing the existing door opening; 
iii.  Replacement doors of a different configuration than the historic doors; 
iv.  Alterations to historic doors which significantly affect their appearance. 
c.  Supporting Documentation. Applications for replacement doors must include photographs of the building and the existing door showing deterioration, documentation of the historic doors if available, to scale drawings of the proposed doors within the opening (elevations and sections), and a finish sample. 
6.  Ironwork. 
 
a.  Fences and Railings. A Certificate of No Effect will be granted for the following: 
i.  Ordinary repairs to existing fence and railings. 
ii.  Replacement of missing, non-historic or severely deteriorated historic fences and railings providing that the new ironwork matches the historic ironwork based on documentation such as historic photographs, extant examples on identical buildings, or remnants of the historic ironwork. 
iii.  A Certificate of Appropriateness is required for the following: 
(A)  Replacement ironwork which does not match the historic fence and/or railing. 
(B)  The installation of a fence or railing in a location which historically had no ironwork. 
(C)  Alterations to or removal of historic fences and railings. 
(D)  In instances where historic fences and/or railings have been removed or replaced and no documentation of the historic ironwork is available, the Commission recommends either a design which is stylistically compatible with the building or a simple contemporary design which is not intrusive to the special architectural and historic character of the building and the streetscape. Both alternatives require a Certificate of Appropriateness. 
b.  Window and Door Security Gates. 
 
i.  A Certificate of No Effect will be granted for the installation of exterior window and/or door security gates providing they are existing features of the building and the proposed gates do not detract from the historic and architectural character of the building. 
ii.  A Certificate of Appropriateness will be required for the installation of window and/or door security gates if none exist. The proposed gates should meet the following criteria: 
(A)  A simple design. 
(B)  Conform to the shape of the opening. 
(C)  Be mounted within the opening. 
(D)  Have no frame (window gate). 
iii.  Exterior window gates are not permitted above the first floor on the front façade, which shall not be construed to mean the parlor floor (see definition of parlor floor). Window gates which accommodate air conditioner units should have simple boxes or holes rather than more elaborate curved protrusions, unless the latter is appropriate to the building's architectural character. 
c.  Supporting Documentation. Applications for new ironwork must include photographs of the building, both present and historic, dimensioned drawings of the proposed ironwork (elevation and full or half-scale section), a site plan showing extent of ironwork (only for installations proposed in locations where no ironwork presently exists). 
7.  Residential Awnings. 
 
a.  Awning installation on residential buildings require a Certificate of Appropriateness and should meet the following criteria: 
i.  The awnings are retractable; 
ii.  The metal frame is covered with canvas fabric in an historically appropriate color and pattern for the building and the historic district; 
iii.  The awnings fit within the window and/or door openings and have the same shape as the openings; 
iv.  The awning frames are attached to the building in such a way that they do not destroy or cause irreversible damage to significant architectural features. 
b.  Supporting documentation for applications for residential awnings must include present and historic photographs of the building, to scale drawings (elevation and section) of the installation, and a material and color sample. 
8.  Commercial Awnings. 
a.  The installation of a commercial awning requires a Certificate of Appropriateness and should meet the following criteria: 
i.  The metal frame is covered with canvas fabric in an historically appropriate color and pattern for the building and the historic district. 
ii.  The awning frames are attached to the building in such a way that they do not destroy, conceal from view, or cause irreversible damage to significant architectural features. 
iii.  The awning is an appropriate size for storefront. 
iv.  The awning lettering should be limited to the name of the business and address. A brief description of the business may be acceptable. 
b.  Supporting documentation for applications for commercial awnings must include present and historic photographs of the building, to scale drawings of the installation including lettering and a material and color sample. 
9.  Imitation Cladding. 
 
a.  Vinyl and Aluminum Siding. The Commission discourages the use of vinyl or aluminum siding on historic buildings. These materials are not permitted on masonry buildings. On buildings which have existing vinyl or aluminum siding, individual units may be replaced with matching materials if necessary following the issuance of a Certificate of No Effect. On buildings with wood clapboard siding and/or shingles, the Commission encourages retention of the historic material or replacement with matching materials. 
b.  If an applicant chooses to apply for aluminum or vinyl siding, a Certificate of Appropriateness is required. 
c.  Imitation Facing. The Commission discourages the application of imitation stone or brick facings. On buildings which have existing imitation stone and brick facings, ordinary repairs and repainting may be performed following the issuance of a Certificate of No Effect. One exception is a refacing of a severely deteriorated brownstone façade with a cementitious mix tinted to match the color of brownstone. Such work will be granted a Certificate of No Effect providing it meets the following criteria: 
i.  The existing brownstone surface is exfoliating, damaged or otherwise unsound (as documented in photographs). 
ii.  The proposal calls for the replication of the original texture, color profiles and details. 
iii.  The proposed calls for damaged stone to be cut back to sound stone and the new surface to be keyed into the sound stone and built up in successive layers using a cementitious mix with the top layer tinted and finished to match the original brownstone texture and color. In some cases, a sample patch may be requested for inspection and approval by the Historic Preservation Officer. 
iv.  The use of wire lath is prohibited. 
10.  New Window Openings. 
a.  A Certificate of No Effect will be granted for new window openings when the following criteria are met. 
i.  The proposed window openings are located on a secondary façade. 
ii.  The new window openings and sash retain the same shape, dimensions and configuration as the building's existing windows. 
iii.  The new lintels and sills match the design, color, and texture of other window openings on the façade. 
iv.  The location of the new openings are consistent with the existing pattern of bays. 
v.  The new openings do not detract from any significant historic architectural features on the building. 
vi.  Proposed new window openings which do not meet all of the above criteria will require a Certificate of Appropriateness. 
b.  Supporting documentation for applications for new window openings must include photographs of primary and secondary facades and a to scale elevation of the façade(s) indicating the proposed new openings. 
11.  Sidewalk Repair and Replacement. 
 
a.  Repairs of less than fifty percent (50%) of existing sidewalk. 
i.  For repairs, the replacement units should be of like material and color to match the existing sidewalk. Intact blue stone paving must not be removed and discarded. Intact blue stone which has moved due to the thrust of tree roots or the freeze and thaw cycle and that presents a safety hazard to pedestrians, should be carefully removed and reset in sand, quarry, dust or dirt. 
b.  Replacement of More than Fifty Percent (50%). In the case of stone paving such as blue stone, the replacement units should be of the same material, shape, and size as the existing stone paving. 
i.  When the previous material is concrete, then blue stone or colored concrete must be used. Colored concrete after curing should be Scofield Charcoal Gray or equivalent. The texture of the concrete should be made smooth with a wood float in order to create a texture more like blue stone. The sidewalk should cure without fine finishing and lines should be scored without edging. Corners (intersections) need to meet ADA standards and sloped areas (re: driveways or ramps) should have a light broom finish for traction. 
[Amended 11-10-2010 by Ord. No. 10-129] 
c.  Not Acceptable. New sidewalks of white or natural concrete of more than fifty percent (50%), irregular "patio" styles and varying colors with great contrast are not acceptable. Patio styles that are historically appropriate or create the appearance of blue stone are acceptable, but subject to approval by the historic preservation officer. 
d.  Curbs. Existing stone curbing should not be removed in sidewalk repair, with the exception of new handicapped curb cuts at street corners. If new curbing is required, replacing concrete curbs or at handicapped cuts, they should be poured concrete and meeting city standards for dimensions. The color should be French gray. Matching the color mixture of the sidewalks. 
e.  Supporting documentation for applications for sidewalk repair and/or replacement must include photographic documentation of existing conditions and a dimensioned sketch of the proposed paving pattern. 
M.  Signs. 
1.  All signs shall reflect the historic character of the area of the proposed sign placement and will respect the size, scale and mass of the facade, building height and rhythms and sizes of windows and door openings. 
2.  No signs shall be back-lighted. 
3.  Projecting signs shall be permitted in accordance with § 345-68. 
4.  All signs within the historic district require a Certificate of Appropriateness, except that applications for unlit interior window signage only shall require a Certificate of No Effect. 
[Amended 5-28-2008 by Ord. No. 08-072]  
§ 345-72. - Design standards: recommended and not recommended. 
A.  One and Two Family/Multi-Family Attached. 
1.  Residential Recommended. 
 
a.  Attractive mature streetscape; 
b.  Scale, orientation, and style consistent with adjacent development; 
c.  On-street parking; 
d.  Street trees small but detailed front yard. 
2.  Residential Not Recommended. 
 
a.  Fenced front yard resembles an "auto compound" and creates a commercial atmosphere; 
b.  Excessive curb cut width and expansive concrete areas; 
c.  No clear sense of unit entries; 
d.  No street trees or landscaping. 
3.  Residential Not Recommended. 
 
a.  Building mass dominates because of lack of offsets and poor relationship between window size and facade area; 
b.  Continuous drop curb limits on street parking; 
c.  Proximity of overhead doors to road limits visibility and requires maneuvering in the right-of-way; 
d.  Lack of street trees and landscaping; 
e.  Garage doors dominate façade. 
4.  Residential Not Recommended. 
 
a.  Lack of architectural detail; 
b.  Lack of interest at street level; 
c.  Incompatible siding materials; 
d.  Poor integration between architecture and streetscape; 
e.  No landscaping or street trees. 
B.  Multi-Family Residential—Mid-Rise/High-Rise. 
1.  Residential Recommended. 
 
a.  Maintain consistent heights/setbacks; 
b.  Consistent architectural theme; 
c.  Subtle variation of color and detail; 
d.  Pattern of windows/doors is consistent; 
e.  No visible off street parking; 
f.  Street trees and foundation plantings. 
2.  High-Rise Residential Recommended. 
 
a.  Building oriented to streetscape; 
b.  No excessive setbacks; 
c.  Parking is not a dominant visual element; 
d.  Architecturally interesting structure with "human" scale lower level; 
e.  Enhanced streetscape with materials compatible with structure; 
f.  Appropriate landscape treatment; 
g.  Good transition between public and private uses. 
3.  Residential Not Recommended. 
 
a.  "Tower in the park" is discouraged; 
b.  Massive structures in a sea of surface parking; 
c.  No mans land creates excessive distances between buildings; 
d.  Slab buildings devoid of architectural interest; 
e.  Lack of landscaping further compounds bleak character. 
C.  Fencing. 
1.  Fencing Lot Recommended. 
 
a.  High quality materials; 
b.  Architectural details; 
c.  Color, materials and landscaping softens impact; 
d.  Area inside fencing is partially screened by plantings, green buffer in front of fence. 
2.  Fencing Not Recommended. 
 
a.  No landscaping or buffer; 
b.  Harsh, unsoftened elements, stark white wall, high chainlink fencing topped with knife wire. 
D.  Streetscape. 
1.  Streetscape Recommended. 
 
a.  Unified design theme; 
b.  Attention to details; 
c.  Consistent setbacks of retail display windows and recessed entries; 
d.  Cornice signage; 
e.  Fabric awnings of consistent design. 
2.  Streetscape Not Recommended. 
 
a.  Lack of pedestrian amenities such as landscaping and street furniture; 
b.  Solid metal security gates over retail windows; 
c.  Disjointed signage-various styles, sizes, and sign heights oriented to vehicles; 
d.  Nondescript street lighting. 
E.  Public Space. 
1.  Public Spaces Recommended. 
 
a.  Comprehensive amenity plan; 
b.  Ample seating; 
c.  Seasonal shading with full canopy provides weather protection for seating area; 
d.  Intimate, socially intensive space. 
2.  Public Spaces Not Recommended. 
 
a.  Expansive, paved unusable area; 
b.  Lack of visual interest (public art, fountain, or planting beds, etc.); 
c.  No seating; 
d.  Little or no landscaping; 
e.  Discourages use of space for social interaction. 
F.  Commercial. 
1.  Corner Commercial Recommended. 
 
a.  Building wraps corner and reflects building design; 
b.  Storefront visible from two facades; 
c.  Scale is pedestrian; 
d.  Signage is pedestrian oriented; 
e.  Architectural details provide interest. 
2.  Corner Commercial Recommended. 
 
a.  Architectural features are enhanced by design treatment; 
b.  Windows on two facades wrapping corner; 
c.  Fabric awnings; 
d.  Pedestrian scale and signage. 
3.  Corner Commercial Not Recommended. 
 
a.  Visual clutter; 
b.  Excessive window coverage; 
c.  Nonconforming advertising banner; 
d.  Obscures original architectural details of building. 
4.  Commercial Recommended. 
 
a.  First floor use integrated with streetscape; 
b.  Room for first floor retail to provide vitality to pedestrian realm. 
5.  Commercial Not Recommended. 
 
a.  Setback from street destroys pedestrian realm — parking should be in back of building or on street; 
b.  Lack of roof treatment makes building "float"; 
c.  Lack of connection to surrounding buildings; 
d.  Parking area not landscaped; 
e.  Exposed trash area. 
G.  Drive Thru Commercial. 
1.  Drive Thru Recommended. 
 
a.  Drive thru area screened from street; 
b.  Foundation plantings part of comprehensive landscape and screening plan. 
2.  Drive Thru Recommended. 
 
a.  Service area extension of building architecture; 
b.  Fencing and landscaping coordinated to provide transition from parking area to pedestrian area; 
c.  Signage integrated into architecture. 
3.  Drive Thru Not Recommended. 
 
a.  Drive thru area not integrated into architectural design; 
b.  No landscaping of parking area; no screening or decorative fencing; 
c.  Building "floats" in a sea of parking; 
d.  Pedestrian access not integrated into streetscape. 
4.  Drive Thru Not Recommended. 
 
a.  No landscaping to complement architecture; 
b.  Lack of architectural detail, large blank walls; 
c.  No street trees or parking lot screening; 
d.  No provisions for internal pedestrian circulation. 
H.  Parking. 
1.  Parking Recommended. 
 
a.  Seamless integration of parking use and streetscape; 
b.  Street trees soften impact of lighting on surrounding buildings. 
2.  Parking Recommended. 
 
a.  Street trees provide second buffer so pedestrian environment is greened on both sides. 
3.  Parking Not Recommended. 
 
a.  Parking in front of building creates a pedestrian hostile environment with no visible pedestrian access; 
b.  Lack of landscaping creates harsh, barren appearance and no buffer between parking area and pedestrian environment; 
c.  Signage on fence and freestanding area geared to vehicular traffic and not oriented to pedestrian neighborhood/commercial district where it is located. 
4.  Parking Garages Recommended. 
 
a.  Design masks use — garages outwardly resemble an office building; 
b.  Minimal curb cuts encourage pedestrian flow; 
c.  Garages should make provisions for first floor retail shops when built to sidewalk; 
d.  Landscaping and trees buffer use from pedestrian and residential environment. 
5.  Parking Garages Not Recommended. 
 
a.  Large blank wall destroys vitality of pedestrian realm; 
b.  First floor retail or office uses above should surround and mask garage when built to front lot line on commercially zoned streets. 
I.  Industrial. 
1.  Industrial Recommended. 
 
a.  Internal use screened through high end materials like decorative fencing and landscaping; 
b.  High decorative, spiked fence provides security without being visually detracting; 
c.  Use of uniform, decorative lighting fixtures create attractive streetscape along narrow sidewalk. 
2.  Industrial Recommended. 
 
a.  Comprehensive design of parking, signage, security and landscaping creates an inviting entrance; 
b.  Use of landscape island at vehicular entrance to separate traffic flow provides attractive traffic calming element; 
c.  Deciduous landscaping partially screens industrial building from building view. 
J.  Neighborhood Commercial. 
1.  Neighborhood Commercial Recommended. 
 
a.  On street parking, no curb cuts to interrupt pedestrian flow; 
b.  Mixed-use; 
c.  Large display windows on first floor; 
d.  Limited window signage, uniform signband in scale with storefront; 
e.  Uniform standardized signage coordinated with architecture; 
f.  Vestibule provides transition from public to private space. 
2.  Neighborhood Commercial Recommended. 
 
a.  No curb cuts, on street parking provides a wall to shield pedestrians from traffic; 
b.  Awnings unify separate buildings to create a smooth transition between buildings; 
c.  Uniform colors and signband also create unity of appearance; 
d.  Limited window signage allows pedestrian to see in; 
e.  Scale of signage conforms to scale of storefront architecture. 
3.  Neighborhood Commercial Recommended. 
 
a.  Coordination of streetscape elements furniture, bike racks, paper boxes; 
b.  On street parking, no curb cuts interrupting pedestrian flow. 
4.  Neighborhood Commercial Recommended. 
 
a.  "Open door" achieved through big window allows interior activity to mix with sidewalk to create a vibrant streetscape; 
b.  Outdoor dining provision adds to dynamic sidewalk. 
5.  Neighborhood Commercial Not Recommended. 
 
a.  Excessive signage gives "low-rent" appearance; 
b.  Lack of connection to streetscape through use of opaque materials; 
c.  Uninviting for pedestrians—cannot see activity in window openings; 
d.  Colors and materials incompatible with above architecture. 
K.  Utilities. 
1.  Utilities Recommended. 
 
a.  Machinery set back from public view; 
b.  Architectural fencing provides screening and works in conjunction with landscaping to form buffer; 
c.  Use of brick enclosure creates uniform and harmonious architectural/color/material scheme. 
2.  Utilities Not Recommended. 
 
a.  Interior workings on public display; 
b.  Machinery too close to public space; 
c.  No space for landscape buffering and screening; 
d.  Chain link fence does not provide screening and adds to industrial appearance; 
e.  No street trees. 
L.  Highway Commercial. 
1.  Highway Commercial Not Recommended. 
 
a.  Commercial appearance needs to be softened through architectural details like fencing, walls and landscaping. 
2.  Highway Commercial Not Recommended. 
 
a.  Multiple signs and banners create visual con fusion and degrade the area; 
b.  Lack of landscaping to soften lights and noise. 
3.  Highway Commercial Not Recommended. 
 
a.  Overuse of site allows business to borrow public realm for display and storage; 
b.  No definition between end of business and sidewalk through low walls or landscaping. 
4.  Highway Commercial Not Recommended. 
 
a.  Large open parking areas destroy neighborhood vitality; 
b.  Frequent curb cuts make for a dangerous pedestrian experience. 
M.  Conversions. 
1.  Conversion Recommended. 
 
a.  Respect for architectural context; 
b.  Mixed use with first floor retail and office/ housing on upper floors. 
2.  Conversion Not Recommended. 
 
a.  Blank walls; 
b.  No architectural detail; 
c.  No screening of mechanical equipment and meters; 
d.  No fenestration. 
3.  Conversion Not Recommended. 
 
a.  Removal of original windows destroys first floor vitality and historic features; 
b.  Material mismatch removes architectural context. 
4.  Conversion Not Recommended. 
 
a.  Functional mismatch of building materials; 
b.  Breaks continuous building wall by not respecting established window and door pattern.  
§ 345-73. - Alcoholic beverage and tobacco product advertisements. 
[Added 3-6-2003 by Ord. No. 03-040] 
No person may place any form of advertising that advertises alcoholic beverages or tobacco products on any billboard, on any front, rear, side or rooftop of any building, or on any free standing billboard or signboard within one thousand (1,000) feet of an elementary or secondary school, or where otherwise prohibited by law.  
ARTICLE VI - Stormwater Control 
[Added 4-11-2007 by Ord. No. 07-056] 
 
§ 345-74. - Stormwater control. 
[Amended 5-20-2009 by Ord. No. 09-052]  
§ 1. - Scope and Purpose. 
A.  Policy Statement. Flood control, groundwater recharge, and pollutant reduction through nonstructural or low impact techniques shall be explored before relying on structural BMPs. Structural BMPs should be integrated with nonstructural stormwater management strategies and proper maintenance plans. Nonstructural strategies include both environmentally sensitive site design and source controls that prevent pollutants from being placed on the site or from being exposed to stormwater. Source control plans should be developed based upon physical site conditions and the origin, nature, and the anticipated quantity or amount of potential pollutants. Multiple stormwater management BMPs may be necessary to achieve the established performance standards for water quality, quantity, and groundwater recharge. 
B.  Purpose. It is the purpose of this ordinance to establish minimum stormwater management requirements and controls for "major development," as defined in Section 2. 
C.  Applicability. 
1.  This ordinance shall be applicable to all site plans and subdivisions for all major developments that require preliminary or final site plan or subdivision review. 
2.  This ordinance shall also be applicable to all major developments undertaken by the City of Jersey City or any other governmental body. 
D.  Compatibility with Other Permit and Ordinance Requirements. Development approvals issued for subdivisions and site plans pursuant to this ordinance are to be considered an integral part of development approvals under the subdivision and site plan review process and do not relieve the applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable code, rule, act, or ordinance. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this ordinance shall be held as the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. This ordinance is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinances, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law except that, where any provision of this ordinance imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, the more restrictive provisions or higher standards shall control.  
§ 2. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this ordinance shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this ordinance its most reasonable application. The definitions below are the same as or based on the corresponding definitions in the Stormwater Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.2. 
"CAFRA Planning Map" means the geographic depiction of the boundaries for Coastal Planning Areas, CAFRA Centers, CAFRA Cores and CAFRA Nodes pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:7E-5B.3. 
"CAFRA Centers, Cores or Nodes" means those areas within boundaries accepted by the Department pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:8E-5B. 
"Combined Sewer System" means a system that consists of a single conduit that collects and transports domestic sewage and industrial wastewater, along with stormwater runoff. 
"Compaction" means the increase in soil bulk density. 
"Core" means a pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic uses serving the surrounding municipality, generally including housing and access to public transportation. 
"County review agency" means an agency designated by the County Board of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal stormwater management plans and implementing ordinance(s). The county review agency may either be: 
A county planning agency; or 
A county water resource association created under N.J.S.A. 58:16A-55.5, if the ordinance or resolution delegates authority to approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove municipal stormwater management plans and implementing ordinances. 
"Department" means the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection. 
"Designated Center" means a State Development and Redevelopment Plan Center as designated by the State Planning Commission such as urban, regional, town, village, or hamlet. 
"Design engineer" means a person professionally qualified and duly licensed in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may include, but not necessarily be limited to, development of project requirements, creation and development of project design and preparation of drawings and specifications. 
"Development" means the division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels, the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation or enlargement of any building or structure, any mining excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of any building or other structure, or land or extension of use of land, by any person, for which permission is required under the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-l et seq. In the case of development of agricultural lands, development means: any activity that requires a State permit; any activity reviewed by the County Agricultural Board (CAB) and the State Agricultural Development Committee (SADC), and municipal review of any activity not exempted by the Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq. 
"Drainage area" means a geographic area within which stormwater, sediments, or dissolved materials drain to a particular receiving waterbody or to a particular point along a receiving waterbody. 
"Environmentally critical areas" means an area or feature which is of significant environmental value, including but not limited to: stream corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat of endangered or threatened species; large areas of contiguous open space or upland forest; steep slopes; and well head protection and groundwater recharge areas. Habitats of endangered or threatened species are identified using the Department's Landscape Project as approved by the Department's Endangered and Nongame Species Program. 
"Empowerment Neighborhood" means a neighborhood designated by the Urban Coordinating Council "in consultation and conjunction with" the New Jersey Redevelopment Authority pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-69. 
"Erosion" means the detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind, ice or gravity. 
"Impervious surface" means a surface that has been covered with a layer of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water. 
"Infiltration" is the process by which water seeps into the soil from precipitation. 
"Major development" means any "development" that provides for ultimately disturbing one or more acres of land or placement or replacement of one quarter acre or more of impervious cover. Disturbance for the purpose of this rule is the placement of impervious surface or exposure and/or movement of soil or bedrock or clearing, cutting, or removing of vegetation. 
"Municipality" means any city, borough, town, township, or village. 
"Node" means an area designated by the State Planning Commission concentrating facilities and activities which are not organized in a compact form. 
"Nutrient" means a chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen or phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the development of organisms. 
"Person" means any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal jurisdiction pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. Person shall also include the City of Jersey City. 
"Pollutant" means any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes, radioactive substance (except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended (42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.), thermal waste, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal, agricultural, and construction waste or runoff, or other residue discharged directly or indirectly to the land, ground waters or surface waters of the State, or to a domestic treatment works. "Pollutant" includes both hazardous and nonhazardous pollutants. 
"Recharge" means the amount of water from precipitation that infiltrates into the ground and is not evapotranspired. 
"Sediment" means solid material, mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water or gravity as a product of erosion. 
"Separate Sewer System" means a system in which the sanitary and storm sewer systems are not interconnected. In this system, the sanitary sewer system is tributary to a wastewater treatment facility, and the storm sewer system discharges directly to the receiving waters. 
"Site" means the lot or lots upon which a major development is to occur or has occurred. 
"Soil" means all unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin. 
"State Development and Redevelopment Plan Metropolitan Planning Area (PAl)" means an area delineated on the State Plan Policy Map and adopted by the State Planning Commission that is intended to be the focus for much of the state's future redevelopment and revitalization efforts. 
"State Plan Policy Map" is defined as the geographic application of the State Development and Redevelopment Plan's goals and statewide policies, and the official map of these goals and policies. 
"Stormwater" means water resulting from precipitation (including rain and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, or is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or drainage facilities, or conveyed by snow removal equipment. 
"Stormwater runoff" means water flow on the surface of the ground or in storm sewers, resulting from precipitation. 
"Stormwater management basin" means an excavation or embankment and related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A stormwater management basin may either be normally dry (that is, a detention basin or infiltration basin), retain water in a permanent pool (a retention basin), or be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (most constructed stormwater wetlands). 
"Stormwater management measure" means any structural or nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program, or other method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated pollutants, or to induce or control the infiltration or groundwater recharge of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal non-stormwater discharges into stormwater conveyances. 
"Tidal Flood Hazard Area" means a flood hazard area, which may be influenced by stormwater runoff from inland areas, but which is primarily caused by the Atlantic Ocean. 
"Urban Coordinating Council Empowerment Neighborhood" means a neighborhood given priority access to State resources through the New Jersey Redevelopment Authority. 
"Urban Enterprise Zones" means a zone designated by the New Jersey Enterprise Zone Authority pursuant to the New Jersey Urban Enterprise Zones Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27H-60 et seq. 
"Urban Redevelopment Area" is defined as previously developed portions of areas: 
(1)  Delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPM) as the Metropolitan Planning Area (PA1), Designated Centers, Cores or Nodes; 
(2)  Designated as CAFRA Centers, Cores or Nodes; 
(3)  Designated as Urban Enterprise Zones; and 
(4)  Designated as Urban Coordinating Council Empowerment Neighborhoods. 
"Waters of the State" means the ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams, wetlands, and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural or artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its jurisdiction. 
"Wetlands" or "wetland" means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation.  
§ 3. - General Standards. 
A.  Design and Performance Standards for Stormwater Management Measures 
1.  Stormwater management measures for major development shall be developed to meet the erosion control, groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality standards in Section 4. To the maximum extent practicable, these standards shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater management strategies into the design. If these strategies alone are not sufficient to meet these standards, structural stormwater management measures necessary to meet these standards shall be incorporated into the design. 
2.  The standards in this ordinance apply only to new major development and are intended to minimize the impact of stormwater runoff on water quality and water quantity in receiving water bodies and maintain groundwater recharge. The standards do not apply to new major development in areas with a separate sewer system that is neither directly nor indirectly connected to a combined sewer system to the extent that alternative design and performance standards are applicable under a regional stormwater management plan or Water Quality Management Plan adopted in accordance with Department rules. Alternative standards shall provide at least as much protection from stormwater quantity and water quality impacts of major development projects as would be provided under the standards in N.J.A.C. 7:8-5. The standards in this ordinance always apply to new major development in areas with a combined sewer system or in areas with a separate sewer system that is either directly or indirectly connected to a combined sewer system.  
§ 4. - Stormwater Management Requirements for Major Development. 
A.  The development shall incorporate a maintenance plan for the stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of a major development in accordance with Section 10. 
B.  Stormwater management measures shall avoid adverse impacts of concentrated flow on habitat for threatened and endangered species as documented in the Department's Landscape Project or Natural Heritage Database established under N.J.S.A. 13:lB-15.147 through 15.150, particularly Helonias bullata (swamp pink) and/or Clemmys muhlnebergi (bog turtle). 
C.  The following linear development projects are exempt from the groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality requirements of Sections 4.F and 4.G: 
1.  The construction of an underground utility line provided that the disturbed areas are revegetated upon completion; 
2.  The construction of an aboveground utility line provided that the existing conditions are maintained to the maximum extent practicable; and 
3.  The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a sidewalk or trail with a maximum width of fourteen (14) feet, provided that the access is made of permeable material. 
D.  A waiver from strict compliance from the groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality requirements of Sections 4.F and 4.G may be obtained for the enlargement of an existing public roadway or railroad; or the construction or enlargement of a public pedestrian access, provided that the following conditions are met: 
1.  The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the project that cannot be accomplished by any other means; 
2.  The applicant demonstrates through an alternatives analysis, that through the use of nonstructural and structural stormwater management strategies and measures, the option selected complies with the requirements of Sections 4.F and 4.G to the maximum extent practicable; 
3.  The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the requirements of Sections 4.F and 4.G, existing structures currently in use, such as homes and buildings, would need to be condemned, and 
4.  The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other rights to areas, including the potential to obtain through condemnation lands not falling under D.3 above within the upstream drainage area of the receiving stream, that would provide additional opportunities to mitigate the requirements of Sections 4.F and 4.G that were not achievable on-site. 
E.  Nonstructural Stormwater Management Strategies. 
1.  To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in Sections 4.F and 4.G shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater management strategies set forth at Section 4.E into the design. The applicant shall identify the nonstructural measures incorporated into the design of the project. If the applicant contends that it is not feasible for engineering, environmental, or safety reasons to incorporate any nonstructural stormwater management measures identified in Paragraph 2 below into the design of a particular project, the applicant shall identify the strategy considered and provide a basis for the contention. 
2.  Nonstructural stormwater management strategies incorporated into site design shall: 
a.  Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss; 
b.  Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect the flow of runoff over impervious surfaces; 
c.  Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and vegetation; 
d.  Minimize the decrease in the "time of concentration" from pre-construction to post construction. "Time of concentration" is defined as the time it takes for runoff to travel from the hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to the point of interest within a watershed; 
e.  Minimize land disturbance including clearing and grading; 
f.  Minimize soil compaction; 
g.  Provide low-maintenance landscaping that encourages retention and planting of native vegetation and minimizes the use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides; 
h.  Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems discharging into and through stable vegetated areas; 
i.  Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the use or exposure of pollutants at the site, in order to prevent or minimize the release of those pollutants into stormwater runoff. Such source controls include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Site design features that help to prevent accumulation of trash and debris in drainage systems, including features that satisfy Section 4.E.3. below; 
(2)  Site design features that help to prevent discharge of trash and debris from drainage systems; 
(3)  Site design features that help to prevent and/or contain spills or other harmful accumulations of pollutants at industrial or commercial developments; and 
(4)  When establishing vegetation after land disturbance, applying fertilizer in accordance with the requirements established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and implementing rules. 
3.  Site design features identified under Section 4.E.2.i.(2) above shall comply with the following standard to control passage of solid and floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this paragraph, "solid and floatable materials" means sediment, debris, trash, and other floating, suspended, or settleable solids. For exemptions to this standard see Section 4.E.3.c below. 
a.  Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever they use a grate in pavement or another ground surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a storm drain or surface water body under that grate: 
(1)  The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT) bicycle safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways Planning and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or 
(2)  A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate has an area of no more than seven square inches, or is no greater than one-half inches across the smallest dimension. 
Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates in grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening portion) of combination inlets, grates on storm sewer manholes, ditch grates, trench grates, and grates of spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground surfaces include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways, parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open channels, and stormwater basin floors. 
b.  Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if the curb opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an area of no more than seven square inches, or be no greater than two inches across the smallest dimension. 
c.  This standard does not apply: 
(1)  Where the review agency determines that this standard would cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could not practicably be overcome by using additional or larger storm drain inlets that meet these standards; 
(2)  Where flows from the water quality design storm as specified in Section 4.G.1 are conveyed through any device (e.g., end of pipe netting facility, manufactured treatment device, or a catch basin hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid and floatable materials that could not pass through one of the following: 
(a)  A rectangular space four and five-eighths inches long and one and one-half inches wide (this option does not apply for outfall netting facilities); or 
(b)  A bar screen having a bar spacing of one-half inches. 
(3)  Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the bars, to the elevation of the water quality design storm as specified in Section 4.G.1; or 
(4)  Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet this standard is an undertaking that constitutes an encroachment or will damage or destroy the New Jersey Register listed historic property. 
4.  Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater management measure to meet the performance standards in Sections 4.F and 4.G shall be dedicated to a government agency, subjected to a conservation restriction filed with the appropriate County Clerk's office, or subject to an approved equivalent restriction that ensures that measure or an equivalent stormwater management measure approved by the reviewing agency is maintained in perpetuity. 
5.  Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management strategies is available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the address identified in Section 7, or found on the Department's website at www.njstormwater.org. 
F.  Erosion Control, Groundwater Recharge and Runoff Quantity Standards. 
1.  This subsection contains minimum design and performance standards to control erosion, encourage and control infiltration and groundwater recharge, and control stormwater runoff quantity impacts of major development. 
a.  The minimum design and performance standards for erosion control are those established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq. and implementing rules. 
b.  The minimum design and performance standards for groundwater recharge are as follows: 
(1)  The design engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors for stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge calculations at Section 5, either: 
(a)  Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis that the site and its stormwater management measures maintain one hundred (100) percent of the average annual pre-construction groundwater recharge volume for the site; or 
(b)  Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis that the increase of stormwater runoff volume from pre-construction to post-construction for the two-year storm is infiltrated. 
(2)  This groundwater recharge requirement does not apply to projects within the "urban redevelopment area," or to projects subject to (3) below. 
(3)  The following types of stormwater shall not be recharged: 
(a)  Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading. High pollutant loading areas are areas in industrial and commercial developments where solvents and/or petroleum products are loaded/unloaded, stored, or applied, areas where pesticides are loaded/unloaded or stored; areas where hazardous materials are expected to be present in greater than "reportable quantities" as defined by the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR 302.4; areas where recharge would be inconsistent with Department approved remedial action work plan or landfill closure plan and areas with high risks for spills of toxic materials, such as gas stations and vehicle maintenance facilities; and 
(b)  Industrial stormwater exposed to "source material." "Source material" means any material(s) or machinery, located at an industrial facility, that is directly or indirectly related to process, manufacturing or other industrial activities, which could be a source of pollutants in any industrial stormwater discharge to groundwater. Source materials include, but are not limited to, raw materials; intermediate products; final products; waste materials; by-products; industrial machinery and fuels, and lubricants, solvents, and detergents that are related to process, manufacturing, or other industrial activities that are exposed to stormwater. 
(4)  The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on the groundwater table and design the site so as to avoid adverse hydraulic impacts. Potential adverse hydraulic impacts include, but are not limited to, exacerbating a naturally or seasonally high water table so as to cause surficial ponding, flooding of basements, or interference with the proper operation of subsurface sewage disposal systems and other subsurface structures in the vicinity or downgradient of the groundwater recharge area. 
c.  In order to control stormwater runoff quantity impacts from areas of the City with a separate storm sewer system that is neither directly nor indirectly connected to a combined sewer system, the design engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors for stormwater runoff calculations at Section 5, complete one of the following. 
(1)  Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis that for stormwater leaving the site, post-construction runoff hydrographs for the two, ten (10), and one hundred (100)-year storm events do not exceed, at any point in time, the pre-construction runoff hydrographs for the same storm events; 
(2)  Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis that there is no increase, as compared to the pre-construction condition, in the peak runoff rates of stormwater leaving the site for the two, ten (10), and one hundred (100)-year storm events and that the increased volume or change in timing of stormwater runoff will not increase flood damage at or downstream of the site. This analysis shall include the analysis of impacts of existing land uses and projected land uses assuming full development under existing zoning and land use ordinances in the drainage area; 
(3)  Design stormwater management measures so that the post-construction peak runoff rates for the two, ten (10), and one hundred (100)-year storm events are fifty (50), seventy-five (75) and eighty (80) percent, respectively, of the pre-construction peak runoff rates. The percentages apply only to the post-construction stormwater runoff that is attributable to the portion of the site on which the proposed development or project is to be constructed. The percentages shall not be applied to post-construction stormwater runoff into tidal flood hazard areas if the increased volume of stormwater runoff will not increase flood damages below the point of discharge; or 
(4)  In tidal flood hazard areas, stormwater runoff quantity analysis in accordance with (1), (2) and (3) above shall only be applied if the increased volume of stormwater runoff could increase flood damages below the point of discharge. 
d.  In order to control stormwater runoff quantity impacts from all areas of the City with a combined sewer system or with a sewer system that is either directly or indirectly connected to a combined sewer system, the design engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors for stormwater runoff calculations at Section 5, design Combined Sewer Subdrainage Area management measures so that the post-construction peak runoff rates for the two, ten (10), and one hundred (100)-year storm events are fifty (50), seventy-five (75) and eighty (80) percent, respectively, of the pre-construction peak runoff rates. The percentages apply only to the post-construction Combined Sewer Subdrainage Area runoff that is attributable to the portion of the site on which the proposed development or project is to be constructed. 
2.  Any application for a new agricultural development that meets the definition of major development at Section 2 shall be submitted to the appropriate Soil Conservation District for review and approval in accordance with the requirements of this section and any applicable Soil Conservation District guidelines for stormwater runoff quantity and erosion control. For the purposes of this section, "agricultural development" means land uses normally associated with the production of food, fiber and livestock for sale. Such uses do not include the development of land for the processing or sale of food and the manufacturing of agriculturally related products. 
G.  Stormwater Runoff Quality Standards. 
1.  Stormwater quality management measures shall be designed to reduce the post-construction load of total suspended solids (TSS) in stormwater runoff by eighty (80) percent of the anticipated load from the developed site, expressed as an annual average. Stormwater quality management measures shall only be required for major developments in areas with a separate sewer system that is neither directly nor indirectly connected to a combined sewer system. The requirement to reduce TSS does not apply to any stormwater runoff in a discharge regulated under a numeric effluent limitation for TSS imposed under the New Jersey Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules, N.J.A.C. 7:14A, or in a discharge specifically exempt under a NJPDES permit from this requirement The water quality design storm is 1.25 inches of rainfall in two hours. Water quality calculations shall take into account the distribution of rain from the water quality design storm, as reflected in Table 1. The calculation of the volume of runoff may take into account the implementation of non-structural and structural stormwater management measures. 
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution 
Minutes 	Cumulative

Rainfall

(inches)	Minutes 	Cumulative

Rainfall

(inches)
0 	0.0000 	65 	0.8917 
5 	0.0083 	70 	0.9917 
10 	0.0166 	75 	1.0500 
15 	0.0250 	80 	1.0840 
20 	0.0500 	85 	1.1170 
25 	0.0750 	90 	1.1500 
30 	0.1000 	95 	1.1750 
35 	0.1330 	100 	1.2000 
40 	0.1660 	105 	1.2250 
45 	0.2000 	110 	1.2334 
50 	0.2583 	115 	1.2417 
55 	0.3583 	120 	1.2500 
60 	0.6250 		
 
2.  For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 below presents the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs designed in accordance with the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the address identified in Section 7, or found on the Department's website at www.njstormwater.org. The BMP Manual and other sources of technical guidance are listed in Section 7. TSS reduction shall be calculated based on the removal rates for the BMPs in Table 2 below. Alternative removal rates and methods of calculating removal rates may be used if the design engineer provides documentation demonstrating the capability of these alternative rates and methods to the review agency. A copy of any approved alternative rate or method of calculating the removal rate shall be provided to the Department at the following address: Division of Watershed Management, New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, PO Box 418 Trenton, New Jersey, 08625-0418. 
3.  If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the required eighty (80) percent TSS reduction for a site, the applicant shall utilize the following formula to calculate TSS reduction: 
R = A+B - (AXB)/100 
Where 
R = total TSS percent load removal from application of both BMPs, and 
A = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first BMP 
B = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the second BMP 
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs 
Best Management Practice 	TSS Percent Removal Rate 
Bioretention Systems 	90 
Constructed Stormwater Wetland 	90 
Extended Detention Basin 	40-60 
Infiltration Structure 	80 
Manufactured Treatment Device 	See Section 6.C 
Send Filter 	80 
Vegetative Filter Strip 	60-80 
Wet Pond 	50-90 
 
4.  If there is more than one onsite drainage area, the eighty (80) percent TSS removal rate shall apply to each drainage area, unless the runoff from the subareas converge on site in which case the removal rate can be demonstrated through a calculation using a weighted avenge. 
5.  Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to reduce, to the maximum extent feasible, the post-construction nutrient load of the anticipated load from the developed site in stormwater runoff generated from the water quality design storm. In achieving reduction of nutrients to the maximum extent feasible, the design of the site shall include nonstructural strategies and structural measures that optimize nutrient removal while still achieving the performance standards in Sections 4.F and 4.G. 
6.  Additional information and examples are contained in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, which may be obtained from the address identified in Section 7. 
7.  In accordance with the definition of FWI at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-l.4, stormwater management measures shall be designed to prevent any increase in stormwater runoff to waters classified as FWI. 
8.  Special water resource protection areas shall be established along all waters designated Category One at N.J.A.C. 7:9B, and perennial or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category One waters as shown on the USGS Quadrangle Maps or in the County Soil Surveys, within the associated HUC14 drainage area. These areas shall be established for the protection of water quality, aesthetic value, exceptional ecological significance, exceptional recreational significance, exceptional water supply significance, and exceptional fisheries significance of those established Category One waters. These areas shall be designated and protected as follows: 
a.  The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special water resource protection area in accordance with one of the following: 
(1)  A three hundred (300)-foot special water resource protection area shall be provided on each side of the waterway, measured perpendicular to the waterway from the top of the bank outwards or from the centerline of the waterway where the bank is not defined, consisting of existing vegetation or vegetation allowed to follow natural succession is provided. 
(2)  Encroachment within the designated special water resource protection area under Subsection (1) above shall only he allowed where previous development or disturbance has occurred (for example, active agricultural use, parking area or maintained lawn area). The encroachment shall only be allowed where applicant demonstrates that the functional value and overall condition of the special water resource protection area will be maintained to the maximum extent practicable. In no case shall the remaining special water resource protection area be reduced to less than one hundred (150) feet as measured perpendicular to the top of bank of the waterway or centerline of the waterway where the bank is undefined. All encroachments proposed under this subparagraph shall be subject to review and approval by the Department. 
b.  All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow through the special water resource protection area and shall comply with the Standard for Off-Site Stability in the "Standards For Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey," established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq. 
c.  If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through the special water resource protection area cannot comply with the Standard For Off-Site Stability in the "Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey," established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., then the stabilization measures in accordance with the requirements of the above standards may be placed within the special water resource protection area, provided that: 
(1)  Stabilization measures shall not be placed within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the Category One waterway; 
(2)  Stormwater associated with discharges allowed by this section shall achieve a ninety-five (95) percent TSS post-construction removal rate; 
(3)  Temperature shall be addressed to ensure no impact on the receiving waterway; 
(4)  The encroachment shall only be allowed where the applicant demonstrates that the functional value and overall condition of the special water resource protection area will be maintained to the maximum extent practicable; 
(5)  A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with the appropriate Department staff and Soil Conservation District staff to identify necessary stabilization measures; and 
(6)  All encroachments proposed under this section shall be subject to review and approval by the Department. 
d.  A stream corridor protection plan may be developed by a regional stormwater management planning committee as an element of a regional stormwater management plan, or by a municipality through an adopted municipal stormwater management plan. If a stream corridor protection plan for a waterway subject to Section 4.G(8) has been approved by the Department of Environmental Protection, then the provisions of the plan shall be the applicable special water resource protection area requirements for that waterway. A stream corridor protection plan for a waterway subject to G.8 shall maintain or enhance the current functional value and overall condition of the special water resource protection area as defined in G.8.a.(l) above. In no case shall a stream corridor protection plan allow the reduction of the Special Water Resource Protection Area to less than one hundred fifty (150) feet as measured perpendicular to the waterway subject to this subsection. 
e.  Paragraph G.8 does not apply to the construction of one individual single family dwelling that is not part of a larger development on a lot receiving preliminary or final subdivision approval on or before February 2, 2004, provided that the construction begins on or before February 2, 2009.  
§ 5. - Calculation of Stormwater Runoff and Groundwater Recharge. 
A.  Stormwater runoff shall be calculated in accordance with the following: 
1.  The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the following methods: 
a.  The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation and Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as described in the NRCS National Engineering Handbook Section 4 — Hydrology and Technical Release 55 — Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds; or 
b.  The Rational Method for peak flow and the Modified Rational Method for hydrograph computations. 
2.  For the purpose of calculating runoff coefficients and groundwater recharge, there is a presumption that the pre-construction condition of a site or portion thereof is a wooded land use with good hydrologic condition. The term "runoff coefficient" applies to both the NRCS methodology at Section 5.A.l.a and the Rational and Modified Rational Methods at Section 5.A.l.b. A runoff coefficient or a groundwater recharge land cover for an existing condition may be used on all or a portion of the site if the design engineer verifies that the hydrologic condition has existed on the site or portion of the site for at least five years without interruption prior to the time of application. If more than one land cover have existed on the site during the five years immediately prior to the time of application, the land cover with the lowest runoff potential shall be used for the computations. In addition, there is the presumption that the site is in good hydrologic condition (if the land use type is pasture, lawn, or park), with good cover (if the land use type is woods), or with good hydrologic condition and conservation treatment (if the land use type is cultivation). 
3.  In computing pre-construction stormwater runoff, the design engineer shall account for all significant land features and structures, such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows, or culverts, that may reduce pre-construction stormwater runoff rates and volumes. 
4.  In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms, the design engineer shall consider the relative stormwater runoff rates and/or volumes of pervious and impervious surfaces separately to accurately compute the rates and volume of stormwater runoff from the site. To calculate runoff from unconnected impervious cover, urban impervious area modifications as described in the NRCS Technical Release 55—Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds and other methods may be employed. 
5.  If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater management measure is below the flood hazard design flood elevation as defined at N.J.A.C. 7:13, the design engineer shall take into account the effects of tailwater in the design of structural stormwater management measures. 
B.  Groundwater recharge may be calculated in accordance with the following: 
1.  The New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32 A Method fur Evaluating Ground-Water Recharge Areas in New Jersey, incorporated herein by reference as amended and supplemented. Information regarding the methodology is available from the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual; at http://www.state.nj.us/dep/njgs/; or at New Jersey Geological Survey, 29 Arctic Parkway, P.O. Box 427 Trenton, New Jersey 08625-0427; (609) 984-6587.  
§ 6. - Standards for Structural Stormwater Management Measures. 
A.  Standards for structural stormwater management measures are as follows: 
1.  Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to take into account the existing site conditions, including, for example, environmentally critical areas, wetlands; flood-prone areas; slopes; depth to seasonal high water table; soil type, permeability and texture; drainage area and drainage patterns; and the presence of solution-prone carbonate rocks (limestone). 
2.  Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance and repairs, and ensure proper functioning. Trash racks shall be installed at the intake to the outlet structure as appropriate, and shall have parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the bars to the elevation of the water quality design storm. For elevations higher than the water quality design storm, the parallel bars at the outlet structure shall be spaced no greater than one-third the width of the diameter of the orifice or one-third the width of the weir, with a minimum spacing between bars of one-inch and a maximum spacing between bars of six inches. In addition, the design of trash racks must comply with the requirements of Section 8.D. 
3.  Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed, constructed, and installed to be strong, durable, and corrosion resistant. Measures that are consistent with the relevant portions of the Residential Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3, 7.4, and 7.5 shall be deemed to meet this requirement. 
4.  At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management basin, the orifice size shall be a minimum of two and one-half inches in diameter. 
5.  Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the minimum safety standards for stormwater management basins at Section 8. 
B.  Stormwater management measure guidelines are available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Other stormwater management measures may be utilized provided the design engineer demonstrates that the proposed measure and its design will accomplish the required water quantity, groundwater recharge and water quality design and performance standards established by Section 4 of this ordinance. 
C.  Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the requirements of Section 4 of this ordinance, provided the pollutant removal rates are verified by the New Jersey Corporation for Advanced Technology and certified by the Department.  
§ 7. - Sources for Technical Guidance. 
A.  Technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be found in the documents listed at 1 and 2 below, which are available from Maps and Publications, New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, 428 East State Street, P.O. Box 420, Trenton, New Jersey, 08625; telephone (609) 777-1038. 
1.  Guidelines for stormwater management measures are contained in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, as amended. Information is provided on stormwater management measures such as: bioretention systems, constructed stormwater wetlands, dry wells, extended detention basins, infiltration structures, manufactured treatment devices, pervious paving, sand filters, vegetative filter strips, and wet ponds. 
2.  The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Manual, as amended. 
B.  Additional technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be obtained from the following: 
1.  The "Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey" promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee and incorporated into N.J.A.C. 2:90. Copies of these standards may be obtained by contacting the State Soil Conservation Committee or any of the Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-l.3(a)4. The location, address, and telephone number of each Soil Conservation District may be obtained from the State Soil Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey 08625; (609) 292-5540; 
2.  The Rutgers Cooperative Extension Service, 732-932-9306; and 
3.  The Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-l.3(a)4. The location, address, and telephone number of each Soil Conservation District may be obtained from the State Soil Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey, 08625, (609) 292-5540.  
§ 8. - Safety Standards for Stormwater Management Basins. 
A.  This section sets forth requirements to protect public safety through the proper design and operation of stormwater management basins. This section applies to any new stormwater management basin. 
B.  Requirements for Trash Racks, Overflow Grates and Escape Provisions. 
1.  A trash rack is a device designed to catch trash and debris and prevent the clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks shall be installed at the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management basin to ensure proper functioning of the basin outlets in accordance with the following: 
a.  The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater than six inch spacing between the bars. 
b.  The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely affect the hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe or structure. 
c.  The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is not to exceed two and one-half feet per second under the full range of stage and discharge. Velocity is to be computed on the basis of the net area of opening through the rack. 
d.  The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be rigid, durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to withstand a perpendicular live loading of three hundred (300) lbs/ft sq. 
2.  An overflow grate is designed to prevent obstruction of the overflow structure. If an outlet structure has an overflow grate, such grate shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure but removable for emergencies and maintenance. 
b.  The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two inches across the smallest dimension. 
c.  The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be rigid, durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to withstand a perpendicular live loading of three hundred (300) lbs./ft sq. 
3.  For purposes of this paragraph 3, escape provisions means the permanent installation of ladders, steps, rungs, or other features that provide easily accessible means of egress from stormwater management basins. Stormwater management basins shall include escape provisions as follows: 
a.  If a stormwater management basin has an outlet structure, escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the structure. With the prior approval of the reviewing agency identified in Section 8.C a free-standing outlet structure may be exempted from this requirement. 
b.  Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new stormwater management basins having a permanent pool of water deeper than two and one-half feet Such safety ledges shall be comprised of two steps. Each step shall be four to six feet in width. One step shall be located approximately two and one-half feet below the permanent water surface, and the second step shall be located one to one and one-half feet above the permanent water surface. See Section 8.D for an illustration of safety ledges in a stormwater management basin. 
c.  In new stormwater management basins, the maximum interior slope for an earthen dam, embankment, or berm shall not be steeper than three horizontal to one vertical. 
C.  Variance or Exemption from Safety Standards. 
1.  A variance or exemption from the safety standards for stormwater management basins may be granted only upon a written finding by the appropriate reviewing agency (municipality, county or Department) that the variance or exemption will not constitute a threat to public safety. 
D.  Illustration of Safety Ledges in a New Stormwater Management Basin. 
  
§ 9. - Requirements for a Site Development Stormwater Plan. 
A.  Submission of Site Development Stormwater Plan. 
1.  Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a development subject to this ordinance, the applicant shall submit all of the required components of the submittal for the Site Development Stormwater Plan at Section 9.C below and any additional components as specified in the City's Stormwater Management Plan latest revisions as part of the submission of the applicant's application for subdivision or site plan approval. 
2.  The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the standards set forth in this ordinance. 
3.  The applicant shall submit five copies of the materials listed in the submittal for site development stormwater plans in accordance with Section 9.C of this ordinance. 
B.  Site Development Stormwater Plan Approval. The applicant's Site Development project shall be reviewed as a part of the subdivision or site plan review process by the municipal board or official from which municipal approval is sought. That municipal board or official shall consult with the Engineers of the JCMUA and be guided by them to determine if all of the submittal requirements have been satisfied and to determine if the project meets the standards set forth in this ordinance. 
C.  Submittal Requirements. The following information shall be required: 
1.  Topographic Base Map. The reviewing engineer may require upstream tributary drainage system information as necessary. It is recommended that the topographic base map of the site be submitted which extends a minimum of two hundred (200) feet beyond the limits of the proposed development, at a scale of one inch equals two hundred (200) feet or greater, showing two-foot contour intervals. The map as appropriate may indicate the following: existing surface water drainage, shorelines, steep slopes, soils, erodible soils, perennial or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category One waters, wetlands and flood plains along with their appropriate buffer strips, marshlands and other wetlands, pervious or vegetative surfaces, existing man-made structures, roads, bearing and distances of property lines, and significant natural and manmade features not otherwise shown. 
2.  Environmental Site Analysis. A written and graphic description of the natural and man-made features of the site and its environs. This description should include a discussion of soil conditions, slopes, wetlands, waterways and vegetation on the site. Particular attention should be given to unique, unusual, or environmentally sensitive features and to those that provide particular opportunities or constraints for development. 
3.  Project Description and Site Plan(s). A map (or maps) at the scale of the topographical base map indicating the location of existing and proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, structural facilities for stormwater management and sediment control, and other permanent structures. The map(s) shall also clearly show areas where alterations occur in the natural terrain and cover, including lawns and other landscaping, and seasonal high ground water elevations. A written description of the site plan and justification of proposed changes in natural conditions may also be provided. 
4.  Land Use Planning and Source Control Plan. This plan shall provide a demonstration of how the goals and standards of Sections 3 through 6 are being met. The focus of this plan shall be to describe how the site is being developed to meet the objective of controlling groundwater recharge, stormwater quality and stormwater quantity problems at the source by land management and source controls whenever possible. 
5.  Stormwater Management Facilities Map. The following information, illustrated on a map of the same scale as the topographic base map, shall be included: 
a.  Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface contours, land area to be occupied by the stormwater management facilities and the type of vegetation thereon, and details of the proposed plan to control and dispose of stormwater. 
b.  Details of all stormwater management facility designs, during and after construction, including discharge provisions, discharge capacity for each outlet at different levels of detention and emergency spillway provisions with maximum discharge capacity of each spillway. 
6.  Calculations. 
a.  Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations for the pre-development and post-development conditions for the design storms specified in Section 4 of this ordinance. 
b.  When the proposed stormwater management control measures (e.g., infiltration basins) depends on the hydrologic properties of soils, then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report shall be based on onsite boring logs or soil pit profiles. The number and location of required soil borings or soil pits shall be determined based on what is needed to determine the suitability and distribution of soils present at the location of the control measure. 
7.  Maintenance and Repair Plan. The design and planning of the stormwater management facility shall meet the maintenance requirements of Section 10. 
8.  Waiver from Submission Requirements. The municipal official or board reviewing an application under this ordinance may, in consultation with the Chief Engineer of the JCMUA, waive submission of any of the requirements in Sections 9.C.1 through 9.C.6 of this ordinance when it can be demonstrated that the information requested is impossible to obtain or it would create a hardship on the applicant to obtain and its absence will not materially affect the review process.  
§ 10. - Maintenance and Repair. 
A.  Applicability. 
1.  Projects subject to review as in Section 1.C of this ordinance shall comply with the requirements of Sections 10.B and 10.C. 
B.  General Maintenance. 
1.  The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of a major development. 
2.  The maintenance plan shall contain specific preventative maintenance tasks and schedules; cost estimates, including estimated cost of sediment, debris, or trash removal; and the name, address, and telephone number of the person or persons responsible for preventative and corrective maintenance (including replacement). Maintenance guidelines for stormwater management measures are available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. If the maintenance plan identifies a person other than the developer (for example, a public agency or homeowners' association) as having the responsibility for maintenance, the plan shall include documentation of such person's agreement to assume this responsibility, or of the developer's obligation to dedicate a stormwater management facility to such person under an applicable ordinance or regulation. 
3.  Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or transferred to the owner or tenant of an individual property in a residential development or project, unless such owner or tenant owns or leases the entire residential development or project. 
4.  If the person responsible for maintenance identified under Section 10.B.2 above is not a public agency, the maintenance plan and any future revisions based on Section 10.B.7 below shall be recorded upon the deed of record for each property on which the maintenance described in the maintenance plan must be undertaken. 
5.  Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to maintain the function of the stormwater management measure, including repairs to or replacement of the structure; removal of sediment, debris, or trash; restoration of eroded areas; snow and ice removal; fence repair or replacement; restoration of vegetation; and repair or replacement of nonvegetated linings. 
6.  The person responsible for maintenance identified under Section 10.B.2 above shall maintain a detailed log of all preventative and corrective maintenance for the structural stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of the development, including a record of all inspections and copies of all maintenance-related work orders. 
7.  The person responsible for maintenance identified under Section 10.B.2 above shall evaluate the effectiveness of the maintenance plan at least once per year and adjust the plan and the deed as needed. 
8.  The person responsible for maintenance identified under Section 10.B.2 above shall retain and make available, upon request by any public entity with administrative, health, environmental, or safety authority over the site including the JCMLJA, the maintenance plan and the documentation required by Sections 10.B.6 and 10.B.7 above. 
9.  The requirements of Sections 10.B.3 and 10.B.4 do not apply to stormwater management facilities that are dedicated to and accepted by the municipality or another governmental agency. 
10.  In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a danger to public safety or public health, or if it is in need of maintenance or repair, the municipality shall so notify the responsible person in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the responsible person shall have fourteen (14) days to effect maintenance and repair of the facility in a manner that is approved by the Chief Engineer of the JCMUA or his designee. The municipality, in its discretion, may extend the time allowed for effecting maintenance and repair for good cause. If the responsible person falls or refuses to perform such maintenance and repair, the municipality or County may immediately proceed to do so and shall bill the cost thereof to the responsible person. 
11.  The JCMUA has the authority to institute a permit system to enforce the maintenance and repair requirements in this section. 
B.  Nothing in this section shall preclude the municipality in which the major development is located from requiring the posting of a performance or maintenance guarantee in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.  
§ 11. - Penalties. Any person who erects, constructs, alters, repairs, converts, maintains, or uses any building, structure or land in violation of this ordinance shall be subject to the following penalties: 
Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter or any order, decision or determination by the Jersey City Municipal Utilities Authority or Jersey City Office of Planning and who refuses to abate said violation within fourteen (14) days after written notice has been served upon them by registered mail or by personal service shall, for each and every violation, be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions. Each and every day that such violation continues after such notice shall be considered a separate and specific violation of this chapter without the service of an additional notice. The Jersey City Municipal Utilities Authority may also withhold water meters to ensure compliance with this ordinance. 
[Amended 8-8-2007 by Ord. No. 07-133]  
§ 12. - Effective Date. 
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon the approval by the county review agency, or sixty (60) days from the receipt of the ordinance by the county review agency if the county review agency should fail to act.  
§ 13. - Severability. 
If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision, or clause of this ordinance shall be judged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such order of judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision, or clause of this ordinance.  
ARTICLE VII - Performance and Maintenance Guarantees 
 
§ 345-75. - Installation of improvements or guarantees. 
A.  Performance Guarantees Required. 
1.  Prior to the granting of final approval of a subdivision or site plan, the applicant shall have installed or shall have furnished performance guarantees for the ultimate installation of the improvements that were shown on the approved preliminary plan, required as a condition of preliminary approval, or, in the case of subdivisions only, required by the provisions of the "Map Filing Law." 
2.  Improvements for which performance guarantees may be required include without limitation: streets, grading, pavement, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, street lighting, shade trees, surveyor's monuments, water mains, culverts, storm sewers, sanitary sewers or other means of sewage disposal, drainage structures, erosion control and sedimentation control devices, public improvements of open space, and, in the case of site plans only, landscaping and other on-site improvements. 
3.  The applicant shall file with the City Clerk a performance guarantee in favor of the City of Jersey City insuring the installation of all uncompleted improvements on or before an agreed upon date. The cost of installation of the required improvements shall be estimated by the City Engineer pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53, and the amount of the performance guarantee shall be of an amount equal to one hundred twenty percent (120%) of this estimated cost. Ten percent (10%) of the performance guarantee must be in the form of cash. 
4.  The form and sufficiency of the guarantee shall be subject to approval of the City Attorney. Performance guarantees shall be expressly conditioned upon the developer's full compliance with all City ordinances and regulations governing the installation of improvements and utilities and faithful performance of the terms of any developer's agreement with the City. 
5.  The time allowed for installation of the improvements for which the performance guarantee has been provided may be extended by the City Council by resolution. As a condition or as part of any such extension, the amount of any performance guarantee shall be increased or reduced, as the case may be, to an amount equal to one hundred twenty percent (120%) of the cost of the installation as determined by the City Engineer pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53 as of the time of the passage of the resolution. 
6.  If the required improvements are not completed or corrected in accordance with the performance guarantee, the obligor and surety, if any, shall be liable thereon to the City for the reasonable cost of the improvements not completed or corrected, and the City may either prior to or after the receipt of the proceeds thereof complete such improvements. Such completion or correction of improvements shall be subject to the public bidding requirements of the "Local Public Contracts Law." 
7.  Upon substantial completion of all required street improvements (except the top course) and appurtenant utility improvements, and the connection of same to the public system, the obligor may notify the City Council in writing, by certified mail addressed in care of the City Clerk, that the City Engineer prepare, in accordance with the itemized cost estimate prepared by the City Engineer and appended to the performance guarantee, a list of all uncompleted or unsatisfactory completed improvements. If such a request is made, the obligor shall send a copy of the request to the City Engineer. The request shall indicate which improvements have been completed and which improvements remain uncompleted in the judgment of the obligor. Thereupon the City engineer shall inspect all improvements covered by obligor's request and shall file a detailed list and report, in writing, with the City Council, and shall simultaneously send a copy thereof to the obligor not later than forty-five (45) days after receipt of the obligor's request. 
8.  The list prepared by the City Engineer shall state, in detail, with respect to each improvement determined to be incomplete or unsatisfactory, the nature and extent of the incompleteness of each incomplete improvement or the nature and extent of, and remedy for, the unsatisfactory state of each completed improvement determined to be unsatisfactory. The report prepared by the City Engineer shall identify each improvement determined to be complete and satisfactory together with a recommendation as to the amount or reduction to be made in the performance guarantee relating to the completed and satisfactory improvement, in accordance with the itemized cost estimate prepared by the City Engineer and appended to the performance guarantee. 
9.  The City Council, by resolution, shall either approve the improvements determined to be complete and satisfactory by the City Engineer, or reject any or all of these improvements upon the establishment in the resolution of cause for rejection, and shall approve and authorize the amount of reduction to be made in the performance guarantee relating to the improvements accepted, in accordance with the itemized cost estimate prepared by the City Engineer and appended to the performance guarantee. This resolution shall be adopted not later than forty-five (45) days after receipt of the list and report prepared by the City Engineer. Upon adoption of the resolution by the City Council, the obligor shall be released from all liability pursuant to its performance guarantee, with respect to those approved improvements, except for that portion adequately sufficient to secure completion or correction of the improvements not yet approved; provided that thirty percent (30%) of the amount of the total performance guarantee posted may be retained to ensure completion and acceptability of all improvements. 
10.  For the purpose of releasing the obligor from liability pursuant to its performance guarantee, the amount of the performance guarantee attributable to each approved improvement shall be reduced by the total amount of each such improvement, in accordance with the itemized cost estimate prepared by the City Engineer and appended to the performance guarantee, including any contingency factor applied to the cost of installation. If the sum of the approved improvements would exceed seventy percent (70%) of the total amount of the performance guarantee, then the City may retain thirty percent (30%) of the amount of the total performance guarantee to ensure completion and acceptability of all improvements, as provided above. 
11.  If the City Engineer fails to send or provide the list and report as requested by the obligor pursuant to subsection (G) of this section within forty-five (45) days from receipt of the request, the obligor may apply to the court in a summary manner for an order compelling the City Engineer to provide the list and report within a stated time and the cost of applying to the court, including reasonable attorney's fees, may be awarded to the prevailing party. 
12.  If the City Council fails to approve or reject the improvements determined by the City Engineer to be complete and satisfactory or reduce the performance guarantee for the complete and satisfactory improvements within forty-five (45) days from the receipt of the City Engineer's list and report, the obligor may apply to the court in a summary manner for an order compelling, within a stated time, approval of the complete and satisfactory improvements and approval of a reduction in the performance guarantee for the approvable complete and satisfactory improvements in accordance with the itemized cost estimate prepared by the City Engineer and appended to the performance guarantee; and the cost of applying to the court, including reasonable attorneys fees, may be awarded to the prevailing party. 
13.  In the event that the obligor has made a cash deposit with the City as part of the performance guarantee, then any partial reduction granted in the performance guarantee pursuant to this subsection shall be applied to the cash deposit in the same proportion as the original cash deposit bears to the full amount of the performance guarantee. 
14.  If any portion of the required improvements are rejected, the City Council may require the obligor to complete or correct such improvements and, upon completion or correction, the same procedure of notification, as set forth in this section shall be followed. 
15.  Nothing herein, however, shall be construed to limit the right of the obligor to contest by legal proceedings any determination of the City Council or the City Engineer. 
16.  In the event that final approval is by stages or sections of development, the provisions of this section shall be applied by stage or section. 
17.  To the extent that any of the improvements have been dedicated to the City on the subdivision plat or site plan, the City Council shall be deemed upon the release of any performance guarantee required, to accept dedication for public use of streets or roads and any other improvements made thereon according to site plans and subdivisions plats approved by the Board, provided that such improvements have been inspected and have received final approval by the City Engineer. 
B.  Maintenance Guarantees Required. 
1.  Upon completion and acceptance by the City Council of the required improvements or a portion of such improvements, the developer may be required to post a maintenance guarantee with the City Council for a period not to exceed two years after final acceptance of the improvement, in an amount not to exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the cost of the improvement, as determined by the City Engineer pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53. 
2.  The form and sufficiency of the maintenance guarantee shall be approved by the City Attorney. The maintenance guarantee for an improvement shall be posted upon final release by the City Council of the performance guarantee for that improvement and shall be expressly conditioned upon the maintenance by the developer of such improvement for a period of two years, and particularly shall guarantee the remedy of any defects in such improvement which occur during that period. 
3.  Maintenance of Landscaped Areas. All landscaped areas must be properly maintained. In the event that an applicant shall at any time after the issuance of a certificate of occupancy fail to maintain any landscaped areas, the Zoning Official shall serve written notice setting forth any failure to maintain said landscaped area in a reasonable condition, and said notice shall include a demand that such deficiencies be cured within four weeks thereof and shall state the date and place of any hearing thereon which may be held. If the deficiencies set forth in the original notice or in any modification thereof are not cured within said four weeks or any extension thereof the Zoning Official, in order to preserve the taxable value of the surrounding property and to prevent the landscaped areas from becoming a public nuisance, shall revoke the zoning permit issued to said premises until such time as the deficiencies are cured. 
4.  In the event that other governmental agencies or public utilities automatically will own the utilities to be installed or the improvements are covered by a performance or maintenance guarantee to another governmental agency, no performance or maintenance guarantee, as the case may be, shall be required by the City for such utilities or improvements. 
5.  Appeal Procedure for Disputed Guarantee Amounts. The cost of the installation of improvements shall be estimated by the City Engineer based on documented construction costs for public improvements prevailing in the general area of the City. The developer may appeal the City Engineer's estimate to the county construction board of appeals. 
C.  Acceptance of Guarantee. The City Council shall accept a performance guarantee or maintenance guarantee which is an irrevocable letter of credit if it: 
1.  Constitutes an unconditional payment obligation of the issuer running solely to the City for an express initial period of time in the amount determined pursuant to subsection (A) of this section; 
2.  Is issued by a banking or savings institution authorized to do and doing business in this State; 
3.  Is for a period of time at least one year; and 
4.  Permits the City to draw upon the letter of credit if the obligor fails to furnish another letter of credit which complies with the provisions of this section thirty (30) days or more in advance of the expiration date of the letter of credit or such longer period in advance thereof as is stated in the letter of credit.  
ARTICLE VIII - Enforcement, Violations and Penalties 
 
§ 345-76. - Enforcement. 
A.  Zoning Officer. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer and his or her staff to administer and enforce this chapter. No structure shall be erected without a building permit and no structure or lot shall use or have its use changed so as to be in violation of this chapter, In no case shall a building permit be issued for the construction or alteration of any structure nor shall a certificate of occupancy be issued for a new occupant with a new use, or new use by the present occupant, until the proposed construction or alteration or use conforms to the provisions of this chapter. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to cause any structures, plans or premises to be inspected or examined and order the owner in writing that any condition be remedied which is found to exist in violation of any provisions of this chapter. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to keep a record of all applications and all permits which are either issued or denied, with notations of any conditions involved, which data shall form a part of the City public records. 
B.  Building Permits. Applications for building permits shall be submitted in a form required by the Building Code of Jersey City and with sufficient data to confirm conformance with all applicable portions of this chapter. Building permit applications shall also be accompanied by an approved site plan as required by this chapter prior to the granting of a building permit. 
C.  Certificate of Occupancy. 
1.  It shall be unlawful to use or permit the use of any structure or part thereof, hereafter erected, enlarged, moved or changed to another use, wholly or in part, or occupied by a new use until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the Construction Code Official. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any new building or part thereof until all streets, drainage, parking, loading, water, sewer and other items shown on a site plan or subdivision are properly completed and functioning. Such certificate shall show that such structure or part of a structure and the proposed use thereof conform to the requirements of this chapter and all approvals granted pursuant thereto, the Uniform Construction Code, all other applicable City ordinances, regulations and directives and all applicable county, state and federal laws and regulations. It shall be the duty of the Construction Code Official to fully issue a certificate of occupancy only when he or she has received written confirmation from the Zoning Officer that the structure or part of a structure and the proposed use thereof conform to this chapter; and when he or she is satisfied that the structure conforms to all other applicable codes and ordinances of the city. 
2.  Should the zoning officer decline to approve a structure based on the provisions of this chapter, his or her reasons for doing so shall be so stated on two copies of this application and one copy returned to the applicant. 
3.  Revocation. On the serving of notice of any violation of any of the provisions or requirements of this chapter with respect to any structure or use thereof, or of land, as provided below, the certificate of occupancy for such use shall thereupon, without further action, be null and void, and a new certificate of occupancy shall be required for any further use of such structure or land. 
D.  Historic Preservation. All permit applications affecting historic districts, landmarks, buildings, structures, objects, sites or landscape features shall promptly be referred to the Zoning Officer and Historic Preservation Officer for review and appropriate action prior to permit issuance. 
E.  Certificates of Non-Conformity. The prospective purchaser, prospective mortgagee, or any other person interested in any land upon which a nonconforming use or structure exists may apply in writing for the issuance of a certificate certifying that the use or structure existed before the adoption of the ordinance which rendered the use or structure nonconforming. The applicant shall have the burden of proof. Application pursuant hereto may be made to the administrative officer within one year of the adoption of the ordinance which rendered the use or structure nonconforming or at any time to the board of adjustment. 
F.  Plan Review and Determination. The real or prospective owner and/or developer of any land may apply in writing for the issuance of a plan review and determination certifying that submitted plans comply with the provisions of this chapter, redevelopment plan or deviation/variance therefrom duty authorized. 
[Added 11-10-2015 by Ord. No. 15-147 ] 
G.  Zoning Determination. The real or prospective owner and/or developer of any land may apply in writing for the issuance of a zoning determination letter signed by the zoning officer, which acknowledges that such use, structure or building complies with the provisions of this chapter, redevelopment plan or deviation/variance therefrom duly authorized. 
[Added 11-10-2015 by Ord. No. 15-147 ] 
H.  Pre-existing Curbcut Determination. The real owner, prospective purchaser, prospective mortgagee, or any other person interested in any land may apply in writing for the issuance of a pre-existing curbcut determination certifying that a curbcut exists legally before the adoption of the ordinance which rendered the curbcut nonconforming or a deviation/variance therefrom was duly authorized. The applicant shall have the burden of proof. 
[Added 11-10-2015 by Ord. No. 15-147 ] 
I.  Fees. The Zoning Officer and Division of Zoning Enforcement may establish fees to cover administrative costs for the issuance of permits, determinations, certificates and authorizations. 
[Added 11-10-2015 by Ord. No. 15-147 ]  
§ 345-77. - Violations and penalties. 
A.  Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter or any order, decision or determination by the Board of Adjustment and who refuses to abate said violation within fourteen (14) twenty-one (21) days after written notice has been served upon them by registered mail or by personal service shall, for each and every violation, be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions. Each and every day that such violation continues after such notice shall be considered a separate and specific violation of this chapter without the service of an additional notice. If any person shall undertake any activity vis-à-vis an individual landmark or landmark building, structure, object, site, or landmark feature within a historic district, without first having obtained a certificate of appropriateness or a certificate of no effect, such person shall be deemed in violation of this Article. Fines not paid within the time period set by law shall convert to a tax lien placed against the property and shall be recorded with the Jersey City Property Tax Office and the Hudson County Register of Deeds and Mortgages. 
[Amended 4-25-2007 by Ord. No. 07-063] 
B.  In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, moved, repaired, converted, maintained or used or any land is used in violation of or contrary to the provisions of this chapter or any order, decision or determination by the Board of Adjustment, the city may institute any appropriate action or proceeding in City, county or state court to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use; to restrain, correct or abate such violation; to prevent the occupancy of said building structure or land; or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about such premises. 
C.  Any citizen of the city may notify the Construction Official in writing of conditions in violation of this chapter. An appeal may be made to the governing body in writing and thereafter to the courts.  
Chapter A350 - COUNCIL RULES OF ORDER 
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City during codification; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II. Subsequent amendments noted where applicable.] 
_____
 
§ A350-1. - Rules of procedure of Council. 
The following rules of procedure in §§ A350-2 through A350-28 shall govern the conduct of the meetings of the Municipal Council of the City of Jersey City, New Jersey.  
§ A350-2. - Rule I: Governing rules. 
Except as may be provided in the Charter, questions of order, the methods of organization and the conduct of business of the Municipal Council shall be governed by the rules of the House of Representatives of the United States in all cases to which they are applicable, and in which they are not inconsistent with the rules of the Council.  
§ A350-3. - Rule II: Regular meetings of Council. 
A.  The Council shall hold its regular meetings each year during the months of January through December inclusive, except for the months of July and August, on the second and fourth Wednesdays of each month at 6:00 p.m. The Council may, if it chooses to, hold a caucus one-half (1/2) hour prior to the regular meetings. 
B.  In the months of July and August of each year, there shall be only one (1) regular meeting for each of said months. 
C.  The aforesaid regular meeting shall be held at the time set forth herein or as near to the times set forth as practicable. 
D.  Whenever the day fixed for any such regular meeting falls upon a day designated by law as a legal holiday, or upon a day when more than four (4) members of the governing body are attending a state or national conference or convention, such meeting shall be held at the same hour on the next succeeding day, not a holiday. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Council, for good and sufficient reasons, may adjourn a regular scheduled Council meeting to another date and time in the month by setting a date and time for this rescheduled meeting at the previous regular meeting of the Council. 
E.  All regular and special meetings of the Council shall be held in the Council Chamber on the second floor of the City Hall of the city. The Council by a two-thirds ( 2/3 ) vote of its members may at any preceding meeting move to dispense with the next following semimonthly meeting, but there shall at all times be at least one (1) monthly regular meeting. 
F.  The Council may, by resolution duly adopted by at least five (5) affirmative votes, designate a different place from the City Hall to hold any particular or special meeting. Upon the adoption of any such resolution, the City Clerk shall give due and timely notice to the public and to all city officials concerned of the time and place of the meeting as so designated in the resolution. Such notice shall be given in accordance with the Open Public Meetings Act, N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.  
§ A350-4. - Rule III: Caucus. 
Premeeting caucuses. The Council shall hold premeeting caucuses on the Monday of the week in which a regular meeting of Council is held, or such other day as may be set by majority of the Council. The time of such premeeting caucus shall be fixed by the President. When the day fixed for any premeeting conference falls upon a day designed by law as a legal holiday, such meeting shall be held on a day to be scheduled by the President of the Council. All premeeting conferences shall be held in a room or place selected the Council. All such premeeting conferences (caucuses) shall be open to the public. In the event that said regular premeeting conference day is changed by a majority of the Council, the public shall be notified of any change at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to such preconference meeting.  
§ A350-5. - Rule IV: Special meetings. 
A special meeting of the Council may be called by the President or by a majority of the members of the Council. Whenever a special meeting shall be called by the President of the Council, a notice in writing signed by the President shall be served on the Clerk, and whenever a special meeting shall be called by a majority of the members of the Council, a notice in writing signed by such majority shall be served on the Clerk. The Clerk shall forthwith serve a written notice upon each member of the Council at his or her place of residence, stating the date and hour of the meeting and the purpose for which such meeting is called, and no other business shall thereat be transacted. The Clerk in his or her notice of a special meeting shall allow at least twenty-four (24) hours to elapse between the call of the meeting and the date and hour of the meeting. Whenever an emergency exists which requires immediate action by the Council, the Mayor may call a meeting by notifying the Clerk, or, in his or her absence, the President of the Council, who shall cause the Council to meet on short notice in special meeting for the purpose.  
§ A350-6. - Rule V: Agenda - Consent agenda. 
[Amended 3-24-2010 by Ord. No. 10-042; 5-12-2010 by Ord. No. 10-063; 12-19-2012 by Ord. No. 12-155 ] 
A.  Agenda. All reports, communications, ordinances, resolutions or other matters to be submitted to the Council by the administration or by Council Members must by 3:00 p.m. on Wednesday preceding each Council meeting be delivered to the Clerk, whereupon the Clerk shall immediately prepare a calendar of such matters together with such additional matters that he or she may have to present. He or she shall furnish a copy of the calendar to each member of the Council, the Mayor, the Business Administrator and the Corporation Counsel, prior to the Council meeting, and as far in advance of the meeting as time will permit. No item shall be added to an agenda unless it has been timely submitted in accordance with this rule. However, a late item may be added at a meeting and this rule suspended, but only for reasons of emergency, and by an affirmative vote of at least six Council Members. 
B.  All ordinances and resolutions which authorize the sale, conveyance or leasing of any interest in real property; or authorize the acquisition or grant of a license or easement in real property; or grant real estate tax exemptions or tax abatements; or authorize the settlement or termination of legal proceedings affecting real property; or authorize the construction, rehabilitation, repair or demolition of real property; or repeal or cancel any ordinance or resolution referred to in this subsection shall contain both the lot and block number and the street address of such real property. 
C.  All ordinances, resolutions, claims, contract documents and all other legal documents shall bear the stamp and signature of the corporation counsel approving the same pursuant to law prior to their consideration by the Council. No legal document shall be signed by the Mayor or administrative heads until the approval of the Corporation Counsel is appended thereto. 
D.  Consent agenda. Items of business which the Council at its premeeting conferences has determined to be routine and which do not require discussion shall be included under a single section of the calendar known as the "consent agenda." Such items may be adopted, approved or introduced, as the case may be, upon motion by a single roll call vote in accordance with the rules of procedure of the Council. 
E.  The consent agenda section of the calendar shall be preceded by an explanatory note substantially as follows: 
"All matters listed under Subsection B and D, Consent agenda, are considered routine by the Municipal Council and will be enacted by one (1) motion in the form listed below. There will be no separate discussion of these items. If discussion is desired on any item and permitted by the Council, that item will be considered separately."  
§ A350-7. - Rule VI: Presiding officers; president; temporary president pro tem; duties. 
A.  Election and duties. The presiding officer of the Council shall be the President, who shall be elected at the organization meeting, and he or she shall preside at its meetings and perform such other duties as the Council may prescribe. In the absence of the President, a temporary President Pro Tem shall be selected by the Council for a period to be determined by the Council, and shall then preside over the Council. The President shall assume the chair of the presiding officer immediately after his or her election. 
Editor's note— Please see § 3-4, Organization; president; President Pro Tem, for term. 
B.  The presiding officer shall preserve strict order and decorum at all regular and special meetings of the Council. He or she shall state every question coming before the Council and announce the decision of the Council on all matters coming before it. A majority vote of the members of the Council present shall govern except as specifically provided otherwise by law. The President shall sign all ordinances and resolutions adopted by the Council during his or her presence. In the event of the absence of the President, such ordinances and resolutions shall be signed by the temporary President Pro Tem. In the absence of the President Pro Tem, the temporary presiding officer shall sign such ordinances and resolutions adopted by the Council.  
§ A350-8. - Rule VI.i: Maintaining order. 
[ Added 1-9-2013 by Ord. No. 12-160 ] 
In addition to the Presiding Officer who is required to preserve strict order and decorum at all meetings under Rule A350-7, a police officer shall be assigned to attend at all council meetings and remain in attendance for thirty (30) minutes following its adjournment.  
§ A350-9. - Rule VII: Parliamentarian; City Clerk. 
[Amended 1-9-2013 by Ord. No. 12-160 ] 
The Clerk, or his or her designee in his or her absence, shall act as Parliamentarian and shall advise and assist the presiding officer in matters concerning the rules of order and procedure of the Council. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-160, adopted January 9, 2013, amended the Code by adding a new § A350-8, and renumbering former §§ A350-8—A350-28 as new §§ A350-9—A350-29.  
§ A350-10. - Rule VIII: Corporation Counsel. 
[Amended 1-9-2013 by Ord. No. 12-160 ] 
The Corporation Counsel or his or her First Assistant, or their designee, shall be available to the Council at all regular and special meetings. He or she, or his or her designee, shall draw ordinances or resolutions for any member of the Council when and as requested, pursuant to law. 
Note— Former § A350-9. See editor's note, § A350-9.  
§ A350-11. - Rule IX: Call to order. 
[Amended 1-9-2013 by Ord. No. 12-160 ] 
The President shall take the chair at the hour appointed for the meeting and shall immediately call the Council to order. If the President is absent and there is a quorum present, the Council shall elect a temporary President who shall preside until the President arrives. Upon the arrival of the President, the temporary President shall forthwith relinquish the chair upon the conclusion of the business immediately before the Council. 
Note— Former § A350-10. See editor's note, § A350-9.  
§ A350-12. - Rule X: Roll call. 
[Amended 1-9-2013 by Ord. No. 12-160 ] 
Before proceeding with the business of the Council, the Clerk or his or her designee shall call the roll of the members in alphabetical order and the names of those present shall be entered in the minutes. 
Note— Former § A350-11. See editor's note, § A350-9.  
§ A350-13. - Rule XI: Quorum. 
[Amended 1-9-2013 by Ord. No. 12-160 ] 
A.  A majority of the full membership of the Council shall constitute a quorum. No ordinance shall be adopted by the Council without the affirmative vote of a majority of the full membership thereof, and all other matters may be adopted by a majority of the members present, except as specifically provided otherwise by law. 
B.  Should no quorum attend within one (1) hour after the hour appointed for the meeting of the Council, the President, or in his or her absence the Clerk or his or her designee, may thereupon adjourn the meeting until the next day, unless by unanimous agreement those members present select another hour or day. The names of the members present and their action at such meeting shall be recorded in the minutes by the Clerk. 
Note— Former § A350-12. See editor's note, § A350-9.  
§ A350-14. - Rule XII: Order of business. 
[Amended 1-9-2013 by Ord. No. 12-160 ] 
All regular and special meetings of the Council shall be open to the public. Promptly at the hour set forth for each meeting, the members of the Council and, subject to Rule V (§ A350-6), the Clerk shall take their regular stations in the Council Chamber, and the business of the Council shall be taken up for consideration and disposition in the following order, unless otherwise ordered by the Council. 
A.  Roll call. 
B.  Bid reception. 
C.  Ordinances: first reading. 
D.  Ordinances: second reading. 
E.  Citizens' hearings. 
F.  Claims. 
G.  Resolutions. 
H.  Petitions and communications. 
I.  Officers' communications. 
J.  Reports of directors. 
K.  Tabled agenda. 
L.  Citizens' hearings. 
Note— Former § A350-13. See editor's note, § A350-9.  
§ A350-15. - Rule XIII: Reading of minutes. 
[Amended 1-9-2013 by Ord. No. 12-160 ] 
Unless a reading of all or a portion of the minutes of a previous Council meeting is requested by a majority of the Council, such minutes when signed by the President and the Clerk shall be considered approved without reading. 
Note— Former § A350-14. See editor's note, § A350-9.  
§ A350-16. - Rule XIV: Rules of debate. 
[Amended 1-9-2013 by Ord. No. 12-160 ] 
A.  Question under consideration. When a question is presented and seconded it is under consideration, and no motion shall be received thereafter, except to adjourn, to lay on the table, to postpone or to amend, until the question is decided. These motions shall have preference in the order in which they are mentioned and the first two (2) shall be decided without debate. Oral amendments to a resolution may be adopted, but the Clerk shall, after the meeting and as soon as possible thereafter, reduce the amendment to writing, as the minutes reflect the oral amendment. If there is any doubt as to the proper wording and intent of the amendment, the Clerk shall confer with the Corporation Counsel for his or her approval. When the resolution as amended is reduced to writing, it shall be appended to and become a part of the original resolution. 
B.  As to the President. The President or such other member of the Council as may be temporarily presiding may move, second, debate and vote from the chair, subject only to such limitations of debate as are by these rules imposed upon all members; and he or she shall not be deprived of any of the rights and privileges of a Council member by reason of his or her being the presiding Chairperson. 
C.  Getting the floor; improper reference to be avoided. A member of the Council desiring to speak for any purpose whatsoever shall address the presiding officer and, upon recognition, shall confine himself or herself to the question under debate, avoiding all personalities and indecorous language (in which event a member may be silenced). A member may only speak to clear up a matter of fact or explain a material part of his or her speech, except that a member after moving a question may once again speak on the same subject. 
D.  Interruption. A member, once recognized, shall not be interrupted when speaking unless it shall be to call him or her to order or as herein otherwise provided. If a member while speaking shall be called to order, he or she shall cease speaking until the question of order shall be determined by the presiding officer, and, if in order, he or she shall be permitted to proceed. Any member may appeal to the Council from the decision of the Chairperson upon a question of order, when without debate the Chairperson shall submit to the Council the question "Shall the decision of the chair be sustained," and the Council shall decide by a majority vote. 
E.  Privilege of closing debate. The Council member moving the adoption of an ordinance or resolution shall have the privilege of closing the debate, although he or she may have already spoken thereon at its moving. 
F.  Roll call. Upon any roll call there shall be no discussion or explanation given by any member voting, and he or she shall vote yes or no unless he or she shall first receive special permission from the Council to explain his or her vote. A member of the Council may abstain from voting on any matter. An abstention, for all purposes, shall not be counted either as an "aye" or "nay" vote. An abstention shall not be counted either as a vote for or a vote against the particular matter in which the abstention is given. The Council member abstaining from the vote shall be deemed to have taken a strict neutral position on the matter. 
Note— Former § A350-15. See editor's note, § A350-9.  
§ A350-17. - Rule XV: Voting. 
[Amended 1-9-2013 by Ord. No. 12-160 ] 
A.  Voting to be taken by roll call. The vote upon every motion, resolution or ordinance shall be taken in the following order: 
(1)  Ward Council members in alphabetical order by ward designation. 
(2)  Council members at large in alphabetical order by name. 
(3)  The Council President. 
B.  The vote by yeas and nays shall be entered upon the minutes. Resolutions and ordinances shall be signed by the presiding officer at such meetings and by the Clerk before they are entered upon the minutes; the votes of the members of the Council shall be recorded on the original copies to be filed with the Clerk. 
Note— Former § A350-16. See editor's note, § A350-9.  
§ A350-18. - Rule XVI: Addressing Council. 
[Amended 1-9-2013 by Ord. No. 12-160 ] 
Any person may address the Council on any subject of interest to the City of Jersey City. Anyone who wishes to address the Council may notify the City Clerk during regular business hours up to the close of regular business on the day of an evening meeting or up to the close of regular business on the day before a day meeting. Thereafter notice may be given to the City Clerk immediately prior to the commencement of a meeting or during the meeting. Those who give notice during the meeting may address the Council at the conclusion of regular business. 
Note— Former § A350-17. See editor's note, § A350-9.  
§ A350-19. - Rule XVII: Manner of addressing Council. 
[Amended 12-8-1993 by Ord. No. 93-958; 1-9-2013 by Ord. No. 12-160 ] 
A.  Recognition by presiding officer. No person shall begin addressing the Council without first being recognized by the Council President. 
B.  Each person addressing the Council shall step up to the microphone provided for use of the public, give his or her name and address in an audible tone of voice for the record, state the subject he or she wishes to discuss and state whom he or she is representing. All remarks shall be addressed to the Council President; no remarks shall be addressed to the other members of the Council without the permission of the Council President and the member to be addressed. No person other than members of the Council and the person having the floor shall be permitted to enter into any discussion, either directly or through a member of the Council, without the permission of the Council President. No question may be asked a Council member or a member of the city staff without the permission of the Council President. 
C.  Each person addressing the Council shall limit his or her remarks to five (5) minutes. After a person has spoken for five (5) minutes, the Council President shall notify him or her that his or her time as expired, and the City Clerk shall call the name of the next person to address the Council. 
D.  Spokesperson for a group of persons. In order to expedite discussion and to avoid repetitious presentations, whenever any group of persons is to address the Council on the same subject, the Council President may request that a spokesperson be chosen by the group to address the Council; and, if additional matters are to be presented by any other member of this group, to limit the number of persons addressing the Council. 
E.  After motion. After a motion has been made to close the public hearing on any ordinance, no member of the public shall address the Council from the audience on the matter under consideration without first securing permission to do so by majority vote of the City Council. 
Note— Former § A350-18. See editor's note, § A350-9.  
§ A350-20. - Rule XVIII: Decorum. 
[Amended 1-9-2013 by Ord. No. 12-160 ] 
A.  Council members. While the Council is in session, the members shall observe order and decorum. A Council member shall neither, by conversation or otherwise, delay or interrupt the proceedings of the Council nor disturb any member while speaking or refuse to obey the orders of the Council President. Members of the Council shall inform the Council President before leaving their seats during a Council meeting. 
B.  Employees. Members of the city staff shall observe the same rules of order and decorum which apply to the Council. 
C.  Persons addressing the Council. Any person making personal, slanderous or profane remarks or who willfully utters loud, threatening or abusive language or engages in any disorderly conduct which disrupts or disturbs the orderly conduct of any meeting shall be called to order by the Council President. If such conduct continues the Council President may, at his or her discretion, order such person barred from further audience before the Council during that meeting. 
D.  Members of the audience. No person in the audience shall engage in disorderly conduct such as hand clapping, stamping of feet, whistling, using profane language, shouting and other similar demonstrations which disturb the peace and order of the Council Meeting. 
E.  Videotaping, audiotaping and photographing. Any person may videotape, audiotape or photograph the proceedings of the Municipal Council. Such conduct should be unobtrusive so as not to interfere with the proceedings. The Council President or City Clerk may direct the activities of such persons to ensure an orderly meeting. 
Note— Former § A350-19. See editor's note, § A350-9.  
§ A350-21. - Rule XIX: Enforcement of decorum. 
[Amended 1-9-2013 by Ord. No. 12-160 ] 
A.  Warning. All persons shall, at the request of the Council President, be silent. If after receiving a warning from the Council President a person persists in disturbing the meeting, the Council President may order him or her to leave the meeting. If he or she does not remove themselves, the Council President may order the Sergeant-at-Arms to remove them. 
B.  Removal. The Chief of Police, or such members of the Division of Police as the Council President may designate, shall be Sergeant-at-Arms at the Council meetings. He, she or they shall carry out all orders given by the Council President for the purpose of maintaining order and decorum at the Council meeting. On instruction of the Council President, the Sergeant-at-Arms shall remove from the meeting any person who disturbs the proceedings of the Council. 
C.  Resisting removal. Any person who resists removal by the Sergeant-at-Arms shall be charged with violating N.J.S.A. 2C:33-8, Disrupting meetings and processions. 
Note— Former § A350-20. See editor's note, § A350-9.  
§ A350-22. - Rule XX: Council rail; persons authorized. 
[Amended 1-9-2013 by Ord. No. 12-160 ] 
Persons authorized to be within the Council rail. No person, except City officers, shall be permitted within the rail in front of the Council or be permitted to disturb any Council member while on the dais, during any meeting, without express permission of the President of the Council. The Corporation Counsel and City Clerk, or their designees, may speak to any member of the Council on pertinent pending matters before the Council. 
Note— Former § A350-21. See editor's note, § A350-9.  
§ A350-23. - Rule XXI: Special committees. 
[Amended 1-9-2013 by Ord. No. 12-160 ] 
A.  All special committees and the Chairmen thereof shall be appointed by the presiding officer of the Council or by a majority vote of the Municipal Council at a regular meeting. 
B.  A special committee shall consist ordinarily of no more than six (6) members of the Council, including the President, who shall be a member ex officio of all special committees. The President may, whenever he or she deems it necessary, appoint a special committee consisting of all or less of the members of the Council. A quorum of each special committee appointed shall consist of a majority of the members thereof. 
C.  Meetings of special committees shall not be held during Council meetings. 
Note— Former § A350-22. See editor's note, § A350-9.  
§ A350-24. - Rule XXII: Ordinances; resolutions; motions; number of votes; veto; emergency ordinance. 
[Amended 1-9-2013 by Ord. No. 12-160 ] 
A.  Preparation of ordinances. The Corporation Counsel or his or her designee, when requested, shall prepare ordinances or resolutions which shall be delivered to the Clerk. A copy of the same shall be forthwith furnished to each member of the Council by the Clerk. 
(1)  Ordinances may be introduced and adopted by Title and shall be read in full by the Clerk or his or her designee before consideration by the Council on second and final reading, except as otherwise provided by law, including N.J.S.A. 40:49-2. 
(2)  Every ordinance after introduction and adoption on first reading shall be published in full together with a notice as required by law, and said publication shall be at least ten (10) days prior to the time fixed for further consideration for second and final passage. At the time and place so specified in such notice, all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard thereon. 
B.  Resolutions shall be posted on a bulletin board or other convenient location outside of Council Chambers at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to consideration by the Council. Resolutions may be introduced and adopted by title only; resolutions which are so posted in accordance with this rule shall not be read in full by the Clerk for consideration by the Council, unless a member of the Council requests such a reading. Resolutions submitted as late items to the City Clerk within twenty-four (24) hours of a Council Meeting shall be read in full prior to consideration by the Council, unless the President of the Council deems such reading unnecessary. Failure to comply with the provisions of this subsection shall not affect the validity of any resolution. 
C.  Prior approval by administrative heads of departments. All ordinances and resolutions before presentation to the Council by the Mayor or the Business Administrator shall have been reduced to writing. Every ordinance and resolution except those requested by members of the City Council shall bear the name and signature of the city official requesting it. Prior to presentation to the Corporation Counsel, they shall have first been referred for a report on the accuracy of facts to the Director of the Department under whose jurisdiction the ordinance or resolution would devolve. Said report shall be in writing where practicable. The Department Director shall forward his or her report together with a copy of the ordinance or resolution to the Legislative Review Committee of the Council for its review. Thereafter, but before introduction by the Council, the same shall be approved, pursuant to law, by the Corporation Council or his or her designee. 
D.  Introducing for passage or approval. Ordinances, resolutions or other matters requiring action by the Council shall only be introduced by a member of the Council. When a Council member introduces an ordinance or resolution, his or her name shall appear on the same. 
E.  Period. All ordinances shall take effect twenty (20) days after final passage and approval by the Mayor. Two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the Council may, however, declare an emergency by written resolution to reduce this twenty-day period, except the period for bond ordinances shall not be reduced. 
F.  Adoption. Ordinances, other than bond ordinances, shall require five (5) affirmative votes for adoption. Bond ordinances shall require six (6) affirmative votes for adoption, except as otherwise provided by law. 
G.  Veto by the Mayor. Ordinances vetoed by the Mayor shall require six (6) affirmative votes of the Council to override the veto. 
H.  Preparation. Ordinances amending any existing ordinances shall contain, in brackets, the part repealed, and the new part to be inserted shall be underscored. 
I.  Emergency resolutions. Emergency resolutions for appropriations and resolutions for budgetary transfers shall require six (6) affirmative votes for adoption. 
Note— Former § A350-23. See editor's note, § A350-9.  
§ A350-25. - Rule XXIII: Nominations. 
[Amended 1-9-2013 by Ord. No. 12-160 ] 
A.  Upon the receipt from the Mayor of his or her nomination to any office or position, the same shall be read under communications by the Clerk, or his or her designee, and unless otherwise ordered shall be considered by the Council under "New Business." When taken up for action the President shall put the question on each nomination as follows: "Will the Council confirm the nomination?" On that motion, a vote shall be ordered, and, if a majority or more members vote to confirm, the President shall announce: "The nomination is confirmed." If less than a majority of the members vote to confirm, the President shall announce: "The nomination is rejected." 
B.  Action by confirmation or rejection upon a nomination made by the Mayor shall not be postponed or delayed longer than for one (1) regular meeting. 
C.  Within twenty-four (24) hours after confirmation or rejection of a nomination, the Clerk shall, in writing, notify the Mayor of that fact. 
Note— Former § A350-24. See editor's note, § A350-9.  
§ A350-26. - Rule XXIV: Reports, filing. 
[Amended 1-9-2013 by Ord. No. 12-160 ] 
Reports and resolutions to be filed with City Clerk. All reports and resolutions shall be filed with the City Clerk and entered in the minutes. 
Note— Former § A350-25. See editor's note, § A350-9.  
§ A350-27. - Rule XXV: Adjournment. 
[Amended 1-9-2013 by Ord. No. 12-160 ] 
A motion to adjourn shall always be in order and decided without debate. 
Note— Former § A350-26. See editor's note, § A350-9.  
§ A350-28. - Rule XXVI: Ordinances, certification of passage. 
[Amended 1-9-2013 by Ord. No. 12-160 ] 
Certification of passage of ordinances over Mayor's veto. Whenever an ordinance has been vetoed by the Mayor and is passed by the Council over such veto in the manner provided by law, the City Clerk shall append to such ordinances a certification in substantially the following form: 
"I hereby certify that the above ordinance adopted by the Council of the City of Jersey City on the _____ day of _____ was vetoed by the Mayor of the City; and was passed over the said veto on the _____ day of _____. Dated: _______ City Clerk _______ 
Note— Former § A350-27. See editor's note, § A350-9.  
§ A350-29. - Rule XXVII: Minutes of Council meetings. 
[Amended 1-9-2013 by Ord. No. 12-160 ] 
The minutes of each meeting of the Council shall be signed by the officer presiding at such meeting and by the City Clerk. 
Note— Former § A350-28. See editor's note, § A350-9.  
Chapter A351 - EXECUTIVE ORDERS AND ORDINANCES 
Executive orders and related ordinances, as arranged by position, shall be as follows: 
Title 	Labor 	Executive 
Order 	Date 	Ord. No. 	Adoption Date 
Accountant 	15 	1990-McC-60 	12-19-1990 		
Account Clerk P/T 	3.35-15.00 	1987-C-205 	05-18-1988 		
Accounting Assistant Typing 	12 	1991-McC-87 	10-15-1991 	McC-392 	11-06-1991 
Accounting Procedures Analyst 	26 	1990-McC-40 	07-20-1990 	McC-198 	09-12-1990 
Ad Hoc Committee on Senior Affairs 		2014-005 	05-14-2014 		
Administrative Clerk 	31 	1987-C-138 
1989-C-277 	09-24-1987 
06-01-1989 		
Administrative Secretary 	32 	1986-C-41 1987-C-137 			
Affirmative Action Policy 		1993-031 	01-04-1994 		
Affordable Housing Trust Fund Application Review Committee 		2014-002 
2014-003 	03-25-2014 
03-25-2014 		
Agency Aide 	1 	2008-004 	04-15-2008 	08-054 	05-14-2008 
Aide to the Mayor Unclassified 	Up to 58,700 	1993-S-015 	09-03-1993 		
Aide to the Mayor Unclassified 	Up to 44,000 	1986-C-24 1987-C-122 1989-McC-1 	07-03-1989 		
Alliance to Combat Drug and Alcohol Abuse 		1990-McC-59 1993-S-001 	12-19-1990 07-21-1993 		
Analyst Grant Applications/Program Monitor 	14 	2002-011 	05-15-2002 	02-068 	06-12-2002 
Assessing Aide 	25 	1985-C-276 	06-01-1989 		
Assessor Trainee 	4 	1988-C-203 	03-28-1988 		
Assistant Administrative Analyst 				94-015 	03-23-1994 
Assistant Administrator, Cultural and Heritage Affairs 	37 	1986-C-6 
1987-C-57 
1988-C-205 
2014-006 	05-18-1988 
08-20-2014 	14-070 
06-25-2014 
Assistant Analyst Grant Applications 	16 	1989-C-270 	03-29-1989 	C-941 	04-27-1989 
Assistant Budget Examiner 	17 	1987-C-119 	08-18-1987 		
Assistant Budget Officer 	33 	1986-C-13 1987-C-120 	08-18-1987 		
Assistant Business Administrator 	40 	1989-C-280 	06-01-1989 		
Assistant Chief Architect 	20 	1991-McC-71 	03-20-1991 		
Assistant Chief Clerk 	20 			04-132 	11-10-2004 
Assistant Corporation Counsel 	25,000-59,900 	1991-McC-77 	06-31-1991 		
Assistant Construction Official 	28 	1987-C-98 	06-16-1987 		
Assistant Director of Development 				96-050 	05-22-1996 
Assistant Director, Division of Building 	29 	1987-C-97 	06-19-1987 		
Assistant Director, Division of Data Processing 	30 	1986-C-31 	10-21-1986 		
Assistant Director of Neighborhood Preservation Program 	27 	2007-011 	06-13-2007 	07-124 	07-18-2007 
Assistant Director of Engineering 	34 	1987-C-124 	09-18-1987 		
Assistant Director of Finance 	33 	1987-C-56 1987-C-82 	06-03-1987 		
Assistant Director of Parks and Recreation 	23 	2007-019 	11-07-2007 	07-170 	10-24-2007 
Assistant Director of Streets and Sewers 	26 	1987-C-125 	09-18-1987 		
Assistant Economic and Industrial Development 	25 	1998-017 	07-28-1998 	97-032 	04-23-1997 
Assistant Engineer, Traffic 	20 	1990-McC-38 	07-20-1990 		
Assistant Fiscal Officer 	24 	1987-C-87 	06-03-1987 		
Assistant Health Officer 	16 	S-069 	12-20-1994 		
Assistant Manager, Sanitation 	14 	1987-C-126 	09-18-1987 		
Assistant Municipal Clerk 	16 	2002-014 	05-15-2002 	02-067 	06-12-2002 
Assistant Municipal Court Administrator 				McC-63 	10-25-1989 
Assistant Municipal Court Director 	26 	1992-048 	10-19-1992 	92-154 	11-10-1992 
Assistant Municipal Director of Welfare 	17 	1990-McC-36 	07-20-1990 	McC-198 	09-12-1990 
Assistant Municipal Tax Collector 	Up to 95,000 			14-158 
12-17-2014 
Assistant Personnel Director 	35 	1987-C-139 1989-C-281 	06-01-1989 		
Assistant Personnel Technician 	7 	2018-14 
06-29-2018 	18-066 
06-27-2018 
Assistant Program Analyst 	20 	2007-009 	06-27-2007 	07-107 	06-27-2007 
Assistant Program Coordinator Handicapped 				93-131 	10-27-1993 
Assistant Pool Manager 				93-131 	10-27-1993 
Assistant Public Information Officer 	18 	1998-020 	08-03-1998 	96-112 	11-26-1996 
Assistant Recreation Supervisor 	14 	2007-019 	11-07-2007 	07-170 	10-24-2007 
Assistant Superintendent of Watershed 	18 	1990-McC-19 	01-24-1990 		
Assistant Supervising Mechanic 	26 	2017-001 
01-17-2017 	16-191 
 1-11-2017 
Assistant Supervisor Heavy Equipment Operator 	26 	2017-008 
04-17-2017 	17-037 
04-12-2017 
Assistant Supervisor of Accounts 	Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:69A-48 			05-117 	09-28-2005 
Assistant Treasurer 	18 	McC-24 	09-13-1989 		
Attendant, Bath and Pools P/T 	3.50-14.50 	1986-C-7 1986-C-57 1988-C-205 	05-18-1988 		
Audio Visual Specialist 	14 	2007-005 	3-2-2007 	07-048 	03-28-2007 
Audio Visual Supervisor 	12 	2016-010 
09-16-2016 	16-124 
09-14-2016 
Bailiff P/T 	5.00-12.50 	1986-C-6 1987-C-57 1988-C-205 	05-18-1988 		
Bailiff 				93-131 	10-27-1993 
Benefits for employees separating from city 		1986-C-8 	07-09-1986 		
Body and Fender Mechanic 	9 	S-086 	03-05-1996 	95-107 	11-08-1995 
Budget: 10% cut in expenditures 		1992-026 	07-06-1992 		
Budget Examiner 	19 	1986-C-17 1988-C-244 	10-26-1988 		
Budget Officer 	45 	1986-C-37 1987-C-121 	11-10-1986 		
Building Inspector 	26 	1098-C-103 	06-16-1987 		
Building Maintenance Worker, P/T 	3.35-13.75 	1986-C-7 1987-C-57 1988-C-205 	05-18-1988 		
Building Maintenance Worker/Maintenance Repairer 		192-023 	06-17-1992 	92-082 	07-22-1992 
Building Subcode Official 	27 	1987-C-99 	06-16-1987 		
Business Administrator 	115,000 		09-22-1993 03-23-1994 	92-198 94-027 97-053 05-070 	01-13-1993 04-13-1994 08-13-1997 06-22-2005 
Buyer 	11 min. 9,100; max. 24,531 	1986-C-10 	07-18-1986 		
Camp Director 		1990-McC-56 	11-15-1990 	McC-239 	12-19-1990 
Car Phones Assignment (Telephones/Car Phones) 				1992-044 	10-15-1992 
Cashier P/T 	4.00-14.00 	1986-C-6 
1987-C-57 
1988-C-205 	05-18-1988 		
Cashier Typing 	6 	2009-004 	08-03-2009 	09-085 	07-29-2009 
Chaplain 	7,500.00 	1988-C-177 
1988-C-216 
2014-08 	05-18-1988 
08-20-2014 		
Chauffeur P/T 	5.00-13.75 	1986-C-6 
1987-C-57 
1988-C-205 	05-18-1988 		
Chemist (Water Analyst) 	22 	1988-C-236 	10-26-1988 		
Chief Accountant 	34 	1988-C-241 	10-26-1988 		
Chief Aide to Mayor 	Up to 55,000 	1987-C-123 
93-S-011 	08-24-1987 08-06-1993 		
Chief Architect 	Up to 45,000 	1987-C-50 	02-02-1987 		
Chief Assistant Assessor 	34 	2007-008 	06-27-2007 	07-120 	06-27-2007 
Chief Auditor 	35 	1993-S-036 	02-14-1994 		
Chief Engineer 	35 	1988-C-227 	07-13-1988 		
Chief Field Representative, Property Improvement 	26 	1987-C-150 	11-08-1987 		
Chief Financial Officer 	FX $10,000 			93-136 
97-053 
03-099 	11-10-1993 08-13-1997 07-16-2003 
Chief Financial Officer 		2011-005 	09-21-2011 		
Chief Landscape Architect 	34 	2011-002 	02-15-2011 	11-012 	02-09-2011 
Chief License Inspector 	22 	2008-004 	04-15-2008 	08-054 	05-14-2008 
Chief Map Clerk 	18 	2006-007 	09-26-2006 	06-113 	09-27-2006 
Chief Municipal Court Administrator 	19 	1992-049 	10-19-1992 	92-156 	11-10-1992 
Chief of Administrative Services 	25 	1992-007 	03-18-1992 		
Chief of Police 	94,000 or 5% more than base salary of Deputy Police Chief, whichever is greater 	S-075 
1997-001 
97-002 
2003-001 
2004-005 
2010-002 
2011-003 	03-16-1995 
01-02-1997 
02-19-1997 
03-24-2003 
11-01-2004 
05-26-2010 
07-27-2011 	04-141 
04-146 	11-23-2004 
01-12-2005 
Chief of Property Management 	22 	1988-C-210 
1988-C-210 	05-18-1988 		
Chief Parking Enforcement Officer 	12 	2018-14 
06-29-2018 	18-066 
06-27-2018 
Chief Planner (PIC) 	Tabled 			93-094 	09-08-1993 
Chief Project Coordinator/Construction 	28 	2015-008 
10-30-2015 	15-141 
10-28-2015 
Chief Public Defender 	37,000 	1990-McC-15 			
Chief Public Safety Telecommunicator 	Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:69A-68 			99-020 	02-24-1999 
Chief Registered Environmental Health Specialist, Public Health 	22 	1986-C-2 
1988-C-200 
2009-001 	02-18-1986 
03-28-1988 
04-22-2009 	09-045 	04-22-2009 
Chief Sanitation Inspector 	15 	1989-C-282 	06-05-1989 		
Children Supervisor 	5 	2017-013 
07-06-2017 	17-084 
06-28-2017 
City Clerk 	110,000 		09-22-1993 	92-198 
05-070 	01-13-1993 06-22-2005 
Claims Adjuster 	6 	1991-McC-72 	03-20-1991 		
Claims Examiner Worker Compensation, Typing 	18 	2011-006 	10-17-2011 	11-119 	10-12-2011 
Clerk 	3.35-13.50 	1986-C-6 
1987-C-57 
1988-C-205 	05-18-1988 		
Clerk Driver P/T 	3.34-12.50 	1986-C-7 
1987-C-57 
1988-C-205 	05-18-1988 		
Clerk/Telephone Operator 	3 	S-048 	04-21-1994 		
Clerk 1/Telephone Operator 	5 	2018-008 
04-12-2018 	18-026 
04-11-2018 
Clerk Transcriber P/T 	3.35-14.75 	1986-C-6 
1988-C-205 	05-18-1988 		
Clerk Typist P/T 	3.35-14.75 	1986-C-6 
1987-C-57 
1988-C-205 			
Clinic Physician Part-Time 	Fixed $55/hr 	2007-019 	11-07-2007 	07-170 	10-24-2007 
Closing of city departments on July 5, 2019 		2019-008 
		
Code Enforcement Officer Trainee 				96-112 	11-26-1996 
Collection Representative 	9 	1990-McC-30 	05-23-1990 	McC-159 	06-27-1990 
Commercial Driver's Licenses Drug and Alcohol Testing Policy 		1998-014 	03-19-1998 		
Communications Operator 	4 	1987-C-69 	06-02-1987 		
Communications Operator UFD 	4 	1987-C-69 	06-02-1987 		
Communications Technician (Telephone Communications) 	7 	1988-C-238 	10-26-1988 		
Community Operator Trainee P/T 	4.00-12.75 	1986-C-6 
1987-C-57 
1988-C-205 	05-18-1988 		
Community Oversight Committee for PPG Cleanup Sites 		2009-008 	10-20-2009 		
Community Relations Aide 				96-050 	05-22-1996 
Community Relations Specialist Bilingual in Spanish and English 	10 Union 246 $10,450 to $42,531 			02-013 	02-27-2002 
Community Service Aide P/T 	4.05-13.00 	1986-C-6 
1987-C-57 
1988-C-205 	05-18-1988 		
Community Service Aide, Bilingual Spanish and English P/T 	4.05-13.00 	1986-C-6 
1987-C-57 
1988-C-205 	05-18-1988 		
Community Service Aide/Senior Clerk 	7 	1990-McC-52 	10-11-1990 	McC-225 	11-29-1989 
Community Service Worker P/T 	3.35-9.50 	1986-C-6 
1987-C-57 
1988-C-205 	05-18-1988 		
Computer Service Technician 				03-070 	Defeated 05-14-2003 
Construction Inspector/Director of Inspections 	28 	1987-C-148 	11-04-1987 		
Construction Official/ 
Zoning Officer 	32 	1986-C-40 
1987-C-149 	11-04-1987 		
Contract Administrator 3 	28 	2014-004 	05-14-2014 	14-041 
04-23-2014 
Contractor monitoring 		2011-004 	09-21-2011 		
Control Person 	22 	1986-C-26 	09-22-1986 		
Control Room Operator P/T 	4.00-12.50 	1986-C-6 
1987-C-57 
1988-C-205 	05-18-1988 		
Coordinator, Employee Assistance Program UFD 	28 	1987-C-144 	11-04-1987 		
Coordinator for Federal and State Aide 				03-072 	Defeated 05-14-2003 
Coordinator, Financial Researcher/ Senior Budget Examiner 				McC-225 	11-29-1989 
Coordinator of Employment Services 	13 	1988-C-239 	10-26-1988 		
Coordinator of Monitoring and Evaluation 	14 	2008-006 	08-13-2008 	08-103 	08-06-2008 
Corporation Counsel 	110,000 			92-177 
97-053 
05-070 	12-09-1992 08-13-1997 06-22-2005 
Council Members 	22,500 			93-103 	09-22-1993 
Council Members and President (expenses) 	7,500 			93-104 	09-22-1993 
Councilperson's Aide 				93-091 	09-08-1993 
Council President 	24,500 			93-103 	09-22-1993 
Cultural and ethnic heritage displays 		S-068 	12-16-1994 		
Data Entry Machine Operator/Senior Clerk Typist 	6 	1990-McC-42 	07-20-1990 	McC-198 	09-12-1990 
Data Entry Machine Operator/ Typist 	5 	1990-McC-37 	07-20-1990 	McC-198 	09-12-1990 
Data Processing Programmer/Systems Analyst 	9 	2017-017 
12-01-2017 	17-151 
11-29-2017 
Delivery Worker 	4 	1991-McC-70 	03-20-1991 		
Demolition permits—Six-month moratorium; review of Ch. 105—Rescinded 		2018-004 
2018-010 
03-23-2018 
04-26-2018 		
Department Directors 
(Pension; Deferred Pension; Accrued Sick Leave) 		2009-02 	06-03-2009 		
Department Directors and Statutory Officers 
(Mandatory ethics training) 		2009-007 	09-10-2009 		
Department Directors and Employees 
(Mandatory ethics training) 		2009-006 	08-24-2009 		
Deputy Chief of Police serving as Operations Commander 		2015-005 
07-31-2015 		
Deputy City Clerk 	Up to 95,000 	1988-C-234 
1993-S-017 	10-26-1988 
10-26-1993 	97-068 
04-106 
14-158 
09-24-1997 
09-22-2004 
12-17-2014 
Deputy Director, Housing and Economic Development 	33 	1988-C-209 	05-18-1988 		
Deputy Director Office of Employment and Training 		1993-108 	09-22-1993 		
Deputy Fire Chief 	Pursuant to FSO Contract 			05-091 	08-10-2005 
Deputy Fire Director 	Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:69A-68 			00-016 	03-22-2000 
Deputy Municipal Court Director 		1992-051 
1993-098 	10-19-1992 
09-08-1993 	92-154 
92-158 	11-10-1992 
11-10-1992 
Deputy Municipal Superintendent of Weights and Measures 	12 		02-26-1992 	92-016 	03-25-1992 
Deputy Police Chief 	Pursuant to Executive Order and pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:69A-48 
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-179 	2005-002 
2006-001 
2007-015 
2008-001 
2012-002 
2018-003 
2018-009 
06-15-2005 
01-05-2006 
09-17-2007 
01-11-2008 
12-20-2012 
03-14-2018 
04-19-2018 	05-090 	08-10-2005 
Deputy Police Director 	31 	S-088 	03-05-1996 	95-097 	10-25-1995 
Deputy Tax Assessor 	Up to 95,000 			02-130 
04-106 
14-158 
12-26-2002 
09-22-2004 
12-17-2014 
Developer P/T 	4.25-9.20 	1986-C-7 	06-19-1986 		
Director, Accounts and Controls 	30 	1988-C-199 	03-28-1988 		
Director, Communications Center 	* 	S-084 S-090 	03-05-1996 04-12-1996 	15-033 
03-25-2015 
Director, Community Development Program 	24 	1988-C-222 	07-13-1988 		
Director, Department of Economic Opportunity 	75,000 			97-053 	08-13-1997 
Director, Department of Finance 	100,000 			05-070 	06-22-2005 
Director, Department of Health and Human Services 	100,000 		09-22-1993 	92-198 
97-053 
05-070 	01-13-1993 
08-13-1997 
06-22-2005 
Director, Department of Housing and Economic Development and Commerce 	100,000 	2006-003 	09-22-1993 
04-13-2006 	92-198 
97-053 
05-070 	01-13-1993 
08-13-1997 
06-22-2005 
Director, Department of Human Resources 	114,753 			14-034 
03-26-2014 
Director, Department of Neighborhood Improvement 	75,000 			97-053 	08-13-1997 
Director, Department of Public Safety 	185,000 			13-080 
09-11-2013 
Director, Department of Public Works 	100,000 		09-22-1993 	92-198 
97-053 
05-070 	01-13-1993 
08-13-1997 
06-22-2005 
Director, Department of Recreation and Cultural Affairs 	100,000 		09-22-1993 	93-112 
97-053 
05-070 	10-13-1993 
08-13-1997 
06-22-2005 
Director of Redevelopment 	31 	1993-S-025 	12-16-1993 	93-150 	01-12-1994 
Director, Department of Water 	Up to 65,000 		09-22-1993 	92-198 	01-13-1993 
Director, Division of Pensions 	25 	1987-C-130 	09-18-1987 		
Director of Community Development 	Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:69A-68 			99-006 	01-27-1999 
Director of Community Relations & Social Services 	43 	2017-013 
07-06-2017 	17-084 
06-28-2017 
Director of Constituent Services 	25 	S-071 	03-13-1995 		
Director of Cultural Affairs 	25 	1993-S-022 	12-16-1993 	93-151 	01-12-1994 
Director of Cultural Arts 			12-22-1993 	93-151 	12-22-1993 
Director of Custodial Services, Director of Maintenance Services 	26 	1989-C-257 
S-085 	01-03-1989 
03-05-1996 	C-888 	01-26-1989 
Director of Economic and Industrial Development 	29 	1998-016 	07-28-1998 	97-032 	04-23-1997 
Director of Engineering 	39 	1987-C-129 	09-18-1987 		
Director of Finance; Director in Charge 	Up to 59,500 			92-198 93-137 	01-13-1993 
11-10-1993 
Director of Health Education 	35 	2017-010 
05-12-2017 	17-049 
05-10-2017 
Director of Inspections 	40 	2018-013 
06-15-2018 	18-054 
06-13-2018 
Director of Licenses 	28 	S-047 	04-21-1994 		
Director of Maintenance Services 			03-09-1994 	94-015 	03-23-1994 
Director of Neighborhood Preservation Program 				96-050 	05-22-1996 
Director of Office of Employment and Training 				93-125 	10-27-1993 
Director of Office of the Handicapped 	8 	1989-C-256 	01-03-1989 	C-887 	01-26-1989 
Director of Police School 				01-116 	10-24-2001 
Director of Property Improvement 			03-09-1994 	94-015 	03-23-1994 
Director of Security 	17 	1988-201 	03-28-1988 		
Director of Parks and Recreation 	26 	1989-C-287 	06-15-1989 		
Director of Public Works Unclassified 	51,000 	1987-C-127 	09-18-1987 		
Director of Urban Renewal 				94-015 	03-08-1994 
Director of Welfare 	FX: 35,000 	1987-C-75 	06-02-1987 		
Director, Repair and Maintenance 	27 	1990-McC-29 	04-16-1990 	McC-142 	05-09-1990 
Director, Repair and Maintenance/Street Superintendent 				93-093 	09-08-1993 
Director, Repair and Maintenance/Street Supervisor 	22 	1992-033 	07-23-1992 	92-073 	06-24-1992 
Director, Urban Research and Design 	Up to 39,500 	1986-C-34 	10-17-1986 		
Director, Water Supply 	34 				
Discrimination, Harassment, or Retaliation Policy 		2014-001 	02-25-2014 		
Diversity and Inclusion Advisory Board 		2016-011 
2019-002 
12-20-2016 
03-06-2019 		
Drafting Technician 	12 	1987-C-58 	03-04-1987 		
Driver P/T 	3.35-12.50 	1986-C-6 
1987-C-57 
1988-C-205 	05-18-1988 		
Electrical Inspector 	26 	1987-C-104 	06-16-1987 		
Elevator Subcode Official 	27 min. 17,500 max. 59,565 			92-001 	01-27-1992 
Electrical Subcode Official 	27 	1987-C-100 	06-16-1987 	93-001 	01-13-1993 
Employee voluntary separation incentive program 		2019-006 
05-02-2019 		
Environmental Engineer I 	* 			15-055 
05-13-2015 
Environmental Health Coordinator 	45 	2015-003 
06-12-2015 	15-078 
06-10-2015 
Environmental Health Specialist (Hazardous Substances) 				McC-338 	07-17-1991 
Equal Opportunity/ Human Rights Specialist 				93-126 	10-27-1993 
Environmental Specialist 	22 	1987-C-161 	11-06-1987 		
Equipment Operator 	14 	1988-C-165 	01-15-1988 		
Equipment Operator Foreman M/W 	15 	1988-C-168 	01-15-1988 		
Equipment Operator, Water 	14 	1990-McC-51 	10-10-1990 	McC-224 	11-20-1990 
Ethics Officer 		2002-004 	05-06-2002 		05-06-2002 
Exchange Place Special Improvement District Advisory Board 		2016-004 
04-12-2016 		
Executive Assistant 	24 	1987-C-90 	06-03-1987 		
Executive Assistant P/T 	4.48-14.25 	1986-C-6 
1987-C-57 
1988-C-205 	05-18-1988 		
Executive Director, Human Rights Commission 	20 	1987-C-145 	11-04-1987 	C-624 	12-10-1987 
Executive Secretary 	25 	1990-McC-17 	01-22-1990 		
Exhibit Artist 				03-071 	Defeated 
05-14-2003 
Exterminator Trainee 	5 	2008-008 	11-12-2008 	08-155 	11-12-2008 
Federal Aid Highway Project Procedure Manual 		2012-001 
12-14-2012 		
Field Representative Energy Conservation Spanish/English 	8 	1988-C-212 	05-18-1988 		
Field Representative Narcotics Education 		1992-040 	09-18-1992 	92-147 	10-28-1992 
Field Representative, Property Improvement, Bilingual Spanish and English 				96-050 	05-22-1996 
Field Representative, Senior Citizens Program 	8 	1987-C-49 	02-02-1987 		
File Clerk P/T (Seasonal) 	3.10-6.00 	1986-C-6 	06-19-1986 		
Fire Captain 	Pursuant to current FSOA Union Contract 			05-090 	08-10-2005 
Fire Chaplain 	5,000 	2000-011 
2014-08 	08-07-2000 
08-20-2014 	00-108 	09-13-2000 
Fire Chief 	173,414.00 	S-089 
2002-008 
2014-007 
2015-002 
03-28-1996 
05-02-2002 
08-20-2014 
04-27-2015 		05-02-2002 
Fire Fighter 	Pursuant to FOBA Union Contract 				
Fire Official 	26 	1991-McC-83 	07-22-1991 		
Fire Prevention Specialist 		1989-C-286 		C-998 	06-22-1989 
Fire Protection Inspector 	26 	1987-C-106 	06-16-1987 		
First Assistant Corporation Counsel 	59,000-65,000 	1988-C-233 1989-McC-7 	08-22-1989 		
First Assistant Prosecutor 	40,000-80,000 	2002-010 	05-15-2002 	02-069 	06-12-2002 
Fiscal Analyst 	25 	1990-McC-21 	01-24-1990 		
Fiscal Oversight and Management Protocol 		2015-006 
2019-005 
08-26-2015 
05-13-2019 		
Flag of USA to fly from city-owned buildings and properties 		S-042 	03-18-1994 		
Food Service Worker (seasonal) P/T 	3.35-7.50 	1988-C-205 	05-18-1988 		
Gender neutrality in all municipal bathroom facilities established 		2017-005 
03-23-2017 		
General Nurse Public Health P/T 	12.00 	1988-C-205 	05-18-1988 		
General Supervisor, Streets 	17 	S-072 	03-13-1995 		
General Supervisor, Traffic Maintenance 	20 	1987-C-88 	06-03-1987 		
General Supervisor Trades 		1992-038 	09-18-1992 	92-146 	10-28-1992 
General Supervisor Water 		Tabled 		93-100 	09-22-1993 
General Trades Foreman 	22 	1991-McC-69 	03-20-1991 		
Grants Administration and Compliance 		2003-003 	11-24-2003 		
Graphic Artist 				03-003 	01-22-2003 
Green Committee 		2009-005 
2011-001 	07-27-2009 
01-26-2011 		
Hazmat Coordinator 	25 	1987-C-153 	11-04-1987 		
Health Aide Bilingual P/T 	3.35-11.50 	1988-C-205 	05-18-1988 		
Health Insurance Benefits Clerk 	7 	2017-013 
07-06-2017 	17-084 
06-28-2017 
Health Investigator P/T 	3.35-12.50 	1988-C-205 	05-18-1988 		
Health Officer 	21 	1986-C-2 
S-069 	02-18-1986 
12-20-1994 		
Heavy Equipment Operator 	17 	1988-C-166 	01-15-1988 		
Historic Preservation Specialist 	20 	2002-013 	05-15-2002 	02-045 	04-10-2002 
Human Resources Coordinator 	25 	2017-009 
04-27-2017 	17-041 
04-26-2017 
Hydrant and Valve Inspector P/T 	3.35-12.75 	1986-C-7 
1988-C-205 	05-18-1988 		
Identification Clerk 				93-095 	09-08-1993 
Identification Officer 				94-074 	08-17-1994 
Incident Command System 		2000-003 	02-15-2000 		
Inclusion of LGBT, Veteran and Disabled Person Owned Businesses 		2018-015 
10-24-2018 		
Information Technology Audit Committee 		2013-003 
10-21-2013 		
Interpreter Bilingual in Spanish/ 
English 	4 	1987-C-80 	06-03-1987 		
Interviewer Public Defender Officer, Bilingual in Spanish/English 	7 	1988-C-246 	10-26-1988 		
Interviewer Courts, Bilingual in Spanish/English 	7 			92-017 	03-25-1992 
Investigator Communicable Diseases, Director of Licenses- 	7 	S-046 	04-21-1994 	94-042 	05-25-1994 
Investigator, Public Works 	11 		07-16-1991 	McC-347 	08-21-1991 
Investment Specialist 	29 	1991-McC-86 	10-15-1991 	McC-392 	11-06-1991 
Jersey City Municipal Alliance Committee to Combat Drug and Alcohol Abuse 		93-001 	07-21-1993 		
Judge of Municipal Court (part-time, less than 20 hours per week) 	20,000 			96-118 	11-26-1996 
Judge of Municipal Court (part-time, 20 hours or more per week) 	35,000 			96-118 	11-26-1996 
Judge of Municipal Court (full-time) 	70,000 			96-118 	11-26-1996 
Judge of Municipal Court (designated Chief Judge) 	80,000 			96-118 	11-26-1996 
Judge of Municipal Court, Central Judicial Processing 	76,000 	1987-C-53 		McC-12 96-118 	09-13-1989 
11-26-1996 
Keep Jersey City Beautiful committee 		2016-001 
01-06-2016 		
Keyboarding Clerk 2/Telephone Operator 	10 	2017-015 
10-02-2017 	17-121 
09-27-2017 
Labor Relations Assistant 	14 	2016-005 
04-25-2016 	16-058 
04-13-2016 
Laboratory Assistant P/T 	3.35 12.75- 	1986-C-6 
1987-C-57 
1988-C-205 	05-18-1988 		
Laboratory Technician P/T 	6.75 13.75- 	1986-C-6 
1987-C-57 
1988-C-205 	05-18-1988 		
Laborer P/T 	3.35-13.75 	1986-C-6 
1987-C-57 
1988-C-205 	05-18-1988 		
Labor Grades, various unclassified positions 		1992-011 	06-03-1992 		
Labor Grade Classified Positions 		1992-009 			
Law Intern F/T 	17,400-25,000 	1991-McC-68 	03-19-1991 	McC-302 	04-10-1991 
Law Intern P/T: 		1987-C-147 
1993-S-013 
2009-003 	11-04-1987 
09-02-1993 
07-15-2009 		
1st-year law student 	13.00/hour 				
2nd-year law student 	14.00/hour 				
3rd-year law student and post-graduate law student 	15.00/hour 				
Law Librarian 	20 	2007-010 	06-12-2007 	07-125 	07-18-2007 
Leaves of absence (specific information relating to each leave of absence is on file and available for inspection in the office of the City Clerk) 		1986-C-4 
1986-C-5 
1986-C-11 
1986-C-12 
1986-C-15 
1986-C-16 
1986-C-22 
1986-C-27 
1986-C-36 
1986-C-38 
1986-C-39 
1987-C-45 
1987-C-62 
1987-C-63 
1987-C-64 
1987-C-65 
1987-C-76 
1987-C-113 
1987-C-114 
1987-C-116 
1987-C-140 
1987-C-142 
1987-C-143 
1987-C-163 
1988-C-179 
1988-C-184 
1988-C-191 
1988-C-192 
1988-C-193 
1988-C-194 
1988-C-195 
1988-C-196 	05-12-1986 05-12-1986 07-18-1986 07-18-1986 08-01-1986 08-01-1986 08-21-1986 09-22-1986 10-31-1986 11-10-1986 11-10-1986 01-02-1987 05-22-1987 05-22-1987 05-22-1987 05-22-1987 06-02-1987 08-18-1987 
  
08-18-1987 11-04-1987 11-04-1987 11-04-1987 11-06-1987 01-15-1988 02-22-1988 03-17-1988 03-17-1988 03-17-1988 03-17-1988 03-17-1988 03-22-1988 		
		1988-C-248 
1988-C-249 
1988-C-252 
1989-C-261 
1989-C-263 
1989-C-264 
1989-C-265 
1989-C-266 
1989-C-273 
1989-C-275 
1989-C-284 
1989-McC-12 
1990-McC-22 
1990-McC-24 
1990-McC-43 
1990-McC-44 
1990-McC-45 
1990-McC-46 
1990-McC-64 
1992-001 
1992-012 
1992-037 
1992-042 
1993-010 
1993-058 
1993-060 
1993-061 
1993-062 
1993-S-003 
1993-S-004 
1993-S-005 
1993-S-006 
1993-S-007 
1993-S-008 
1993-S-009 
1993-S-010 
1993-S-012 	10-26-1988 10-26-1988 11-01-1988 01-03-1989 03-16-1989 03-17-1989 03-17-1989 03-17-1989 04-11-1989 06-01-1989 06-05-1989 10-05-1989 01-24-1990 
  
01-01-1990 07-26-1990 01-01-1990 07-26-1990 12-19-1990 12-28-1991 06-12-1992 09-11-1992 10-05-1992 07-27-1993 01-07-1993 03-26-1993 03-26-1993 03-26-1993 07-27-1993 07-27-1993 07-27-1993 07-27-1993 07-27-1993 07-27-1993 07-27-1993 07-27-1993 09-01-1993 		
		1993-S-018 
1993-S-019 
1993-S-020 
1993-S-021 
1994-S-033 
1994-S-034 
1994-S-035 
1994-S-037 
1994-S-038 
1994-S-040 
S-041 
S-043 
S-044 
S-045 
S-049 
S-050 
S-051 
S-052 
S-053 
S-054 
S-055 
S-056 
S-059 
S-062 
S-063 
S-065 
S-067 
S-073 
S-074 
S-075-A 
S-078 
S-079 
S-080 
S-091 
S-092 
S-095 
S-096 
S-097 
1997-003 
1997-004 
1997-005 
1997-006 
1997-007 	12-16-1993 12-16-1993 12-16-1993 12-16-1993 02-14-1994 02-14-1994 02-14-1994 02-14-1994 02-14-1994 02-23-1994 03-02-1994 04-21-1994 04-21-1994 04-21-1994 06-10-1994 06-10-1994 07-19-1994 07-19-1994 07-19-1994 07-19-1994 07-19-1994 07-19-1994 09-01-1994 09-01-1994 09-12-1994 12-19-1994 12-16-1994 03-20-1995 03-20-1995 06-22-1995 09-12-1995 09-12-1995 09-12-1995 04-12-1996 04-12-1996 05-14-1996 05-14-1996 05-22-1996 02-26-1997 02-26-1997 02-26-1997 02-26-1997 02-26-1997 		
		1997-011 
1997-012 
1997-013 
1997-014 
1997-015 
1997-016 
1997-017 
1998-002 
1998-003 
1998-004 
1998-005 
1998-006 
1998-007 
1998-008 
1998-009 
1998-010 
1998-011 
1998-021 
2000-001 
2000-004 
2000-005 
2000-006 
2000-008 
2002-006 
2002-007 
2002-012 	02-26-1997 02-26-1997 02-26-1997 02-26-1997 02-26-1997 02-26-1997 04-09-1997 01-26-1998 01-26-1998 01-26-1998 01-26-1998 01-26-1998 01-26-1998 01-26-1998 01-26-1998 01-26-1998 01-26-1998 08-03-1998 12-20-1999 07-28-2000 07-28-2000 07-28-2000 08-15-2000 04-17-2002 04-17-2002 05-15-2002 		
Lead Poisoning Inspector 	Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:69A-43a 	2006-002 	01-31-2006 	06-025 	03-08-2006 
Legal Analyst 	43 	2007-017 
2018-14 
06-27-2007 
06-29-2018 	07-134 
18-066 
08-08-2007 
06-27-2018 
Legal Assistants 	15,000-25,000 	1989-McC-10 
C-21 
C-54 	08-22-1989 		
Legal Research Assistant 	20 	1990-McC-58 	11-15-1990 		
Legal Secretary 	12 	1993-S-026 	12-16-1993 
09-22-1993 		
Legislative Specialist 	30 	S-081 	12-09-1995 		
Loan Adviser 				93-096 	09-08-1993 
Loan Adviser Bilingual Spanish and English 	Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:69A-43a 			05-027 	03-23-2005 
Lobbyist Representative 		2002-005 	05-06-2002 	02-075 	06-12-2002 
Longevity increases; classified and unclassified services 				92-050 
92-090 	05-27-1992 
06-23-1992 
Longevity pay to management unclassified employees for service with other political subdivision of the State of New Jersey 		1988-C-232 	09-20-1988 		
Maintenance Repairer/Plasterer 	12 	1992-003 	03-10-1992 	92-028 	04-08-1992 
Maintenance Worker 2 Grounds 	12 	2014-010 
10-14-2014 	14-124 
10-08-2014 
Maintenance Worker P/T 	3.35-9.50 	1986-C-7 
1988-C-205 	05-18-1988 		
Mail Clerk 	2 	1990-McC-50 	10-10-1990 	McC-224 	11-20-1990 
Management Assistant 	18 	2002-009 	05-15-2002 	02-053 	05-08-2002 
Management Employee Benefits 		2002-015 
2004-003 
2007-017 
2007-018 
2008-009 
2010-003 
2017-016 
2017-018 
2019-001 
2019-003 
07-24-2002 
08-18-2004 
09-05-2007 
10-10-2007 
12-02-2008 
10-12-2010 
09-27-2017 
12-08-2017 
01-25-2019 
04-24-2019 		
Management Hours 		1992-025 	07-06-1992 		
Management Raises 		1992-024 
1992-025 	07-06-1992 
07-06-1992 	92-050 
92-090 	05-27-1992 
07-02-1992 
Management Specialist 			03-09-1994 	94-015 	03-23-1994 
Management Specialist P/T 	6.72-18.00 	1986-C-7 
1987-C-57 
1988-C-205 	05-18-1988 		
Manager, Animal Control Facility 				02-095 	07-12-2002 
Manager, Division of Sanitation 	23 	1986-C-32 	10-22-1986 	McC-74 	12-27-1989 
Mason/Plasterer 	Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:69A-48 			98-146 	10-28-1998 
Mayor 	98,363 			93-072 
97-053 
05-070 	07-28-1993 
08-13-1997 
06-22-2005 
Mayor's personal secretary, unclassified 	26 	1987-C-55 	03-03-1987 		
Meat Inspector 	19,003 max. at 5 years 	1986-C-2 	02-18-1986 		
Mechanic Repair Light Equipment 	14 	2017-11 
05-26-2017 	17-063 
05-24-2017 
Mechanic/Senior Public Works Repairer 				96-050 	05-22-1996 
Messenger 	2 	93-S-002 	07-27-1993 		
Messenger P/T 	3.35-12.50 	1986-C-6 
1987-C-57 
1988-C-205 	05-18-1988 	McC-11 	09-13-1989 
Messenger, bilingual in Spanish and English 	6 	1987-C-77 	06-02-1987 		
Municipal Bond Specialist/Senior Budget Examiner 	28 	1990-McC-61 		McC-264 	01-23-1991 
Municipal Court Attendant P/T 	3.35-13.50 	1986-C-6 
1987-C-57 
1988-C-205 	05-18-1988 		
Municipal Court Clerk P/T 	3.35-13.75 	1986-C-6 
1987-C-57 			
Municipal Court Director 	11 47,500 
FX: 100,000 	2008-007 
1988-C-205 
1987-C-59 
1988-C-230 
1992-050 	08-22-2008 
05-18-1988 
03-04-1987 
07-29-1988 
10-19-1992 	92-154 
92-157 	11-10-1992 
11-10-1992 
Municipal Disaster Control Director 	19 	1989-C-255 	03-29-1989 	C-886 	01-02-1989 
Municipal Emergency Management Coordinator 	21 	2000-002 	03-03-2000 		
Municipal employment conditions 				93-046 	04-28-1993 
Municipal employees minimum wage 	$15.00 	2016-003 
2016-008 
02-29-2016 
07-05-2016 		
Municipal Engineer 	65,000 	1989-McC-3 
1987-C-50 	08-16-1989 		
Municipal Parks Superintendent 	22 	1987-C-132 	09-20-1987 		
Network Administrator 1 	20 	2008-003 	02-19-2008 	08-017 	03-12-2008 
Network Administrator 2 	22 	2008-003 	02-19-2008 	08-017 	03-12-2008 
Newark Avenue Pedestrian Mall—60-day trial extension 		2018-011 
05-21-2018 		
Nonunion classified and unclassified employees; implicit price deflator (not signed) 		S-1993-028 
S-1993-029 
S-1993-030 	01-03-1994 		
Nonunion classified and unclassified managerial employees 		2014-012 
11-21-2014 		
Nutrition Program Coordinator Women, Infants and Children's' Program 	20 	1992-036 
92-073 	07-23-1992 
06-24-1992 		
Nutrition Site Manager P/T 	3.50-9.50 	1986-C-6 
1988-C-205 	05-18-1988 		
Omnibus Operator Class II P/T 	3.35-12.50 	1986-C-6 
1987-C-57 
1988-C-205 			
Operations and Training Officer Emergency Management 				02-007 	02-13-2002 
Paid parental leave for municipal employees 		2018-002 
03-09-2018 		
Paralegal Specialist 	21 	2018-14 
06-29-2018 	94-016 
18-066 
03-09-1994 
06-27-2018 
Parent Educator (Seasonal) P/T 	7.00-12.00 	1986-C-6 
1988-C-205 	05-18-1988 		
Park Maintenance Worker 				96-112 	11-26-1996 
Peddling prohibited in all municipal workplaces 		1990-McC-55 	11-16-1990 		
Permit Clerk Typing 	Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:69A-43a 			08-040 	04-09-2008 
Personnel Forms, Processing 		1992-027 	07-06-1992 		
Personal secretary to Department Director 	26 	1989-McC-2 	07-24-1989 		
Personnel Supervisor 				93-131 	10-27-1993 
Phlebotomist 	7 	1992-039 	09-18-1992 	92-145 	10-28-1992 
Photographer, Processor and Developer 	11:9,300 min. 25,323 max. 	1986-C-10 	07-18-1986 		
Photographer, Processor and Developer P/T 	4.25-14.50 	1986-C-6 
1987-C-57 
1988-C-205 	05-18-1988 		
Pistol Range Dedication 		1988-C-220 	06-06-1988 		
Planner Trainee P/T 	2.75-9.50 	1987-C-83 	06-03-1987 		
Plumbing Inspector 	26 	1987-C-105 	06-16-1987 		
Plumbing Subcode Official 	27 	1986-C-2 
1987-C-101 	06-16-1987 		
Police Captain 	Pursuant to current PSOA Union Contract 			05-090 	08-10-2005 
Police Chaplain 	5,000 	2000-010 
2014-08 	08-07-2000 
08-20-2014 	00-109 	09-13-2000 
Police Chief [1] 
(Base without CPI) 			15-064 
05-27-2015 
Police Communication Clerk, Bilingual Spanish and English 	5 	1987-C-78 	06-02-1987 		
Police Department Detectives 		1988-C-231 	09-09-1988 		
Police Department Study 		1987-C-164 	12-18-1987 		
Police Inspector 				McC-262 	01-09-1991 
Police Lieutenant 	Pursuant to current PSOA Union Contract 			05-090 	08-10-2005 
Police Officer 	Pursuant to POBA Union Contract 			05-090 	08-10-2005 
Police Records Clerk/Typing 				96-050 	05-22-1996 
Police Sergeant 	Pursuant to current PSOA Union Contract 			05-090 	08-10-2005 
Police trainees hired as temporary employees enrolled in Police Training Academy, compensation of 	First 30 days: 5.15 per hour or min. wage, whichever is greater; 31st to 60th day: 6.25 per hour; 61st day and thereafter: 7.50 per hour 	1998-001 
1998-013 	01-30-1998 03-06-1998 		
Press Aide 	25 	1988-C-211 	05-18-1988 		
Principal Auditor 	29 	1987-C-154 	11-04-1987 		
Principal Budget Examiner 	32 	1989-C-274 	06-01-1989 		
Principal Buyer 	15 	1988-C-185 	02-22-1988 		
Principal Clerk 	9 	1988-C-180 	01-22-1988 		
Principal Clerk Transcriber 	9 	1988-C-181 	01-22-1988 		
Principal Clerk Stenographer 	9 	1988-C-182 	01-22-1988 		
Principal Clerk Typing 	9 	1988-C-183 	01-22-1988 		
Principal Clerk Typing P/T 	3.35-15.50 	1987-C-57 1988-C-205 	05-18-1988 		
Principal Community Organization Specialist 	25 	2017-002 
01-17-2017 	16-190 
01-11-2017 
Principal Data Control Clerk P/T 	3.35-17.75 	1986-C-29 1987-C-57 1988-C-205 	05-18-1988 		
Principal Engineer 	29 	1988-C-202 	03-28-1988 		
Principal Engineer, Civil 	26 	1991-McC-67 	03-20-1991 	McC-303 	04-10-1991 
Principal Fiscal Analyst 	40 	2018-012 
05-31-2018 	18-045 
05-23-2018 
Principal Legal Stenographer 	10 	1986-C-10 	07-18-1986 		
Principal Planner (Transportation) 	25 	1990-McC-34 	04-23-1990 	McC-159 	06-27-1990 
Principal Program Development Specialist, Criminal Justice 	25 	S-087 	03-05-1996 	95-108 
96-050 	11-08-1995 05-22-1996 
Principal Registered Environmental Health Specialist, Public Health 	10 	1986-C-2 
S-069 
2009-001 	02-18-1986 
12-20-1994 
04-22-2009 	09-045 	 04-22-2009 
Process Officer 	28 	1990-McC-16 	01-18-1990 	McC-102 	02-14-1990 
Program Analyst 	17 	1988-C-250 	10-26-1988 		
Program Analyst P/T 	4.50-14.50 	1986-C-6 
1987-C-57 
1988-C-205 	05-18-1988 		
Program Coordinator Aging 	8 	1988-C-225 	07-13-1988 		
Program Coordinator Lead Poisoning Control Program 	30 	2018-008 	04-12-2018 	18-026 
04-11-2018 
Program Coordinator Minority and Women Business Enterprise Development 				93-090 	08-18-1993 
Program Coordinator Special Events 	13 	1988-C-178 	01-15-1988 		
Program Development Specialist (Community Service) 	14 	1987-C-70 	06-02-1987 		
Program Development Specialist (Human Resources) 	14 	1988-C-173 	01-15-1988 		
Program Development Specialist Aging 	14 	14-011 
11-14-2014 	14-137 
11-12-2014 
Program Development Specialist 3 	31 	2017-004 
03-09-2017 	17-021 
03-08-2017 
Program Manager Disease Prevention and Control 	25 	2007-019 	11-07-2007 	07-170 	10-24-2007 
Program Monitor 	14 	1988-C-172 	01-15-1988 		
Program Nutritionist 	20 	2007-004 	03-02-2007 	07-047 	03-28-2007 
Project Coordinator, Crime Prevention Program 	16 	1992-032 	07-23-1992 	92-073 	06-24-1992 
Project Coordinator, Redevelopment 			03-09-1994 	94-015 	03-23-1994 
Project Coordinator, Housing and Economic Development 	31 	1987-C-67 	06-02-1987 		
Project Manager Data Processing 	31 	2018-14 
06-29-2018 	18-066 
06-27-2018 
Public Art Advisory Committee 		2017-006 
03-27-2017 		
Public Defender 5 - 10 years experience 6 or more years legal experience 	28,500 
33,000 	1990-McC-15 	01-09-1990 		
Public Health Investigator 	9 	1989-C-258 	01-03-1989 	C-889 	01-26-1989 
Public Information Assistant Typing 	11 	2007-001 	02-06-2007 	07-026 	02-28-2007 
Public Information Officer 	23 	1997-008 	02-26-1997 		
Public Participation Specialist 	11 	1987-C-74 	06-02-1987 		
Public Relations Officer 	27 	1989-C-268 	03-29-1989 		
Public Safety Advisory Board 		2013-002 
10-15-2013 		
Public Safety Telecommunicator 	23 	1997-010 
2000-012 	02-26-1997 
10-11-2000 
(Editor's Note: This Executive Order also repealed Executive Order 1998-018, dated 08-03-1998.) 	97-023 	03-26-1997 
Public Works Inspector 	9 	1987-C-73 1987-C-91 	06-03-1987 		
Public Works Trainee P/T 	3.35-13.50 	1986-C-6 
1987-C-57 
1988-C-205 	05-18-1988 		
Purchasing Agent 	33 	1989-C-279 	06-01-1989 		
Purchasing Disparity Study "Croson Study" Committee 		2014-009 
2015-001 
10-07-2014 
01-09-2015 		
Radio Dispatcher 	Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:69A-43a 			05-028 	03-23-2005 
Radio Repairer 				96-050 	05-22-1996 
Range Master 				96-050 	05-22-1996 
Real Estate Director 	27 	1988-C-176 	01-15-1988 		
Real Estate Manager 	21 	1991-McC-81 	07-22-1991 		
Real Estate Manager P/T 	5.00-15.00 	1988-C-205 	05-18-1988 		
Receptionist P/T 	3.35-13.00 	1986-C-6 
1987-C-57 
1988-C-205 	05-18-1988 		
Records Manager 	10 	1992-002 	03-10-1992 	92-028 	04-08-1992 
Records Retrieval Operator 	6 	1990-McC-63 	12-19-1990 		
Recreation Leader Boxing 	4 	1990-McC-39 	07-20-1990 	McC-198 	09-12-1990 
Recreation Maintenance Supervisor 	20 	1987-C-48 	02-02-1987 		
Recreation Supervisor 	10 	1987-C-134 	09-20-1987 		
Recreation Program Coordinator 	18,500 	1988-C-188 	02-22-1988 		
Recreation Program Coordinator P/T 	10,000 	1988-C-188 	02-22-1988 		
Recreation Superintendent 	22 	1990-McC-27 	04-16-1990 		
Recreation Supervisor, Recreation Center 	20 	1987-C-146 	11-04-1987 		
Recreation Supervisor (Seasonal) P/T 	4.67-8.49 	1986-C-7 	06-19-1986 		
Recreation Supervisor, Senior Citizens 	14 	1988-C-175 	01-15-1988 		
Registered Environmental Health Specialist, Public Health 	6 	1986-C-2 
S-069 
2009-001 	12-20-1994 
04-22-2009 	09-045 	 04-22-2009 
Rent Collector P/T 	5.00-13.00 	1986-C-7 
1988-C-205 	05-18-1988 		
Rent Administrator for the Rent Receivership Program 		S-066 	12-07-1994 		
Representative, Citizen Complaints 				93-092 	09-08-1993 
Research Aide 	6 	2007-019 	11-07-2007 	07-170 	10-24-2007 
Research Assistant 	15 	1990-McC-13 	10-06-1989 		
Research Assistant Criminal Information 	14 	2006-005 	04-20-2006 	06-060 	05-10-2006 
Road Inspector 	9 	2015-009 
10-30-2015 	15-142 
10-28-2015 
Safety Inspector 		1992-031 	07-1992 	92-100 	08-19-1992 
Sanctuary city establishment 		2017-003 
02-03-2017 		
Sanitary Inspector P/T 	6.50-15.00 	1987-C-136 	09-20-1987 		
Sanitation Guard P/T 	5.00-9.50 	1987-C-57 	03-04-1987 		
Sanitation Inspector 	13 	1987-C-86 	06-03-1987 		
Sanitation Superintendent 	35 	2017-015 
10-02-2017 	17-121 
09-27-2017 
Second Assistant Corporation Counsel 				93-131 	10-27-1993 
Secretarial Assistant, Bilingual Spanish and English 	11 	1987-C-68 	06-02-1987 		
Secretarial Assistant Transcriber 	11 	1987-C-229 	07-28-1988 		
Secretary, Board/ Commission 	32,500 	1988-C-245 	10-26-1988 		
Secretary to Board of Alcoholic Beverage Control 	12,000 	Res. C-3530 
1993-S-016 	10-20-1993 	98-120 05-016 	09-09-1998 
02-23-2005 
Secretary of Insurance Commission 	40,000 			92-002 	03-25-1992 
Secretary to Municipal Council 	1 	1993-S-016 	10-20-1993 		
Security Guard P/T 		1986-C-7 
1987-C-57 
1988-C-205 	05-18-1988 		
Security Systems Operator 	20 	2007-013 	07-23-2007 	07-144 	08-22-2007 
Senior Account Clerk 	7 	1990-McC-62 	12-19-1990 		
Senior Accounting Procedures Analyst 			03-09-1994 	94-015 	03-23-1994 
Senior Account Clerk Typing 	7 	100-McC-62 	12-19-1990 		
Senior Administrative Analyst 	30 	1987-C-151 2004-002 	10-04-1987 03-08-2004 		
Senior Assessing Aide 	28 	1988-C-189 	02-22-1988 		
Senior Assistant Assessor 				02-131 	11-26-2002 
Senior Assistant Corporation Counsel, Unclassified 	Min. 24,000 max. 40,000 	1986-C-14 1986-C-28 	10-01-1986 		
Senior Carpenter 	28 	2018-006 
04-03-2018 	18-022 
03-28-2018 
Senior Chemist 	19,002 (max. at 5 years) 	1986-C-2 			
Senior Clerk 	7 	1987-C-155 	11-04-1987 		
Senior Clerk P/T 	3.35-15.00 	1987-C-57 
1988-C-205 	05-18-1988 		
Senior Clerk Stenographer 	7 	1987-C-156 	11-04-1987 		
Senior Clerk Transcriber, Bilingual in Spanish and English 	7 	1987-C-157 	11-04-1987 		
Senior Clerk Typist 	7 	1987-C-158 	11-90-1987 		
Senior Clerk Typist P/T 	3.35-15.00 	1986-C-7 
1987-C-57 
1988-C-205 	05-18-1988 		
Senior Code Enforcement Officer 	14 	1989-C-267 	03-27-1989 	C-935 	04-27-1989 
Senior Communications Officer 	11 	1987-C-69 	06-02-1987 		
Senior Community Relations Specialist 	25 	1990-McC-26 			
Senior Community Relations Specialist, Bilingual in Spanish and English 	25 	1990-McC-28 	04-16-1990 	McC-141 	05-09-1990 
Senior Community Service Planner 	14 	1989-C-272 	03-29-1989 	C-943 	04-28-1989 
Senior Construction Inspector 				93-096 	08-18-1993 
Senior Customer Service Representative 	14 	2007-007 	04-05-2007 	07-078 	05-09-2007 
Senior Engineer Civil 	45 	2017-013 
07-06-2017 	17-084 
06-28-2017 
Senior Engineer Traffic 	12 	1991-McC-85 	09-09-1991 	McC-374 	10-09-1991 
Senior Engineering Clerk 	11 	1988-C-224 			
Senior Environmental Health Specialist (Hazardous Substances) 				93-128 	10-27-1993 
Senior Equipment Operator 	18 	1988-C-167 			
Senior Identification Officer 	Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:69A-43a 			05-043 	04-27-2005 
Senior Landscape Architect 	33 	2016-007 
07-05-2016 	16-101 
06-29-2016 
Senior Loan Advisor 	Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:69A-43a 			08-040 	04-09-2008 
Senior Maintenance Repairer Fire Equipment 	7 	1997-009 	02-26-1997 		
Senior Microbiologist 	20 	1989-C-271 			
Senior Permit Clerk 	15 	2007-003 	03-02-2007 	07-046 	03-28-2007 
Senior Planner P/T 	7.50-15.00 	1988-C-205 			
Senior Planner Economic Development P/T 	10.00-18.00 	1987-C-57 1988-C-205 			
Senior Planning Aide 	14 	2006-004 	04-18-2006 	06-058 	05-10-2006 
Senior Plumbing Inspector 	24 	1988-C-206 	03-18-1988 		
Senior Police Records Clerk 	7 	S-057 	08-31-1994 	94-090 	09-14-1994 
Senior Program Analyst 	24 	2007-006 	04-03-2007 	07-070 	04-25-2007 
Senior Program Monitor 	19 	2006-009 	09-20-2006 	06-117 	10-11-2006 
Senior Public Safety Telecommunicator 	14 	2000-009 	06-08-2000 	00-069 	06-28-2000 
Senior Pump Station Operator 	25 	1990-McC-33 1990-McC-159 	06-27-1990 		
Senior Research Assistant 	20 	1987-C-112 	08-03-1987 		
Senior Research Assistant P/T 	9.10-10.00 	1986-C-7 	06-19-1986 		
Senior Registered Environmental Health Specialist, Public Health 	8 	1986-C-2 
S-069 
2009-001 	02-18-1986 
12-20-1994 
04-22-2009 	09-045 	 04-22-2009 
Senior Sanitation Inspector 	14 	1989-C-283 	06-05-1989 		
Senior System Analyst 	26 	1991-McC-84 	09-09-1991 	McC-374 	10-09-1991 
Senior Training Technician 	28 	1993-S-014 	09-03-1993 	93-036 	05-19-1993 
Senior Statistical Typist 	8 	1989-C-269 	03-29-1989 	C-940 	04-27-1989 
Senior Water Inspector 	25 	1987-C-135 	09-20-1987 		
Service charge for Jersey City School Board shared 		2017-007 
04-05-2017 		
Severance Incentive Program, compensation for 		96-083 	03-05-1996 		
Sewer Inspector Bilingual in Spanish and English 	9 	1988-C-223 	07-13-1988 		
Sexual Harassment 		1994-S-032 
1998-015 
04-001 
2006-008 	02-02-1994 04-28-1998 01-15-2004 09-25-2006 		
Sidewalk Inspector/ Street Inspector 	13 	1987-C-85 	06-03-1987 		
Sign Maker 2 	18 	2007-019 	11-07-2007 	07-170 	10-24-2007 
Social Caseworker Trainee 	8 	1991-McC-89 	10-15-1991 	McC-392 	11-06-1991 
Social Caseworker Aide 	11 			92-017 	03-25-1992 
Social Caseworker Supervisor 	17 	1987-C-117 	08-18-1987 		
Social Caseworker Supervisor Bilingual in Spanish and English 	17 	1987-C-117 	08-18-1987 		
Social Service Assistant 	8 	1991-McC-66 	03-20-1991 	McC-303 	04-10-1991 
Social Service Technician 	9 	2017-017 
12-01-2017 	17-151 
11-29-2017 
Special Assistant to Finance Director 	FX: 45,000 	1987-C-118 	08-18-1987 		
Special Law Enforcement Officer 	[2] 
		13-013 
02-27-2013 
Special Service Assistant P/T 	10.00-18.00 	1987-C-57 1988-C-205 	05-18-1988 		
Statistical Typist 	6 	1988-C-208 	05-18-1988 		
Storekeeper P/T 	3.35-13.75 	1987-C-57 1988-C-205 	05-18-1988 		
Street Permit Clerk 	12 	1987-C-109 	06-16-1987 		
Student Assistant 	2 	2007-019 	11-07-2007 	07-170 	10-24-2007 
Student Assistant (Seasonal High School) P/T 	3.35-13.75 	1986-C-6 	06-19-1986 		
Summit and Newark Avenue, renaming of southwest corner 		1988-C-221 	06-13-1988 		
Superintendent of Watershed 	21 	1990-McC-18 	01-24-1990 		
Superintendent, Water Distribution and Aqueduct Maintenance 	27 	1988-C-186 	02-22-1988 		
Supervising Buyer 	18 	1987-C-133 	09-20-1987 		
Supervising Clerk Typist, Bilingual in Spanish and English 	Withdrawn 	93-109 	09-22-1993 		
Supervising Clerk P/T 	4.50-15.75 	1987-C-57 1988-C-205 	05-18-1988 		
Supervising Electronic Repairer 	27 	1988-C-237 	10-26-1988 		
Supervising Engineer 	32 	1986-C-30 	10-21-1986 		
Supervising Engineer P/T 	15.00-27.00 	1987-C-57 1988-C-205 	05-18-1988 		
Supervising Equipment Operator 	Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:69A-43a 			08-112 	08-20-2008 
Supervising Fire and Ambulance Dispatcher 	22 	2000-007 	02-02-2000 	99-024 	02-24-1999 
Supervising Health Insurance Benefits Clerk 	14 	2011-007 	10-17-2011 	11-120 	10-12-2011 
Supervising Heavy Equipment Operator 	26 	2017-015 
10-02-2017 	17-121 
09-27-2017 
Supervising Legal Stenographer 	21 	1990-McC-11 	11-08-1989 		
Supervising Lifeguard 	10 	2017-14 
09-15-2017 	17-116 
09-13-2017 
Supervising Parking Enforcement Officer 	18 	2018-013 
06-15-2018 	18-054 
06-13-2018 
Supervising Planner 	30 	1991-McC-79 	06-26-1991 		
Supervising Principal Clerk 	14 	1991-McC-88 	10-15-1991 	McC-392 	11-06-1991 
Supervising Program Development Specialist Minority and Business Concern 	14,800-44,751 	1991-McC-76 	04-29-1991 		
Supervising Public Safety Telecommunicator 	27 	2000-009 
2017-012 
06-08-2000 
06-16-2017 	00-069 
17-066 
06-28-2000 
06-14-2017 
Supervising Representative Citizen Complaints 	25 	1998-019 	08-03-1998 	96-112 	11-26-1996 
Supervising Road Inspector 	19 	2006-010 	10-26-2006 	06-137 	11-21-2006 
Supervising School Traffic Guard 		93-110 	09-22-1993 		
Supervising Security Guard 	7 	1993-S-027 	12-22-1993 	93-149 	01-12-1994 12-16-1993 
Supervising Security Systems Operator 	23 	2007-012 	07-23-2007 	07-143 	08-22-2007 
Supervising Towing Operations 	7 	2017-015 
10-02-2017 	17-121 
09-27-2017 
Supervising Traffic Investigator 	15 	1992-022 	06-17-1992 	92-082 	07-22-1992 
Supervising Water Gatehouse Operator 	8 	1987-C-51 	02-24-1987 		
Supervising of Accounts 	19 	1989-C-259 	01-03-1989 		
Supervising of Aqueduct Maintenance and Repairer 	18 	1990-McC-48 	10-04-1990 		
Supervising of Aqueduct Maintenance and Repairs 	25 	1988-C-187 	02-22-1988 		
Supervising Program Analyst 	22 	2016-006 
07-05-2016 	16-100 
06-29-2016 
Supervisor Billing and Collection/Supervisor of Water Meter Readers 	8 	1992-001.1 	03-18-1982 	92-027 	04-08-1992 
Supervisor Customer Service 	25 	2015-004 
07-20-2015 	15-090 
07-15-2015 
Supervisor of Deaf Program P/T 	7.50-12.50 	1988-C-205 	05-18-1988 		
Supervisor Demolition 	20 	1987-C-70 	06-02-1987 		
Supervisor Job Development 	25 	1990-McC-41 	07-20-1990 		
Supervisor Parks 	15 	1992-034 	07-23-1992 	92-073 	06-24-1992 
Supervisor of Pumping, Generating Operations 	27 	1992-006 	03-18-1992 		
Supervisor, Senior Citizen Outreach and Referral Plan 	18 	1987-C-81 	06-03-1987 		
Supervisor Signal System 	13 	1990-McC-25 	04-16-1990 	McC-138 	05-09-1990 
Supervisor of Tax Services 	26 	1987-C-71 1988-C-247 	10-26-1988 		
Supervisor, Traffic Investigation 	15 	1988-C-228 	07-13-1988 		
Supervisor Trees 	20 	1992-005 	03-18-1992 		
Supervisor of Water and Sewage Billings and Collections 		1986-C-35 1987-C-71 	06-02-1986 	McC-40 	10-11-1989 
Supervisor of Water Distribution 	26 	1990-McC-47 	10-04-1990 		
Supervisor of Water Meter Reading 	8 	1992-035 	07-23-1992 	92-073 	06-24-1992 
Supervisor Water Meter Repair 		1993-089 	09-08-1993 	93-089 	08-18-1993 
Supervisory Assistants Corporation Counsel 	50,000-65,000 	1989-McC-8 	08-22-1989 		
Systems Analyst 	33 	1988-C-190 	02-22-1988 		
Tax Assessor 	100,000 	1986-C-25 1995-077 2003-002 	09-22-1986 08-10-1995 07-30-2003 	97-068 05-070 	09-24-1997 06-22-2005 
Tax Collector 	100,000 [3] 
1987-C-92 1991-McC-75 	04-29-1991 	07-163 
14-157 
10-10-2007 
12-17-2014 
Tax exemptions, long-term policy 		S-039 1997-020 
2010-001 
2013-004 
2015-007 
10-20-1997 
03-31-2010 
12-24-2013 
09-03-2015 		
Tax Research Examiner and Investigator 	20 	1987-C-162 	11-06-1987 		
Tax Searcher P/T 	4.50-12.50 	1988-C-205 	05-18-1988 		
Teacher aide 	Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:69A-43a 			05-051 	05-18-2005 
Technical Assistant 3 	21 	2009-009 	11-10-2009 	09-113 	11-10-2009 
Technical Asst. Management Information Systems 	10 	2008-2 	12-20-2007 	08-002 	01-23-2008 
Technician, Management Information System 	9 	2004-006 	12-02-2004 	04-144 	01-12-2004 
Telecommunications Systems Analyst 	16 	1993-S-024 1990-McC-49 	12-16-1993 	McC-224 	11-20-1990 
Temporary Employees 		2002-016 	12-19-2002 		
Telephones (car phones assignment) 		1992-044 	10-15-1992 		
Tenant Adviser 	12 	1988-C-214 	05-18-1988 		
Third Assistant Corporation Counsel 				93-131 	10-27-1993 
Ticket Taker (Seasonal) P/T 	17.00 per session 	1986-C-6 	06-19-1986 		
Traffic Enumerator 	4 	1990-McC-32 	5-23-1990 	McC-159 	06-27-1990 
Traffic Maintenance Supervisor 	26 	1989-C-260 	01-03-1989 		
Training Officer (Law Enforcement) Police Department 		1990-McC-57 	11-15-1990 	McC-239 	12-19-1990 
Training Officer (Part-Time) 	18 	2008-005 	05-27-2008 	08-080 	06-25-2008 
Training Technician 				96-050 	05-22-1996 
Tree Superintendent 	21 	1992-004 	03-18-1992 		
Truck Driver Heavy 	7 	1990-McC-31 	05-23-1990 	McC-159 	06-27-1990 
Union classified and unclassified employees providing overtime snow removal from Jan. 23—25, 2016 		2016-002 
02-05-2016 		
Urban Renewal Technician 			03-09-1994 	94-015 	03-23-1994 
Vacation leave and other benefits for nonunion classified and unclassified managerial personnel 		1998-012 	03-02-1998 	92-115 	09-16-1992 
Vehicles: prohibiting taking city vehicles to employee's home 		1992-045 	10-15-1992 		
Veterans' Advisory Task Force 		2018-005 
03-28-2018 		
Violence prevention task force 		2019-004 
05-07-2019 		
Vision Zero initiative 		2018-001 
2018-007 
2019-007 
02-09-2018 
04-04-2018 
06-14-2019 		
Voter Registration Program, Nonpartisan 		1987-C-60 	03-27-1987 		
Water Inspector 	13 	1987-C-84 	06-03-1987 		
Water Meter Reader/Water Meter Repairer 	5 	1993-S-023 	12-16-1993 	93-152 	01-12-1994 
Water Repairer P/T 	4.00-11.50 	1986-C-7 1988-C-205 	05-18-1988 		
Watershed Inspector 	10 	1990-McC-20 			
Water Superintendent 	40 	1989-C-262 	03-14-1989 		
Welfare Supervisor 		15 	1988-C-170 1991-McC-82 	07-22-1991 	
Welfare Investigator 				McC-64 	11-08-1989 
Welfare Investigator Spanish 				McC-64 	11-08-1989 
WIC Peer Counselor 	6 	2014-013 
11-25-2014 	14-143 
11-25-2014 
Work First New Jersey Program, nondisplacement of incumbent city employees 		1997-018 	04-21-1997 		
Youth Aide P/T 	3.35-5.00 	1986-C-6 	06-19-1986 		
Youth Opportunity Coordinator 	35 	2016-009 
08-22-2016 	16-114 
08-17-2016 
 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Note— Effective to January 1, 2015 pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:14-179 and N.J.S.A. 40:69A-60.7 the base salary of the Chief of Police is hereby set at one hundred seventy-three thousand four hundred fourteen dollars ($173,414.00) per year or the identical base salary as the Fire Chief, whichever is greater. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-179 the annual base salary shall be adjusted to ensure that his/her base salary remains higher than the highest base salary of the next ranking officer in command below the Chief of Police. 

--- (2) --- 
Note— Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:69A-43a. 

--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-157 stipulates: 
1. The Tax Collector's base salary shall be increased by $10,000 for as long as the duties and responsibilities related to the financial management and monitoring of tax abatements remain within the tax collector's office. 
2. In the event these additional functions are assigned to another person and office the base salary shall revert back to the current salary plus any Consumer Price Index (CPI) increase received pursuant to Sec. 53-6(D) of the Municipal Code. 
 
Chapter A352 - ENABLING ORDINANCES 
The following is a listing of enabling ordinances (special ordinances) enacted since January 1, 1989. The complete text of each ordinance is on file in the Office of the City Clerk. 
Table 1.   Bond Ordinances 
Table 2.   Franchises and Vacations 
Table 3.   Land Acquisitions and Transfers 
Table 4.   Lease and Easement Agreements 
Table 5.   Redevelopment Plans 
Table 6.   Tax Abatements/Urban Renewals (Limited Dividend) 
Table 7.   Designations and Dedications of Streets and Public Places 
TABLE 1. BOND ORDINANCES 
Ord. No. 	Subject Matter 	Date of Adoption 
C-917 	Bond to authorize acquisition of real property 	04-13-1989 
C-918 	Bond to authorize acquisition of equipment for water distribution 	03-23-1989 
C-919 	Bond to authorize improvement of various public streets 	03-23-1989 
C-939 	Bond to appropriate unused bond proceeds for Police Department equipment 	04-13-1989 
C-958 	Bond to appropriate unused bond proceeds to fire engine overhaul 	05-11-1989 
C-980 	Bond to authorize acquisition of water distribution equipment 	05-25-1989 
C-981 	Bond to rescind Ord. Nos. C-939 and C-958 	05-25-1989 
C-987 	Bond to appropriate funds for reconstruction of A. Harry Moore School 	06-22-1989 
C-988 	Bond to appropriate funds for construction of School No. 17 	05-25-1989 
C-989 	Bond to appropriate funds for reconstruction of School No. 16 	05-25-1989 
C-990 	Bond to appropriate funds for reconstruction of School No. 32 	05-25-1989 
C-991 	Bond to appropriate funds for asbestos removal in public school buildings 	06-22-1989 
C-996 	Bond to authorize improvement of various traffic signal systems 	06-22-1989 
McC-6 	Bond to appropriate funds for improvement of sewer system 	09-13-1989 
McC-89 	Bond to authorize acquisition of medical equipment 	12-27-1989 
McC-93 	Bond to authorize appropriation of funds for payment of tax refunds due 	01-24-1990 
McC-96 	Bond to authorize public improvements in Greenville Yard Area 	01-24-1990 
McC-128 	Bond to authorize improvements to water distribution system 	04-25-1990 
McC-129 	Bond to authorize acquisition of replacement equipment and new automotive vehicles 	04-25-1990 
McC-181 	Additional appropriation for improvement of portion of Henderson Street 	07-18-1990 
McC-182 	Bond appropriating sums received pursuant to Neighborhood Preservation Balanced Housing Program 	07-18-1990 
McC-190 	Bond appropriating funds for payment of tax refunds due 	07-13-1990 
McC-196 	Bond to authorize various street improvements 	09-12-1990 
McC-229 	Bond to amend Ord. No. McC-129 	11-20-1990 
McC-230 	Bond to amend Ord. No. McC-182 	11-20-1990 
McC-242 	Bond to appropriate funds for reconstruction of City Hall 	12-19-1990 
McC-268 	Bond to authorize acquisition and reconstruction of Jackson Valley site 	02-27-1991 
McC-313 	Bond to authorize acquisition of real property and making of various public improvements 	07-17-1991 
McC-327 	Bond to authorize appropriations made in transition year budget 	05-22-1991 
McC-364 	Bond to authorize appropriations for reconstruction of School No. 23 	12-26-1991 
McC-365 	Bond to authorize appropriations for construction of School No. 28 	12-26-1991 
McC-366 	Bond to appropriating funds for reconstruction of Lincoln High School 	12-26-1991 
McC-367 	Bond appropriating funds for improvements at Ferris High School 	12-26-1991 
McC-368 	Bond appropriating funds for improvements at School Nos. 15, 25 and 14 	12-26-1991 
McC-369 	Bond appropriating funds for reconstruction of Snyder High School 	12-26-1991 
McC-371 	Bond appropriating funds for repayment of federal asbestos loan 	12-26-1991 
McC-372 	Bond appropriating funds for construction of School No. 17 	12-26-1991 
McC-398 	Bond appropriating sums received pursuant to Neighborhood Preservation Balanced Housing Program 	01-08-1992 
McC-413 	Amendment of Ord. No. McC-182 	02-11-1992 
McC-417 	Bond to authorize improvement of Grand Street 	02-26-1992 
McC-418 	Bond to authorize improvement of Arlington Avenue 	02-26-1992 
92-014 	Bond to authorize improvement of Jersey Avenue 	03-11-1992 
92-029 	Bond to authorize improvement of various traffic signal systems 	04-08-1992 
92-040 	Bond to authorize acquisition of new aerial ladder unit for the Fire Department 	05-13-1992 
92-076 	Cancellation of unused or unfunded appropriations 	06-24-1992 
92-089 	Refunding bond ordinance for payment of tax refunds due 	07-22-1992 
92-102 	Bond to authorize acquisition of Loews Theatre property 	09-01-1992 
92-112 	Appropriation of unused bond proceeds 	08-19-1992 
92-113 	Bond to authorize improvements to water supply system 	08-19-1992 
92-114 	Bond to authorize improvements to water supply system 	08-19-1992 
92-135 	Appropriation from capital improvement fund to Parking Authority 	10-14-1992 
92-176 	Amendment of Ord. No. McC-398 	12-09-1992 
93-053 	Bond to authorize various public improvements 	05-27-1993 
93-060 	Refunding bond for payment of tax refunds due 	06-09-1993 
93-062 	Bond to authorize improvement of Wilkinson Avenue Park and Muhammad Ali Park 	06-23-1993 
93-065 	Bond to authorize water capital improvements 	06-23-1993 
94-018 	Bond to authorize various public improvements 	04-13-1994 
94-023 	Bond to authorize various public improvements 	04-13-1994 
94-048 	Bond to authorize payment of tax refunds 	06-22-1994 
94-057 	Bond to authorize payment of tax refunds 	06-22-1994 
94-097 	Refunding bond ordinance to authorize the appropriation of not to exceed $1,180,000 and to authorize the issuance of not to exceed $1,180,000 maturing value of refunding bonds or notes of the City, to refund a portion of the outstanding balance of urban renewal bonds of said City, to authorize the execution of agreements to facilitate such refunding plan and to finance the cost of issuing such refunding bonds on behalf of said City and to provide for the issuance of such refunding bonds 	06-28-1995 
94-098 	Refunding bond ordinance to authorize the appropriation of not to exceed $1,180,000 and to authorize the issuance of not to exceed $92,555,000 maturing value of refunding bonds or notes of the City, to refund a portion of the outstanding balance of fiscal year adjustment bonds of said City, to authorize the execution of agreements to facilitate such refunding plan and to finance the cost of issuing such refunding bonds on behalf of said City and to provide for the issuance of such refunding bonds 	06-28-1995 
94-099 	Refunding bond ordinance to authorize the appropriation of not to exceed $40,015,000 and to authorize the issuance of not to exceed $40,015,000 maturing value of refunding bonds or notes of the City, to refund a portion of the outstanding balance of water bonds of said City, to authorize the execution of agreements to facilitate such refunding bonds on behalf of said City, and to provide for the issuance of such refunding bonds 	06-28-1995 
94-100 	Refunding bond ordinance to authorize the appropriation of not to exceed $83,420,000 and to authorize the issuance of not to exceed $83,420,000 maturing value of school refunding bonds or notes of the City, to refund a portion of the outstanding balance of school bonds of said City to authorize the execution of agreements to facilitate such school bonds refunding plan and to finance the cost of issuing such school refunding bond on behalf of said City, and to provide for the issuance of such school refunding bonds 	06-28-1995 
94-101 	Refunding bond ordinance to authorize the appropriation of not to exceed $31,745,000 and to authorize the issuance of not to exceed $31,745,000 maturing value of refunding bonds or notes of the City, to refund a portion of the outstanding balance of general and public improvement bonds of said City, to authorize the execution of agreements to facilitate such refunding plan and to finance the cost of issuing such refunding bonds on behalf of said City, and to provide for the issuance of such refunding bonds 	06-28-1995 
94-122 	Amendment of Ord. No. McC-182 	12-28-1994 
94-123 	Bond to authorize acquisition of real property and making of various public improvements 	01-11-1995 
94-124 	Bond to authorize acquisition of real property and making of various public improvements 	01-11-1995 
94-125 	Amendment of Ord. No. McC-372 	05-24-1995 
94-126 	Bond appropriating funds for the installation of new emergency and exit lighting in school buildings 	05-24-1995 
94-127 	Bond appropriating funds for the fuel tank remediation program at all school buildings 	05-24-1995 
94-128 	Bond appropriating funds for the cost of identifying a suitable site for the location and construction of a new building for a new academic high school 	05-24-1995 
94-129 	Bond appropriating funds for the installation of a new roofing system at P.S. No. 9, Kennedy School, Lincoln High School, Ferris High School and Snyder High School Annex 	05-24-1995 
94-130 	Bond appropriating funds for new windows, balances and security screens in all school buildings 	05-24-1995 
94-131 	Bond appropriating funds for the reconstruction, remodeling, alteration or major repair of P.S. No. 11, Martin Luther King, Jr. School 	05-24-1995 
94-132 	Bond appropriating funds for the installation of public address systems in school buildings 	05-24-1995 
94-133 	Bond appropriating funds for the cost of identifying and acquiring property for a suitable site for the location and construction of a new elementary school to replace P.S. No. 3 	05-24-1995 
94-134 	Bond appropriating funds for the cost of the upgrade of fire alarm systems and replacement of outdated pneumatic fire alarm systems in school buildings 	05-24-1995 
94-135 	Bond appropriating funds for the cost of the acquisition and construction of five portable classroom units for pre-kindergarten classes 	05-24-1995 
95-051 	Bond appropriating funds for the payment of tax refunds due and owing from the city on or before June 30, 1995 	06-14-1995 
96-015 	Bond ordinance authorizing the acquisition of additional and replacement equipment and new automotive vehicles 	03-13-1996 
96-016 	Bond ordinance authorizing the making of various public improvements and the acquisition of additional equipment and machinery for the water distribution, supply and transmission system of the city 	03-13-1996 
96-018 	Bond ordinance to pay for the reconstruction, remodeling, alteration and major repair of Public School No. 32 	03-13-1996 
96-053 	Bond ordinance to amend purposes (K) and (L) of Section 3 of Ord. No. 94-123, without changing the appropriations, down payments or the amounts of obligations authorized by said Ord. No. 94-123 	05-22-1996 
96-068 	Refunding bond ordinance for the payment of tax refunds due and owing from the city 	06-26-1996 
96-098 	Bond ordinance authorizing the acquisition of real property, the making of various public improvements and the acquisition of additional and replacement equipment and new automotive vehicles 	10-09-1996 
96-111 	Bond ordinance authorizing the acquisition and renovation of real property 	11-13-1996 
97-004 	Bond ordinance 	02-11-1998 
97-005 	Bond ordinance 	04-22-1998 
97-006 	Bond appropriating funds for the acquisition and improvement of Caven Point Recreation Facility, a new elementary school and new middle school in the P.S. 3 area and a new middle school in the Heights Area 	06-11-1997 
97-028 	Bond appropriating funds for the acquisition and improvement of 89-101 Cambridge Avenue for lease to the Jersey City Parking Authority 	04-09-1997 
97-039 	Bond appropriating unused proceeds of serial bonds to make additional appropriations to provide for improvements to public parks, acquisition of new automotive vehicles and equipment and acquisition and installation of additional and replacement management information equipment 	06-11-1997 
97-040 	Refunding bond appropriating funds for the payment of real property tax refunds due and owing from the city on or before June 30, 1997, and providing for the issuance of refunding bonds 	06-11-1997 
97-043 	Canceling unused and unfunded bonds and amending Ord. Nos. S-160, S-276, S-313, S-587, MC-81, MC-244, MC-384, MC-392, MC-659, MC-815, McC-866, McC-967, C-211, C-420, C-518, C-522, C-733, C-791, C-917, McC-96, McC-129, McC-242, 92-112, 313, 93-053, 94-018, 94-123 and McC-89 	06-25-1997 
97-094 	Bond authorizing the acquisition of real property, the making of various public improvements and the acquisition of additional equipment and machinery for the water supply, treatment, transmission and distribution system 	02-11-1998 
98-003 	Bond authorizing the acquisition of real property, the making of various public improvements and the acquisition of additional and replacement equipment and new automotive vehicles 	02-11-1998 
98-006 	Bond authorizing the acquisition of real property, the making of various public improvements and the acquisition of additional and replacement equipment 	03-11-1998 
98-031 	Special emergency appropriation for new comprehensive Master Plan 	04-08-1998 
98-047 	Bond authorizing assistance for the Jersey City Housing Authority 	05-13-1998 
98-049 	Refunding bond ordinance to authorize appropriations by the city for the payment of real property tax appeal refunds due and owning from the city on or before June 30, 1998 	05-13-1998 
98-065 	Bond to abolish Jersey City Hydroelectric Utility Fund; cancels City Ordinance No. MC-82 	05-27-1998 
98-066 	Bond to cancel unused and unfunded authorizations to issue water bonds, and appropriating unused and unexpected proceeds of water bonds to water capital surplus 	05-27-1998 
98-157 	Bond ordinance to authorize the acquisition of real property, the making of various public improvements and the acquisition of additional and replacement equipment and new automotive vehicles in and for the city 	12-09-1998 
98-158 	Bond ordinance to authorize the acquisition of real property, the making of various public improvements and the acquisition of additional equipment and machinery for the water supply system 	12-09-1998 
99-066 	Refunding bond ordinance to authorize appropriations by the city for the payment of real property tax appeal refunds due and owing from the city on or before June 30, 1999 	05-12-1999 
99-097 	Bond ordinance to authorize the acquisition of real property, the making of various public improvements and the acquisition of additional equipment and machinery for the water supply, treatment, transmission and distribution system of the city 	08-18-1999 
99-171 	Bond ordinance appropriating funds to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency to implement the state Unsafe Building Demolition Program at the Flintkote Property in the Liberty Harbor North Redevelopment Project Area 	12-15-1999 
00-027 	Appropriate unused and unexpended proceeds of bonds to another capital purpose for the construction of Woodward Street from Grand to Johnson 	04-12-2000 
00-040 	Bond appropriating funds for acquisition of sites for preschool classes and programs and reconstruction of buildings for preschool classes and programs 	05-10-2000 
00-041 	Cancel unused and unfunded authorizations; appropriate and reappropriate unused and unexpended proceeds; appropriation to capital improvement fund; cancel certain grant appropriations 	05-10-2000 
00-050 	Refunding bond ordinance for payment of real property tax appeal refunds 	05-10-2000 
00-088 	Appropriation of unused and unexpended proceeds of bonds to another capital purpose for construction of and installation of original equipment in the new City Municipal Justice Complex 	07-19-2000 
00-092 	Bond ordinance to authorize the making of various public improvements to the water supply, transmission and distribution system 	09-27-2000 
00-139 	Bond ordinance to authorize the acquisition of real property, the making of various public improvements and the acquisition of additional and replacement equipment and automotive vehicles 	10-11-2000 
01-055 	Authorization of bond refund for authorization of appropriation of funds by the city for the payment of real estate property tax appeal refunds 	05-16-2001 
01-057 	Authorizes bond for the making of various public improvements to Greene Street as a local improvement in and for the city 	06-13-2001 
02-074 	Refund bond providing payment of amounts owing to others for taxes levied in and by the city, appropriating two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) and issuing a bond for said amount 	06-12-2002 
02-089 	Bond appropriating funds for general improvements 	See Ord. 02-104 
02-090 	Bond appropriating funds for general improvements 	11-13-2002 
02-091 	Refunding of all or a portion of the city's fiscal year adjustment bonds 	11-13-2002 
02-104 	Bond appropriating funds for general improvements 	11-13-2002 
02-112 	Bond appropriating funds to the Parking Authority 	Defeated 
11-13-2002 
02-113 	Appropriating funds for improvement bonds 	08-13-2003 
02-132 	Refunding unfunded pension liabilities 	11-26-2002 
03-014 	Refunding unfunded pension liabilities 	11-26-2002 
03-123 	Refunding bonds for general obligations 	Defeated 
12-03-2003 
03-124 	Refunding bonds for general obligations 	Never acted upon 
03-129 	Bond appropriating funds to the Parking Authority 	Withdrawn 
09-10-2003 
03-130 	Bond appropriating funds for the acquisition of equipment for the Jersey City Incinerator Authority 	09-24-2003 
04-021 	Re-appropriating funds for the rehabilitation of Apple Tree House 	03-10-2004 
04-041 	Refunding bond for general obligations 	Defeated 
03-24-2004 
04-091 	Refunding of all or a portion of the city's fiscal year adjustment bonds 	09-08-2004 
04-092 	Refunding of all or a portion of the Series 1993 Water Bonds, Series 1997 Water Bonds and Series 2003B Water Bonds 	09-08-2004 
04-093 	Refunding of all or a portion of the Series 1996A Refunding Bonds, Series 1997 Bonds, Series 1999A Bonds, Series 1999B Bonds, Series 2001 Bonds, Series 2002A Refunding Bonds, Series 2003 Bonds and Series 2003B Bonds 	09-08-2004 
05-025 	Reappropriating $1,841,154.96 proceeds of obligations not needed for their original purposes 	03-23-2005 
05-038 	Providing for various capital improvement and appropriating $26,135,000, therefor, and providing for the issuance of $24,875,000 in general improvement bonds or notes of the City of Jersey City to finance the same 	04-13-2005 
05-039 	Providing for various public improvements to the water supply, transmission and distribution system in and for the City of Jersey City and appropriating $5,000,000, therefor, and providing for the issuance of $5,000,000 in general improvement bonds or notes of the City of Jersey City to finance the same 	04-13-2005 
05-040 	Refunding bond ordinance providing for the refunding of all or a portion of various series of city bonds, appropriating an amount not exceeding $37,500,000 therefor and authorizing the issuance of not to exceed $37,500,00 school refunding bonds of the city of Jersey City for financing the cost thereof 	04-13-2005 
05-068 	Refunding bond ordinance providing for payment of amounts owing to others for taxes levied in and by the city, appropriating $7,000,000 therefor, and authorizing the issuance of $7,000,000 bonds or notes of the city for financing the cost thereof 	04-13-2005 
06-007 	Refunding bonds for general obligations 	02-22-2006 
06-057 	Providing for payment of amounts owing to others for taxes levied in and by the City of Jersey City, in the County of Hudson, New Jersey, appropriating $4,000,000 therefore and authorizing the issuance of $4,000,000 Bonds or Notes of the City of Jersey City for financing the cost thereof 	05-10-2006 
06-106 	Providing for various capital improvements for the City of Jersey City and appropriating $33,780,000 therefor, and providing for the issuance of $32,163,000 in general improvement bonds or notes of the City of Jersey City to finance the same 	09-13-2006 
06-107 	Providing for various public improvements to the water supply, transmission and distribution system in and for the City of Jersey City and appropriating $5,000,000 therefor, and providing for the issuance of $5,000,000 in general improvement bonds or notes of the City of Jersey City to finance the same 	09-13-2006 
06-167 	Authorizing the guaranty of not exceeding $19,000,000 aggregate principal amount of bonds of the Parking Authority of the City of Jersey City 	Withdrawn 
12-13-2006 
07-043 	Providing for the refunding of all or a portion of various series of city bonds appropriating an amount not exceeding $17,500,000 therefor and authorizing the issuance of not to exceed $17,500,000 water refunding bonds of the City of Jersey City for financing the cost thereof 	03-14-2007 
07-044 	Providing for the refunding of all or a portion of various series of city bonds appropriating an amount not exceeding $52,500,000 therefor and authorizing the issuance of not to exceed $52,500,000 general improvement refunding bonds of the City of Jersey City for financing the cost thereof 	03-14-2007 
07-045 	Providing for the refunding of all or a portion of various series of city bonds appropriating an amount not exceeding $14,000,000 therefor and authorizing the issuance of not to exceed $14,000,000 school refunding bonds of the City of Jersey City for financing the cost thereof 	03-14-2007 
07-088 	Providing for payment of amounts owing to others for taxes levied in and by the City of Jersey City, in the County of Hudson, New Jersey, appropriating $3,500,000 therefor and authorizing the issuance of $3,500,000 bonds or notes of the City of Jersey City for financing the cost thereof 	05-09-2007 
07-162 	Providing for various capital improvements for the City of Jersey City and appropriating $27,555,000, therefore and providing for the bonds or notes of the City of Jersey City to finance the same 	09-22-2007 
08-050 	Refunding bond ordinance providing for payment of amounts owing to others for taxes levied in and by the city, appropriating $2,200,000 therefor, and authorizing the issuance of $2,200,000 bonds or notes of the city for financing the cost thereof 	05-14-2008 
08-148 	Providing for various capital improvements for the City of Jersey City and appropriating $41,925,000, therefor, and providing for the issuance of $39,928,555 in general improvement bonds or notes of the City of Jersey City to finance the same 	11-12-2008 
09-028 	Refunding bond ordinance providing for payment of amounts owing to others for taxes levied in and by the City of Jersey City, in the County of Hudson, New Jersey, appropriating $11,471,819 therefor and authorizing the issuance of $11,471,819 bonds or notes of the City of Jersey City for financing the cost there 	 03-25-2009 
09-068 	Bond ordinance providing for the acquisition of property located at 15 Linden Avenue East in and by the City of Jersey City, in the County of Hudson, New Jersey, appropriating $24,000,000.00 therefor and authorizing the issuance of $24,000,000.00 bonds or notes of the City to finance part of the cost thereof 	06-17-2009 
09-109 	Ordinance providing for the financing of the acquisition by the Parking Authority of the City of Jersey City of real property in the City and appropriating $4,600,000, therefor, and providing for the issuance of $4,380,950 in general improvement bonds or notes of the City of Jersey City to finance the same 	11-24-2009 
09-127 	Ordinance provided for the financing of a portion of the Newark Avenue Roadway Improvements Project by the City of Jersey City and appropriating $2,600,000 therefor, and providing for the issuance of $2,476,000 in general improvement bonds or notes of the City of Jersey City to finance the same 	12-16-2009 
10-031 	Bond ordinance providing for funding of temporary emergency appropriations in connection with the payment of amounts owing to other for taxes levied in and by the City 	03-10-2010 
10-081 	Providing for construction of new facility for use by Department of Public Works and Jersey City Incinerator Authority 	06-23-2010 
10-085 	Providing for acquisition of real property 	07-14-2010 
10-141 	Providing for a special emergency appropriation of $9,300,000 for payment of contractually required severance liabilities resulting from the layoff or retirement of city employees 	11-23-2010 
11-043 	Providing for a special emergency appropriation of $3,150,000 for the preparation and execution of a complete program of revaluation of real property for the use of the local assessor of the city 	04-13-2011 
11-116 	Refunding bond ordinance providing for payment of amounts owing to others for taxes levied in and by the City, appropriating $7,000,000 therefor and authorizing the issuance of $7,000,000 bonds or notes of the city for financing the cost thereof 	09-27-2011 
11-124 	Providing for a special emergency appropriation of $9,500,000 for the payment of contractually required severance liabilities resulting from the layoff or retirement of city employees 	10-26-2011 
11-126 	Refunding bond ordinance providing for the refunding of all or a portion of various series of city bonds, appropriating an amount not exceeding $13,750,000 therefor and authorizing the issuance of not to exceed $13,750,000 general improvement refunding bonds of the city for financing the cost thereof 	11-09-2011 
12-024 	Refunding bond ordinance, providing for the refunding of all or a portion of various series of city bonds, appropriating an amount not exceeding $28,000,000 therefor and authorizing the issuance of not to exceed $28,000,000 general obligation refunding bonds of the city for financing the cost thereof 	03-14-2012 
12-042 
Providing for various capital improvements for the city and appropriating $28,157,850, therefor, and providing for the issuance of $26,816,950 in general improvement bonds or notes of the city to finance the same 	04-11-2012 
12-123 
Refunding bond ordinance, providing for the refunding of all or a portion of various series of city bonds, appropriating an amount not exceeding $40,000,000 therefor and authorizing the issuance of not to exceed $40,000,000 general obligation refunding bonds of the city for financing the cost thereof 	10-10-2012 
13-031 
Providing for various capital improvements for the city and appropriating $10,400,000, therefor, and providing for the issuance of $10,400,000 in general improvement bonds or notes of the city to finance the same 	04-10-2013 
13-069 
Refunding bond ordinance, providing for the refunding of all or a portion of various series of City bonds, appropriating an amount not exceeding $53,500,000 therefor and authorizing the issuance of not to exceed $53,500,000 general improvement refunding bonds for financing the cost thereof 	06-19-2013 
13-070 
Refunding bond ordinance, providing for the refunding of all or a portion of various series of City bonds, appropriating an amount not exceeding $25,800,000 therefor and authorizing the issuance of not to exceed $25,800,000 school refunding bonds of the City for financing the cost thereof 	06-19-2013 
13-071 
Refunding bond ordinance, providing for the refunding of all or a portion of various series of City bonds, appropriating an amount not exceeding $10,700,000 therefor and authorizing the issuance of not to exceed $10,700,000 water refunding bonds of the City for financing the cost thereof 	06-19-2013 
13-091 
Reappropriating $1,009,628.89 proceeds of obligations not needed for their original purposes in order to provide for various capital improvements in and by the City 	09-11-2013 
13-100 
Reappropriating $784,600 proceeds of obligations not needed for their original purposes in order to provide for various capital improvements in and by the City 	10-09-2013 
13-118 
Providing for a special emergency appropriation of $9,500,000 for the payment of contractually required severance liabilities resulting from the retirement of city employees 	11-13-2013 
13-122 
Approving the execution of a financial agreement with Journal Square I Urban Renewal LLC and other applicable documents related to the authorization and issuance by the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency of not to exceed $10,000,000 redevelopment area bonds (non-recourse to the full faith and credit of the City) and determining various other matters in connection therewith 	11-13-2013 
13-123 
Approving the execution of a financial agreement with Journal Square II Urban Renewal LLC and other applicable documents related to the authorization and issuance by the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency of not to exceed $10,000,000 redevelopment area bonds (non-recourse to the full faith and credit of the City) and determining various other matters in connection therewith 	11-13-2013 
13-124 
Approving the execution of a financial agreement with Journal Square III Urban Renewal LLC and other applicable documents related to the authorization and issuance by the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency of not to exceed $10,000,000 redevelopment area bonds (non-recourse to the full faith and credit of the City) and determining various other matters in connection therewith 	11-13-2013 
14-022 
Cancelling certain funded appropriation balances heretofore provided for capital projects and re-appropriating such funded appropriation balances for other capital projects 	03-17-2014 
14-030 
Ordinance to exceed the municipal budget appropriation limits and to establish a cap bank ( N.J.S.A. 40A:4-45.14) 	04-17-2014 
14-131 
Bond ordinance providing for various 2014 capital improvements by and in the City and appropriating $36,450,000 therefor and authorizing the issuance of $34,714,280 in bonds or notes of the City to finance part of the cost thereof 	11-12-2014 
14-132 
Providing for a special emergency appropriation of $7,500,000 for the payment of contractually required severance liabilities resulting from the retirement of City employees 	10-22-2014 
14-166 
Reappropriating $214,285 proceeds of obligations not needed for their original purposes in order to provide for various capital improvements in and by the City 	01-14-2015 
15-007 
Refunding bond ordinance providing for (i) the refunding of certain outstanding qualified school bonds, Series 2007 A of the City dated February 23, 2007 to provide debt service savings, and (ii) authorizing the issuance of not to exceed $11,300,000 aggregate principal amount of school refunding bonds of the City to effect such refunding and appropriating the proceeds therefor 	03-11-2015 
15-008 
Refunding bond ordinance providing for (i) the refunding of certain outstanding qualified general improvement bonds, Series 2007 of the City dated December 7, 2007 to provide debt service savings, and (ii) authorizing the issuance of not to exceed $14,800,000 aggregate principal amount of general improvement refunding bonds of the City to effect such refunding and appropriating the proceeds therefor 	03-11-2015 
15-107 
Approving the execution of a financial agreement with GS FC Jersey City PEP I Urban Renewal LLC and other applicable documents related to the authorization and issuance by the City Redevelopment Agency of not to exceed $10,000,000.00 redevelopment area bonds (non-recourse to the full faith and credit of the City) and determining various other matters in connection therewith 	08-19-2015 
15-108 
Approving the execution of a financial agreement with GS FC Jersey City Pep 2 Urban Renewal LLC and other applicable documents related to the authorization and issuance by the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency of not to exceed $10,000,000.00 redevelopment area bonds (non-recourse to the full faith and credit of the City) and determining various other matters in connection therewith 	08-19-2015 
15-125 
Amending Ordinance No. 10-085 of the City finally adopted July 14, 2010, providing for the acquisition by the City of real property in the City and the construction of various improvements thereto and appropriating $7,700,000 therefor, and providing for the issuance of $7,333,300 in general improvement bonds or notes of the City of Jersey City to finance the same 	10-14-2015 
15-149 
Providing for a special emergency appropriation of $8,000,000 for the payment of contractually required severance liabilities resulting from the retirement of City employees 	11-10-2015 
16-018 
Refunding bond ordinance of the City of Jersey City, in the County of Hudson, State of New Jersey (the "City") providing for (i) the refunding of certain outstanding qualified general improvement bonds, Series 2009 and qualified general improvement bonds (parking authority project), Series 2009A of the City dated February 10, 2009 and December 30, 2009, respectively, to provide debt service savings, and (ii) authorizing the issuance of not to exceed $32,000,000 aggregate principal amount of general improvement refunding bonds of the City to effect such refunding and appropriating the proceeds therefor 	02-10-2016 
16-025 
Ordinance to exceed the municipal budget appropriation limits and to establish a cap bank ( N.J.S.A. 40A:4-45.14) 	02-24-2016 
16-066 
Reappropriating $2,054,353.47 of proceeds of obligations not needed for their original purposes in order to provide for various capital improvements in and by the City of Jersey City, in the County of Hudson, New Jersey 	04-27-2016 
16-083 
Providing for various capital improvements for the City of Jersey City and appropriating $29,858,755, therefor, and providing for the issuance of $28,436,905 in general improvement bonds or notes of the City of Jersey City to finance the same 	05-25-2016 
16-129 
Refunding bond ordinance of the City, providing for the refunding of all or a portion of the City's qualified water refunding bonds, Series 2007B, appropriating an amount not exceeding $4,500,000 therefor and authorizing the issuance of not to exceed $4,500,000 water refunding bonds of the City for financing the cost thereof 	09-14-2016 
16-130 
Providing for a special emergency appropriation of $5,000,000 for the preparation and execution of a complete program of revaluation of real property for the use of the local assessor of the City 	09-14-2016 
16-131 
Refunding bond ordinance of the City, providing for the refunding (on a crossover basis) of all or a portion of the City's general improvement bonds (Recovery Zone Economic Development Bonds-Direct Payment), Taxable Series 2010C appropriating an amount not exceeding $8,000,000 therefor and authorizing the issuance of not to exceed $8,000,000 general improvement refunding bonds of the City for financing the cost thereof 	09-14-2016 
16-132 
Refunding bond ordinance of the City, providing for the refunding of all or a portion of the City's qualified general improvement refunding bonds, Series 2007A, appropriating an amount not exceeding $19,500,000 therefor and authorizing the issuance of not to exceed $19,500,000 general improvement refunding bonds of the City for financing the cost thereof 	09-14-2016 
16-133 
Refunding bond ordinance of the City, providing for the refunding (on a crossover basis) of all or a portion of the City's general improvement bonds (Build America Bonds-Direct Payment), Taxable Series 2010B appropriating an amount not exceeding $82,000,000 therefor and authorizing the issuance of not to exceed $82,000,000 general improvement refunding bonds of the City for financing the cost thereof 	09-14-2016 
17-025 
Ordinance to exceed the municipal budget appropriation limits and to establish a cap bank ( N.J.S.A. 40A:4-45.14) 	03-27-2017 
17-098 
Reappropriating $4,000,000 of proceeds of obligations not needed for their original purposes in order to provide for various capital improvements in and by the City 	08-16-2017 
17-108 
Reappropriating $1,951,796.81 of proceeds of obligations not needed for their original purposes in order to provide for a capital improvement in and by the City 	09-13-2017 
17-146 
Providing for the acquisition of street sweepers and related expenses for the City and appropriating $2,600,000 therefor and providing for the issuance of $2,600,000 in bonds or notes of the City to finance the same 	10-25-2017 
18-008 
Appropriating $514,286.88 of proceeds of obligations not needed for their original purposes in order to provide funding for the renovation of a fire house in and by the City 	02-28-2018 
18-013 
Reappropriating $1,800,000 of proceeds of obligations not needed for their original purposes in order to provide for various capital improvements in and by the City 	02-28-2018 
18-018 
Ordinance to exceed the municipal budget appropriation limits and to establish a cap bank ( N.J.S.A. 40A:4-45.14) 	03-28-2018 
18-028 
Providing for a special emergency appropriation of $940,500 providing for the preparation of a master plan 	04-25-2018 
18-038 
Providing for various capital improvements for the City and appropriating $47,282,671, therefor, and providing for the issuance of $45,031,115 in general improvement bonds or notes of the City to finance the same 	05-09-2018 
18-113 
(1) Authorizing the City to enter into a real estate purchase agreement, environmental agreement, and all other documents necessary for and related to the purchase of certain real property, the demolition of certain structures, and the construction of certain infrastructure improvements within the Bayfront I Redevelopment Area (2) appropriating $170,000,000 therefor and authorizing the issuance of $170,000,000 bonds or notes of the City to finance the cost thereof and (3) authorizing the City to enter into a cooperation agreement with the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency to represent the City in the redevelopment of the Bayfront I Redevelopment Area 	10-10-2018 
18-114 
Providing for a special emergency appropriation of $14,500,000.00 for the payment of contractually required severance liabilities resulting from the retirement of city employees 	10-10-2018 
 
TABLE 2. FRANCHISES AND VACATIONS 
Ord. No. 	Subject Matter 	Date of Adoption 
C-976 	Franchise license granted to Teleport Communications 	05-25-1989 
92-030 	Vacation of portions of Montague Place, Ogden Avenue and Prospect Avenue 	04-15-1992 
92-061 	Franchise granted to J.P. Affordable Housing Holding, Co., Inc. 	06-10-1992 
92-062 	Franchise granted to J.P. Affordable Housing Holding, Co., Inc. 	06-10-1992 
92-099 	Franchise granted to 101 Hudson Urban Renewal Associates 	09-16-1992 
92-108 	Franchise granted to Academy Associates, L.P. 	08-19-1992 
92-181 	Vacation of Heckman Drive 	12-09-1992 
92-200 	Vacation of Hope Street and King Street 	01-13-1993 
93-004 	Franchise granted to J.P. Affordable Housing Co., Inc. 	02-03-1993 
93-005 	Franchise granted to J.P. Affordable Housing Co., Inc. 	02-03-1993 
93-021 	Vacation of Provost Street, Newport Redevelopment Area 	03-10-1993 
93-068 	Franchise granted to J.P. Affordable Housing Co., Inc. 	06-23-1993 
93-069 	Franchise granted to J.P. Affordable Housing Co., Inc. 	06-23-1993 
94-024 	Journal Square Special Improvement District 	04-13-1994 
94-049 	Franchise granted to J.P. Affordable Housing Co., Inc. 	06-22-1994 
94-050 	Franchise granted to J.P. Affordable Housing Co., Inc. 	06-22-1994 
94-051 	Franchise granted to J.P. Affordable Housing Co., Inc. 	06-22-1994 
94-063 	Vacation of portions of Barrow Street and Canal Street 	07-20-1994 
94-070 	Franchise granted to United States Postal Service 	08-17-1994 
94-108 	Vacation of a portion of Van Winkle Avenue 	11-22-1994 
95-008 	Vacation of a portion of Mercer Street 	02-22-1995 
95-017 	Franchise granted to FHC/LHC Housing Development Corp. (Victoria Gardens L.P.) 	03-08-1995 
95-063 	Vacation of portions of Pacific Avenue, Ash Street and Carbon Street 	07-19-1995 
95-094 	Vacating a portion of Communipaw Avenue 	10-11-1995 
95-095 	Vacating a portion of the sidewalk area adjoining Lots 70 through 87 in Block 359 for construction of a stone wall along the south side of tenth Street and the east side of Monmouth Street 	10-11-1995 
96-092 	Franchise granted to Penwal Affordable Housing Corporation 	09-25-1996 
97-051 	Franchise granted to Port Imperial Ferry Corp., dba NY Waterway to use and maintain certain areas or portions of Grand Street, Center Street, Monmouth Street, Montgomery Street and York Street for purposes of installing and maintaining 9 directional signs to its ferry terminal at the foot of Sussex Street on the Hudson River 	08-13-1997 
97-067 	Vacating the portion of Ege Avenue bounded by Martin Luther King Drive and Ocean Avenue and the portion of Hart Street bounded by Ege Avenue to the north and Kearney Avenue to the south 	09-24-1997 
98-012 	Franchise renewal granted to Comcast Cablevision of Jersey City, Inc. 	02-25-1998 
98-156 	Vacating portions of Canal Street, Gilchrist Street and Varick Street for construction of a new facility for the Jersey City Medical Center 	11-24-1998 
99-002 	Franchise portion of Ninth Street between Luis Munoz Marin Boulevard and Manila Avenue adjoining tax Block 217 	01-27-1999 
99-046 	Vacating portion of Greene Street north of Christopher Columbus Drive and conveying such vacated portion to Cali Harborside (Fee) Associates, L.P. 	04-14-1999 
99-057 	Franchise granted to Public School No. 2 Urban Renewal Company, L.L.C. to improve and use a portion of sidewalk area adjoining Block 245, Lots 7, 8 and 9 by installation and maintenance of a fence 	04-28-1999 
99-107 	Vacating portion of the public right-of-way in the lands in and under York, Street, Grand Street and Greene Street 	08-18-1999 
00-001 	Franchise granted to RCN Telecom Services of New Jersey, Inc., Open Video Systems Service Ordinance 	01-26-2000 
00-002 	Franchise granted to Metricom, Inc., to install radios and associated equipment on certain facilities located within public rights-of-way 	01-26-2000 
00-026 	Vacating portions of Manning Avenue, Woodward Street and Johnston Avenue and authorizing conveyance thereof to Jersey City Housing Authority 	04-12-2000 
00-044 	Vacating portions of public right-of-way in and under Sussex Street and Hudson Street 	04-26-2000 
00-045 	Permission granted to GSJC Land LLC to set aside and reserve a portion of lands in and under the rights-of-way of Essex Street, Hudson Street and Sussex Street 	04-26-2000 
00-064 	Permission granted to St. Peter's Preparatory School to make capital improvements to lands located within the Warren Street public right-of-way for the purpose of developing improvements to benefit the school and surrounding areas 	06-14-2000 
00-066 	Permission granted to Hudson Farmers Market to use the sidewalk area adjoining Lots 6A, 7A, 8 to 12, Tax Block 924, by maintaining a buffer strip with four feet from the iron fence for the purpose of seasonal display of retail items 	06-14-2000 
00-114 	Permission granted to GSJC Land LLC to set aside and reserve Essex Street, east of Hudson Street, to maintain a staging area for construction located on Block 3, Lot 28, and Block 4, Lot 28, on Hudson Street between Essex Street and Sussex Street 	09-13-2000 
01-002 	Vacating a portion of prior street consisting of 1,489 sq. ft. and dedicating portion of Lot 23, Block 2115 	01-24-2001 
01-003 	Vacation of Colden Street and Varick Street 	01-24-2001 
01-004 	Grants permission to Sienna Urban Renewal Associates to make improvements to a portion of lands located at 107-129 Montgomery Street within the sidewalk area of the Warren Street public right-of-way for the purpose of installing a canvas canopy 	01-24-2001 
01-035 	Grants permission to Louis Delforno and Ella Delforno to improve and use approximately two hundred square feet of sidewalk 	03-28-2001 
01-041 	Grants permission to 225 Newark Avenue for the installation and maintenance of entrance guardrails which encroach to the public right-of-way of First and Coles Streets and Newark Avenue 	03-28-2001 
01-050 	Permission granted to St. Joseph's Home for the Blind, Sisters of St. Joseph of Peace, its successors and assigns to improve use of sidewalk adjoining Lots 20, 21, 22, 23, 24 and S, Block 522 on the official tax assessment map 	04-25-2001 
01-051 	Grants permission to Kay 321 Washington Properties to make private improvements to a portion of lands located at 321-333 Washington Street, within the sidewalk area of the Morgan Street public right-of-way 	04-25-2001 
01-060 	Vacation of an area of 19th Street 	05-16-2001 
01-073 	Permission granted to GSJC and LLC, its successors and assigned to set aside and reserve in Essex Street, East of Hudson Street and area of approximately thirty feet by one hundred five feet, immediately adjacent to the building to be constructed on Block 3m Lot 28 for the purpose of providing and awning 	06-13-2001 
01-077 	Grants permission for 225 Newark Ave. to use 7.7 feet on First Street. 5.3 feet on Coles Street and 1.3 feet on Newark Ave 	06-27-2001 
01-078 	Execution of agreement with the Jersey City Medical Center to extend construction performance plans for the hospital 	06-27-2001 
01-084 	Grants permission to Raine Court Urban Renewal to improve and use sidewalk area adjoining Lot F, Block 68 on the official tax assessment map 	06-27-2001 
01-086 	Vacation of a portion of Canal Street consisting of approximately 8,758 square feet being located within the Liberty Harbor North Redevelopment Area 	06-27-2001 
01-104 	Grants permission to MSDW/GNOME, New Jersey Holdings, LP to make private improvements to a portion of lands located within the Dey Street and St. Paul's Avenue public right-of-way 	09-26-2001 
01-117 	Grants permission to Nam Hoon Chung and Yong Ja Chung to use land for the allowance of the encroachment of the building and cellar entrance onto the public right-of-way in the West Side Avenue 	10-24-2001 
01-130 	Vacation of Custer Avenue consisting of approximately 1,558 square feet 	11-28-2001 
01-135 	Grants partial vacation of Merritt Street along Lot 1, block 1380 	01-09-2002 
02-006 	Vacation of a portion of Caven Point Road 	02-13-2002 
02-009 	Grants permission to MSDW/GNOME, New Jersey Holdings, LP to make private improvements to a portion of lands located within the Dey Street and St. Paul's Avenue public right-of-way 	02-27-2002 
02-050 	Grants permission to Journal Square Realty Corp. to use approximately 20 feet by 5 feet of public walkway 	04-24-2002 
02-092 	Grants permission to Nick Van Ee to use portions of the sidewalk 	09-12-2002 
02-093 	Grants permission to Kitchen Café LLC to place flower/plant boxes on the sidewalk 	09-12-2002 
02-103 	Rescinds vacation Ord. No. 104 and 136, and accepts a dedication of streets, sidewalks and utilities from Colgate-Palmolive Company 	09-25-2002 
02-137 	Grants permission to A.T. Holdings, Inc., to make private improvements 	12-11-2002 
03-031 	Grants permission to GSJC Land LLC to install and maintain a series of bollards and security planters 	03-26-2003 
03-032 	Grants permission to GSJC Land LLC to install and maintain a series of bollards and security planters 	03-26-2003 
03-033 	Grants franchise to GSJC Land LLC for the installation, use and maintenance of a telecommunications conduit and a series of access manholes 	03-26-2003 
03-034 	Grants franchise to GSJC Land LLC for the installation, use and maintenance of a telecommunications conduit and a series of access manholes 	03-26-2003 
03-035 	Grants franchise to GSJC Land LLC for the installation, use and maintenance of a telecommunications conduit and a series of access manholes 	03-26-2003 
03-036 	Grants franchise to GSJC Land LLC for the installation, use and maintenance of a building wind screen 	03-26-2003 
03-037 	Grants permission to GSJC Land LLC to install, use and maintain a one hundred twenty-five foot (125') long, twenty-six foot (26') wide building canopy to be mounted thirty-five feet three inches (35'3?) over the main entrance to its office structure 	03-26-2003 
03-053 	Approving an amended and restated water services franchise and service agreement between the city and the Jersey City Municipal Utilities Authority 	04-23-2003 
03-062 	Grants permission to Green Tree Construction, Inc., for the installation and maintenance of entrance steps 	5-14-2003 
03-065 	Grants permission to Pesce Bros., LLC, to improve and use land area 	Withdrawn 
05-14-2003 
03-074 	Grants franchise ordinance to Champion Bagel Baking Corporation to permit outdoor eating in the city's sidewalk 	05-28-2003 
03-083 	Grants permission to make private improvements to a portion of land located at 304-306-308-310 Grand Street and 57 Bright Street 	06-11-2003 
03-088 	Vacation of a portion of Hudson Street right-of-way 	06-25-2003 
03-089 	Grants permission to GSJC Land LLC, to install, erect and maintain a slurry foundation wall and temporary screening fence along the Sussex Street right-of-way 	06-25-2003 
03-095 	Amends Schedule B to amended and restated Water Services Franchise and Service Agreement 	07-16-2003 
03-098 	Vacation of a portion of West Street 	Withdrawn 
07-02-2003 
03-122 	Vacation of an area of Lewis Avenue 	09-10-2003 
03-144 	Vacation of a portion of Hudson Street right-of-way 	10-08-2003 
03-148 	Vacation of a portion of West Street 	11-12-2003 
04-002 	Grants permission to Longstreet Associates, LLC to construct curbing and a planter bed along the public right-of-way of Maxwell Street 	Withdrawn 
01-14-2004 
04-056 	Grants permission to Greentree Construction, Inc to construct a curb for the public parking of vehicles on First Street 	Withdrawn 
05-12-04 
04-068 	Vacation of a portion of Sixth Street 	07-14-2004 
04-090 	Grants permission to 10-16 Liberty, LLC to install and maintain steps with banisters and steps to the cellar and bilco door hatch 	09-08-2004 
04-104 	Grants permission to Five Star Investment Group, LLC to improve and use approximately 155 square feet of sidewalk area adjoining the Lots 16 and 17, Block 206 	09-22-2004 
04-108 	Rescinds vacation Ord. No. G-57, and accepts a dedication of Sussex Street between Hudson Street and Greene Street, and sidewalks and utilities from Colgate-Palmolive Company 	09-22-2004 
04-140 	Vacating a portion of Van Winkle Avenue between Amelia Street and U.S. Route 1 & 9 Elevated Pulaski Skyway 	11-23-2004 
04-142 	Grants permission to K. Hovnanian at Jersey City IV, LLC to make capital improvements within the Kellogg Street public right-of-way 	11-23-2004 
05-030 	Granting permission to 95 Van Dam Corporation, its successors and assigns, to make private improvements to that portion of lands located at the corner of Communipaw Avenue and Monitor Street (300 Communipaw Avenue), within the sidewalk area of the Monitor Street public right-of-way 	03-23-2005 
05-031 	Vacating a portion of Canal Street within the Liberty Harbor North Redevelopment Area 	03-23-2005 
05-032 	Vacating a portion of Canal Street and Grove Street to be know as Grove Square 	05-23-2005 
05-059 	Franchise and revocable license granted to Hudson County Community College to occupy an area with dimension of 46 feet by 4 feet along the public right-of-way of Van Reypen Street adjacent to Block 1871, Lot 14 for the purpose of allowing exterior doors and gates to swing out from a building and into the public right-of-way 	06-08-2005 
05-066 	Granting permission to Farhad and Zohreh Behin to construct a stoop, stairs, a planer bed and four foot-high fence along the public right-of-way of Seventh Street adjacent to Block 319, Lot "U" 	06-08-2005 
05-076 	Granting permission to Trio Development Company, General Partnership, and Ottimo Corporation to place planters and outdoor tables and seats on the sidewalks in front of 87-89 Sussex Street and 212 Washington Street 	06-22-2005 
05-077 	Granting permission to Nicholas DeMarco, his successors and assigns, to make private improvements to a portion of land located at the corner of West Side Avenue and Union Street (511 West Side Avenue), within the sidewalk area of the Union Street public right-of-way 	06-22-2005 
05-106 	Approving an amended and restated water services franchise and service agreement between the city and the Jersey City Municipal Utilities Authority 	09-14-2005 
05-163 	Vacating a certain easement along Chapel Avenue 	11-22-2005 
05-174 	Franchise granting permission to Culver Avenue Lofts to construct front landing, stairs, and new underground utility service 	01-11-2006 
06-005 	Vacating portion of Pavonia Avenue 	01-25-2006 
06-011 	Vacating balance of Sixth Street along New Jersey Turnpike Authority right-of-way and previously vacated portion of Sixth Street 	02-08-2006 
06-013 	Franchise granting permission to Danitom Development, Inc., to make private improvements 	02-22-2006 
06-084 	Vacating a portion of Washington Boulevard 	07-19-2006 
06-089 	Vacating a portion of Custer Avenue and authorizing the recordation of Jersey City Street Ordinance #134, granting the vacation of Sand Street extending from Pamprapo Avenue to Custer Avenue 	08-16-2006 
06-105 	Franchise granting permission to Bejoray, Inc., LLC, to construct fire exit 	09-13-2006 
06-164 	Granting permission to Mushroom Development, LLC, its successors and assigns, to make private improvements within the public right-of-way adjacent to the property located at 212—212 1/2 Sixth Street, Jersey City, New Jersey also known on the tax maps of the City of Jersey City as Block 248, Lots T and U 	01-10-2007 
06-165 	Granting permission to Mushroom Development, LLC, its successors and assigns, to make private improvements within the public right-of-way adjacent to the property located at 270—272 Sixth Street, Jersey City, New Jersey also known on the tax maps of the City of Jersey City as Block 318, Lots 11 and 12 	01-10-2007 
07-011 	Granting permission to Jersey City Housing Authority, its successors and assigns to construct a portion of the front stairway stoop in the right-of-way of Pacific Avenue and Ash Street 	02-14-2007 
07-029 	Granting to Benedetto Lopiccolo, his successors and assigns, to make private improvements within the public right-of-way adjacent to the property located at 322 Eighth Street, Jersey City, New Jersey, also known on the tax map of the City of Jersey City as Block 357, Lot 14 	03-14-2007 
07-066 	Authorizing the City of Jersey City (Licensee) to enter into a telecommunications license agreement with Newport Tower Co., LLC. (Licensor) for the use of space at the Licensor's building located at 525 Washington Boulevard, Jersey City 	04-25-2007 
07-067 	Vacating a portion of Washington Street from its intersection with Dudley Street and extending southerly to the Morris Canal Big Basin and authorizing the acceptance of deeds dedicating the vacated street as a public park 	Defeated 
10-24-2007 
07-092 	Granting permission to FTD Steuben, LLC, its successors and assigns, to make private improvements within the public right of way adjacent to the property located at 154-158 Steuben Street, Jersey City, New Jersey, also known on the tax map of the City of Jersey City as Block 139, Lot 90, 91 and 92 	05-23-2007 
07-135 	Vacating a portion of West Side Avenue (Between Broadway and Fayette (Place) Street) 	08-08-2007 
07-153 	Vacating a portion of Washington Street from its intersection with Dudley Street and extending southerly to the Morris Canal Big Basin and authorizing the acceptance of a deed dedicating the westerly side of the vacated street as a public park 	09-11-2007 
07-165 	Granting permission to Brass Works Urban Renewal Company, LLC, its successors and assigns, to improve and use a portion of the Franklin Street public right of way as more particularly described herein and adjoining Lot G, Block 751 on the official tax assessment map of the City of Jersey City, for the installation and maintenance of a landscaping island, which encroaches onto a portion of the Franklin Street public right of way 	10-24-2007 
07-183 	Vacating a portion of Carrol Avenue, Jersey City, New Jersey 	12-19-2007 
08-001 	A franchise ordinance granting permission to Old and New, LLC., its successors and assigns, to make private improvements in the public right of way adjacent to the property located at 93 Montgomery Street, Jersey City, New Jersey, also known on the tax maps of the City of Jersey City as Block 102, Lot 61 	01-23-2008 
08-035 	Granting permission to Jersey City Episcopal Community Development Corporation, its successors and assigns, to install and maintain a handicap ramp along the south side of Neptune Avenue as set and to construct bay windows which extend into the franchise area within the proposed franchise area adjoining 109-111 Old Bergen Road a/k/a Lot 42M in Block 1367 	03-26-2008 
08-107 	Granting permission to 19 Winfield, LLC, its successors and assigns, to construct stairs and stoops within the public right-of-way, for each of three (3) houses on Princeton Avenue adjacent to Block 1431, Lots 23, 24, and 25 respectively 	08-06-2008 
08-109 	Authorizing the execution of an agreement between the City of Jersey City and Fiber Technologies Networks LLC to permit the installation, use and maintenance of telecommunications facilities within certain public rights-of-way for purposes of providing telecommunications services 	08-20-2008 
08-143 	Granting permission to FTD Newark, LLC, its successors and assigns, to make private improvements in the public right of way adjacent to the property located at 209-217 Newark Avenue, Jersey City, New Jersey, also known on the tax maps of the City of Jersey City as Block 311 Lot 68 	10-07-2008 
08-151 	Granting permission to Bay City Condo, LLC, its successors and assigns, to make private improvements in the public right of way adjacent to the property located at 213-225 Bay Street, Jersey City, New Jersey, also known on the tax maps of the City of Jersey City as Block 241 Lots A, 18, 20 and 33D 	11-12-2008 
08-161 	Granting permission to Pronti Construction, Inc., its successors and assigns, to make private improvements in the Barrow Street and Wayne Street Public rights of way adjacent to the property located at 307 Barrow Street, Jersey City, New Jersey, also known on the tax maps of the City of Jersey City as Block 273, Lot E 	11-25-2008 
09-048 	Ordinance by the Municipal Council of the City of Jersey City vacating all of Walks Street, Jersey City, New Jersey 	04-22-2009 
09-060 	A franchise ordinance granting permission to Mohammad Hamami to construct fenced yard/planted area and stoop extending 4'-0" within the public right-of-way for each of two (2) attached townhouses on Fourth Street, Lots 11 and 12 in Block 246 known as 210-212 Fourth Street 	05-20-2009 
09-065 	An ordinance vacating a portion of Ludlow Street (between New Street and Cator Avenue) 	06-17-2009 
09-072 	An ordinance granting permission to 134 Bay Street, LLC and 126-142 Morgan Street Urban Renewal, LLC, their successors and assigns, to make private improvements in the Provost Street right-of-way between Morgan Street and Bay Street adjacent to the property located at 10 Provost Street, 143 Bay Street, and 332-350 Marin Boulevard, Jersey City, New Jersey, also known on the tax maps of the City of Jersey City as Block 140, Lot 1 and Block 171 in its entirety 	06-17-2009 
09-101 	Franchise ordinance granting permission to 141 Bright Monmouth, LLC, his successors and assigns, to make private improvements in the public right-of-way adjacent to the property located at 141 Bright Street, Jersey City, New Jersey, also known on the tax maps of the City of Jersey City as Block 341 Lot P.1. 	09-23-2009 
09-103 	Franchise ordinance granting permission to the Ambriola Company, Inc., its successors and assigns, to make private improvements in and use of the public right-of-way adjacent to the property located at 2 Burma Road (a/k/a 95 Burma Road), Jersey City, New Jersey, also known on the tax map of the City of Jersey City as Block 2154 Lot 13.c. 	10-14-2009 
09-104 	Franchise ordinance granting permission to Wells Reit II-International Financial TW%M. Calitower, LLC, its successors and assigns, to install decorative safety bollards approximately three (3) feet eight (8) inches in length and no more than one (1) foot eleven (11) inches in depth along the public right-of-way of Columbus Drive, Marin Boulevard, and Wayne Street adjacent to Block 203, Lot 26, in accord with the site plan approved by the Jersey City Planning Board 	10-14-2009 
09-105 	Franchise ordinance granting permission to 782-784 Ocean Avenue LLC, its successors and assigns, to allow an encroachment along the south side of Ocean Avenue for two (2) stoops as set forth in schedule with the proposed franchise area adjoining 782-784 Ocean Avenue A/K/A Lot 52 in Block 1970 	10-14-2009 
09-107 	Franchise ordinance granting permission to Johanna Garcia, her successors and assigns, to install and maintain steps along the north side of Baldwin Avenue as set forth in Schedule with the proposed franchise area adjoining Baldwin Avenue Lot 20.02 in Block 519 	10-28-2009 
09-110 	Ordinance vacating a portion of 17th Street 	10-28-2009 
09-111 	Ordinance vacating a portion of 18th Street 	10-28-2009 
09-112 	Ordinance vacating a water main easement located on Lot PL-1, Block 402 	10-28-2009 
10-005 	Ordinance vacating the paper street known as Dudley Street from its intersection with Greene Street and extending easterly 	01-27-2010 
10-009 	Granting permission to One LLC, its successors and assigns, to make private improvements to a portion of land within the sidewalk area of the Bowers Street public right-of-way 	2-24-2010 
10-096 	Granting permission to 110 First Street Urban Renewal Associates, LLC to construct a landscaped yard/planted entrance area within public right-of-way 	08-04-2010 
10-097 	Granting permission to John Hajjar, its successors and assigns, to install and maintain an elevated canopy 	08-04-2010 
10-116 	Authorizing execution of right-of-way use agreement between city and NextG Networks of NY, Inc., for installation, use and maintenance of telecommunications facilities within certain public rights-of-way for purpose of providing telecommunications services 	09-29-2010 
10-173 	Granting permission to 769 Montgomery Street Urban Renewal Company, LLC, its successors and assigns to permit existing encroachments in the Montgomery Street at Boland Street rights-of-way adjacent to the property located at 769 Montgomery Street 	01-12-2011 
11-077 	Granting permission to 222-224 First Street LLC, its successors and assigns, to construct and install an entry porch, stairs, fencing and landscaping approximately 40 feet in length and 7 feet in depth along the public right-of-way of First Street adjacent to Block 243, Lots 12 & 13 	08-10-2011 
11-121 	Granting permission to 15-16 Realty Corp., its successors and assigns, to use a portion of the air space and the sidewalk area of the Bergen Avenue public right-of-way located adjacent to 896-898 Bergen Avenue 	10-12-2011 
11-123 	Vacating a portion of Port Jersey Boulevard located east of East Pulaski Lane in the City of Bayonne to the most eastern end of Port Jersey Boulevard 	10-12-2011 
11-127 	Accepting from PSEG Power LLC (PSEG) a dedication of certain water mains located within the public rights-of-way known as Duffield Avenue, Van Keuren Avenue, and St. James Street near the Hudson Generating Station 	11-09-2011 
12-078 
A franchise ordinance granting permission to Jersey City Episcopal Community Development Corporation (petitioner) to use that 489 square feet on Halladay Street, all in lot formerly known as 9, 11B, 12 & 33 now known as lots 34, 35, 36 & 37 block 2054 on the official tax assessment map of the for the installation and maintenance of a fence, landscaping and front path which encroach onto the public right-of-way of Halladay Street 	06-13-2012 
12-108 
Granting permission to 593 Jersey Avenue, LLC, its successors and assigns, to make private improvements in the Jersey Avenue public right-of-way adjacent to the property located at 587 Jersey Avenue, Jersey City, New Jersey, also known on the tax maps of the city as Block 315, Lot B 	08-22-2012 
12-163 
Vacating a portion of Grove Square consisting of approximately 1,910 square feet in order to align the street grid with the Liberty Harbor North Redevelopment Plan 	01-09-2013 
13-045 
Granting permission to Abdel Amin, his successors and assigns, to make private improvements to the public right-of-way at the property located at 60 Sussex Street a/k/a 67 Green Street, Jersey City, New Jersey, also known on the tax maps of the city as Block 14304, Lot 5 	04-24-2013 
13-046 
Granting permission to 593 Jersey Avenue, LLC, its successors and assigns, to make private improvements in the Jersey Avenue public right-of-way adjacent to the property located at 591 Jersey Avenue, Jersey City, New Jersey, also known on the tax maps of the City of Jersey City as Block 11103, Lot 17 (f/k/a Block 315 Lot A) 	04-24-2013 
13-119 
Franchise ordinance granting permission to 110 First Street Urban Renewal Associates, LLC, its successors and assigns, to improve and use that approximately ten-foot portion of the public right-of-way between the sixty-foot right-of-way adjacent to Second Street and Lot 42, Block 11603, on the official tax assessment map of the City of Jersey City for the installation of underground backflow preventers, house traps 7/5' × 5' vaults for its sanitary and storm sewer systems, which encroach ten feet onto the public right-of-way along Second Street 	11-13-2013 
13-125 
Franchise ordinance granting permission to One Exchange JC, LLC, its successors and assigns, to make private improvements in the public rights-of-way of Exchange Place and York Street adjacent to the property located at One Exchange Place, Jersey City, New Jersey, also known on the tax maps of the City as Block 14502, Lot 1 	11-26-2013 
13-126 
Authorizing the execution of a rights-of-way use agreement between the City and Cross River Fiber, Inc. to permit the installation of fiber optic cabling in existing underground conduit and/or on existing utility poles within certain public rights-of-way for purposes of providing telecommunication services 	02-11-2014 
13-131 
Franchise ordinance granting permission to Kennedy Lofts Urban Renewal LLC, its successors and assigns, to allow existing private improvements in the Newkirk Street and Jones Street rights-of-way adjacent to the property located at 100 Newkirk Street, Jersey City, New Jersey, also known on the tax maps of the City as Block 10703, Lot 18 	12-18-2013 
14-010 
Franchise ordinance granting permission to Hudson Body Company, its successors and assigns, to make private improvements in the Allen Street public right-of-way adjacent to the property located at 415-435 Tonnele Avenue, Jersey City, New Jersey, also known on the Tax Maps of the City as Block 4101, Lots 20 and 21 	02-11-2014 
14-054 
Authorizing the execution of a rights-of-way use agreement between the City of Jersey City and TW Telecom of New Jersey L.P. to permit the installation of fiber optic cabling in existing underground conduit and/or on existing utility poles within certain public rights-of-way for purposes of providing telecommunication services 	06-11-2014 
14-059 
Granting permission to MCREF Warren LLC, its successors and assigns, to make private improvements in the Morgan Street, Warren Street and Bay Street rights-of-way adjacent to property located at 333-341 Washington Street, Jersey City, New Jersey, also known on the tax maps of the City of Jersey City as Block 11611, Lot 1 	05-28-2014 
14-062 
Granting permission to 148 First Street Urban Renewal, LLC, its successors and/or assigns, and 160 First Street Urban Renewal, LLC, its successors and/or assigns, to make private improvements in the public right-of-way of First Street adjacent to the property located at 148-154 First Street and 162-170 First Street, Jersey City, New Jersey, also known on the tax maps of the City of Jersey City as Block 11502, Lots 5.03, 9, 10 and 11 	06-11-2014 
14-100 
Vacating a portion of Bramhall Avenue consisting of approximately 3,000 square feet for development of Berry Lane Park 	09-10-2014 
14-162 
Approving an addendum to the 2005 amended and restated water services franchise and service agreement between the City and the Jersey City Municipal Utilities Authority to revise Schedule C to increase the payments to the City 	12-17-2014 
14-155 
Granting renewal of municipal consent to Comcast of Jersey City, LLC, its successors and/or assigns, to construct, connect, operate and maintain a cable television system in the City 	01-14-2015 
15-015 
Granting permission to Willow Avenue Realty Associates, L.P., its successors and assigns, to improve and use that approximately five-foot by ten-foot portion of the public right-of-way between the sixty-foot right-of-way adjacent to Morgan Street and Lot 9, Block 13002, on the official tax assessment map of the City for the construction of a six-step stoop, entrance stairway which encroaches five feet onto the public right-of-way along Morgan Street 	02-25-2015 
15-044 
Granting permission to Public Storage, its successors and assigns, to make improvements in the First Street, Second Street, Provost Street and Warren Street right-of-way adjacent to the property located at 124-142 First Street, also known as Block 11503, Lot 1 on the Tax maps of the City 	04-08-2015 
15-124 
Authorizing the execution of a rights-of-way use agreement between the City and Mobilitie, LLC d/b/a NYFI to permit the installation of antennas and related communications equipment on existing utility poles and if necessary to install utility poles within certain public rights-of-way for purposes of providing telecommunication services 	09-24-2015 
15-157 
Granting permission to Tal Raichlin Shuster, its successors and/or assigns, to make private improvements in the public right-of-way of 81-83 Sussex Street, Jersey City, New Jersey also known on the tax map of the City as Block 14402, Lot 2 	11-24-2015 
15-179 
Granting permission to One Edward Hart Road, LLC, its successors and/or assigns, to make private improvements in the public right-of-way of One Edward Hart Road, Jersey City, New Jersey, also known on the tax map of the City of Jersey City as Block 24304, Lot 6 	01-13-2016 
16-013 
Authorizing the execution of a rights-of-way use agreement between the City of Jersey City and New York SMSA Limited Partnership, d/b/a Verizon Wireless, to permit the installation of antennas and related communications equipment on existing utility poles and if necessary to install utility poles within certain public rights-of-way for purposes of providing telecommunication services 	02-10-2016 
16-024 
Franchise ordinance of the City Council of the City of Jersey City granting permission to PS First Hudson Urban Renewal, LLC, its successors and assigns, to make improvements in the First Street, Second Street, Provost Street and Warren Street rights-of-way adjacent to the property located at 133 Second Street and designated as Block 11503, Lot 1 on the tax map of the City of Jersey City, New Jersey 	02-10-2016 
16-047 
Vacating a portion of Marcy Avenue, Jersey City, New Jersey 	04-13-2016 
16-062 
Franchise ordinance granting permission to 75 Jersey City, LLC, its successors and assigns, to make private improvements to a portion of lands within the sidewalk area of the Montgomery Street public right-of-way located adjacent to 75 Montgomery Street, Jersey City, New Jersey 	04-27-2016 
16-162 
Vacating a portion of Pine Street consisting of approximately 5,327 square feet or 0.122 acres being located within the Morris Canal Redevelopment Area of the City 	10-26-2016 
16-177 
A franchise ordinance granting permission to COA 99 Hudson, LLC, its successors and assigns, to improve and use approximately six areas of two feet and nine inches in width and ten feet and three inches in length within a portion of the public right-of-way within the 80-foot right-of-way of Greene Street and adjacent to Lot 1, Block 14507, on the official tax assessment map of the City for the installation six structural pile caps, which encroach two feet and nine inches into the public right-of-way along Greene Street 	11-22-2016 
16-185 
A franchise ordinance granting permission to Roseville Avenue Redevelopment Urban Renewal LLC, its successors and assigns, to make private improvements to a portion of lands within the sidewalk area of Montgomery Street and York Street public right-of-way located adjacent to 391-413 Montgomery Street and 451-489 Montgomery Street, Jersey City, NJ 	12-14-2016 
17-006 
Franchise ordinance vacating a portion of Dey Street 	03-08-2017 
17-030 
A franchise ordinance granting permission to 225 Bay Street, LLC, successor in interest to Bay City Condo, LLC, its successors and assigns, to make private improvements in the public right-of-way of Bay Street adjacent to the property located at 213-225 Bay Street, Jersey City, New Jersey, also known on the tax maps of the City of Jersey City as Block 241, lots A, 18, 20, and 33D 	03-22-2017 
17-072 
A franchise ordinance granting permission to 817 Associates, LLC, its successors and assigns, to allow for vacating of a portion of Cottage Street 	06-28-2017 
17-085 
Amending City Ordinance 14.062 granting permission to 148 First Street Urban Renewal, LLC, its successors and/or assigns, and 160 First Street Urban Renewal, LLC, its successors and/or assigns, to make private improvements in the public right-of-way of First Street adjacent to the property located at 148-154 First Street and 162-170 First Street, Jersey City, New Jersey, also known on the tax maps of the City as Block 11502, Lots 5.03, 9, 10 and 11 	06-28-2017 
17-086 
Vacating a portion of Freeman Avenue and Field Avenue 	07-19-2017 
17-109 
Vacating an alley lying between Newkirk St and Cubberly Pl 	09-13-2017 
17-128 
Vacating a portion of Factory St consisting of approximately 3,623.4 square feet for public utilities located in the Montgomery St redevelopment area 	09-27-2017 
17-140 
Granting permission to Usman Khan, his successors and assigns, to allow an encroachment along the south side of Emerson Av, and the east side of Sip Av, for a fence as set forth within the proposed franchise area adjoining 24 Emerson Av, a/k/a Lots 31, Block 11901 	10-11-2017 
17-143 
Granting permission to M&T Bank-Branch 3303, its successors and assigns, to make private improvements to a portion of lands within the sidewalk area of Bayview Av and Ocean Av public rights-of-way located adjacent to 532 Ocean Av 	10-25-2017 
18-012 
Vacating a portion of West Street in accordance with the stipulation of settlement dated July 25, 2012 and pursuant to the Journal Square 2060 Redevelopment Plan 	02-28-2018 
18-043 
Granting permission to 28 Liberty Manor Development, LLC, its successors and assigns to construct and install planters, fence, steps and stoops approximately 125 feet in length and nine and twenty one-hundredths feet in depth along the public right-of-way of Bright Street, in accord with the site plan as submitted in the attached Exhibit "A" (Franchise Ordinance) 	05-23-2018 
18-044 
Granting permission to Larry Li and Lei Wang, their successors and assigns, to make private improvements in the Bright Street right-of-way adjacent to the property located at 278 Grand Street, Jersey City, New Jersey, also known on the current tax map of the City as Block 14105, Lot 9 (Franchise Ordinance) 	05-23-2018 
18-135 
Vacating a portion of Washington Street, Washington Boulevard and First Street rights-of-way located in the Hudson Exchange Redevelopment Area 	12-19-2018 
19-062 
Granting permission to 972-976 Summit Ave Development, LLC, its successors and assigns to construct and install planters, steps and stoops approximately 118 feet in length on Lincoln Street and 105 feet in length on Summit Avenue and four feet in depth along the public right-of-way on Lincoln Street and 3.2 feet in depth along the public right-of-way of Summit Avenue 	06-12-2019 
 
TABLE 3. LAND ACQUISITIONS AND TRANSFERS 
Ord. No. 	Subject Matter 	Date of Adoption 
C-874 	Authorizing execution deed to Union Park Development Assn., 11-014Inc. 	01-26-1989 
C-876 	Transfer of city-owned property to Jersey City Redevelopment Area 	01-12-1989 
C-877 	Transfer of city-owned property to Jersey City Redevelopment Area 	01-12-1989 
C-878 	Transfer of city-owned property to Jersey City Redevelopment Area 	04-13-1989 
C-885 	Land acquisition amendment 	02-02-1989 
C-903 	Transfer of city-owned property to Jersey City Neighborhood Housing Services Development Corporation, Inc. 	03-09-1989 
C-904 	Acquisition of 46 Woodlawn Avenue 	03-09-1989 
C-928 	Acquisition of 119 Manning Avenue 	04-13-1989 
C-932A 	Transfer of property within Montgomery Street Redevelopment Area 	04-13-1989 
C-969 	Transfer of city-owned property to Jersey City Neighborhood Housing Services Development Corporation, Inc. 	06-25-1989 
C-970 	Transfer of city-owned property to Jersey City Neighborhood Housing Services Development Corporation, Inc. 	05-25-1989 
C-971 	Transfer of city-owned property to Jersey City Neighborhood Housing Services Development Corporation, Inc. 	05-25-1989 
C-972 	Transfer of city-owned property to Jersey City Neighborhood Housing Services Development Corporation, Inc. 	05-25-1989 
C-973 	Transfer of city-owned property to Jersey City Neighborhood Housing Services Development Corporation, Inc. 	05-25-1989 
C-974 	Transfer of city-owned property to Jersey City Neighborhood Housing Services Development Corporation, Inc. 	05-25-1989 
C-979 	Transfer of city-owned property to Jersey City Neighborhood Housing Services Development Corporation, Inc. 	05-25-1989 
McC-36 	Transfer of property to Resurrection House Corporation 	09-27-1989 
McC-46 	Transfer of property to Housing Assist Corp. 	10-25-1989 
McC-47 	Transfer of property to Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	10-25-1989 
McC-76 	Transfer of property to Jersey City Municipal Port Authority 	12-08-1989 
McC-79 	Execution of agreements for sale and exchange of certain properties within the Caven Point Area 	12-08-1989 
McC-99 	Dedication of public access walkway by K. Hovanian 	07-18-1990 
McC-146 	Redemption of Exchange Place property to Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	05-09-1990 
McC-148 	Transfer of property to Neighborhood Housing Services of Jersey City Holding Company 	09-12-1990 
McC-160 	Transfer of property from Housing Authority to city 	06-27-1990 
McC-169 	Transfer of property to Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	06-27-1990 
McC-170 	Transfer of property to J.P. Affordable Housing Holding Co., Inc. 	06-27-1990 
McC-195 	Acceptance of property for use as public sidewalk 	08-21-1990 
McC-199 	Transfer of property to Jersey City Public School District 	09-12-1990 
McC-206 	Transfer of property to Jersey City Neighborhood Housing Services Development Corporation, Inc. 	09-12-1990 
McC-207 	Transfer of property to Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	09-26-1990 
McC-208 	Dedication of various lands owned by Port Authority 	10-10-1990 
McC-215 	Transfer of land to Resurrection House (School No. 18) Housing Corporation 	11-20-1990 
McC-219 	Expansion of LaPointe Park 	10-10-1990 
McC-226 	Transfer of property to Jersey City Neighborhood Housing Services Development Corporation, Inc. 	11-20-1990 
McC-236 	Repeal of Ord. No. McC-46 	12-19-1990 
McC-279A 	Transfer of Bay Street Urban Renewal Project to Bay Street Urban Renewal Development Corporation 	04-10-1991 
McC-285 	Dedication of various lands owned by National Bulk Carriers, Inc. to public 	02-27-1991 
McC-286 	Repeal of Ord. No. C-721 	03-27-1991 
McC-290 	Acquisition of certain access and utility easements 	03-13-1991 
McC-301 	Transfer of property to Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	05-08-1991 
McC-311 	Transfer of property to Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	04-24-1991 
McC-315 	Transfer of property to Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	04-24-1991 
McC-316 	Transfer of property to Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	04-24-1991 
McC-318 	Acceptance of monument from Military Order of the Purple Heart of the United States Combat Wounded Veterans, Chapter 33 	05-08-1991 
McC-328 	Acceptance of property within Newport Redevelopment Area 	08-21-1991 
McC-328 	Transfer of property to Affordable Housing Developers of Jersey City, Inc. 	06-12-1991 
McC-337 	Repeal of Ord. No. McC-148 	07-17-1991 
McC-343 	Transfer of property to J.P. Affordable Housing Co. 	08-21-1991 
McC-344 	Transfer of property to Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	08-21-1991 
McC-360 	Sale of property to Euell Development Limited-Dividend Housing Corp. 	09-25-1991 
McC-363 	Transfer of property to Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	09-11-1991 
McC-383 	Transfer of property to Storms Avenue Housing Development Corporation, Inc. 	10-23-1991 
McC-389 	Acquisition of property from Jersey City Neighborhood Housing Services Development Corporation, Inc. 	11-06-1991 
McC-390 	Repeal, in part, of Ord. No. C-821 	11-06-1991 
McC-400 	Acquisition of property from St. Anthony's R.C. Church and transfer of property to Padua Housing Corp. 	01-08-1992 
McC-410 	Transfer of property to St. Joseph's School for the Blind; acquisition of property 	02-11-1992 
92-006 	Transfer of 169 Martin Luther King Drive Cooperative Association to Bread and Roses, Inc. 	03-11-1992 
92-015 	Dedication and transfer of sewerage utilities to Jersey City Sewerage Authority 	03-25-1992 
92-039 	Transfer of property for the Housing Authority's Lafayette II Project 	04-22-1992 
92-054 	Transfer of ownership interests in Newport Tower Urban Renewal Corporation Entity 	06-10-1992 
92-097 	Transfer of property to Enterprise Community Development Corporation, Inc. 	08-19-1992 
92-098 	Transfer of property to Jersey City Development Corporation 	09-02-1992 
92-116 	Transfer of property to Jersey City Development Corporation 	09-16-1992 
92-152 	Acquisition of property 	10-28-1992 
92-160 	Transfer of property to Jersey City Development Corporation 	11-10-1992 
93-003 	Acquisition of Loew's Theatre 	02-10-1993 
93-006 	Transfer of property to Enterprise Community Development Corporation, Inc. 	02-10-1993 
93-033 	Transfer of property to Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	03-24-1993 
93-033A 	Acquisition of portion of Lincoln Park 	04-14-1993 
93-044 	Acquisition of property for Jersey Avenue and Grand Street Extension Project 	04-28-1993 
93-047 	Conveyance of land 	04-28-1993 
93-051 	Dedication of certain phase II roadways within Newport Redevelopment Zone and city 	05-19-1993 
93-076 	Acquisition and conveyance of Salem Lafayette Housing Project 	08-18-1993 
93-080 	Repeal of Ord. Nos. McC-311 and 92-098 and transfer of property to Jersey City Development Corporation 	08-18-1993 
93-083 	Dedication of certain lands as park lands 	09-08-1992 
93-102 	Abolishing self-liquidating Municipal Pool and Ice Skating Rink Utility and repealing Ord. No. MC-365 	09-22-1993 
93-113 	Dedication of various lands within Harsimus Cove South Redevelopment Area 	10-13-1993 
93-122 	Interlocal service agreement 	10-27-1993 
93-133 	Repeal of Ord. Nos. McC-178 and McC-187 	11-10-1993 
93-147 	Transfer of property to J.P. Affordable Housing Holding Co. 	01-12-1994 
94-008 	Transfer of property to Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	02-23-1994 
94-033 	Transfer of property to Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	04-27-1994 
94-043 	Acquisition of land 	05-24-1994 
94-061 	Transfer of property to Jersey City Redevelopment Area 	08-17-1994 
94-068 	Conveyance of property 	08-17-1994 
94-107 	Sale of property to New Jersey Transit 	11-22-1994 
94-111 	Transfer of property to Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	11-22-1994 
94-114 	Transfer of property to Jersey City Development Corporation 	12-14-1994 
94-119 	Transfer of property to Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	12-28-1994 
95-013 	Acquisition of property 	03-08-1995 
95-019 	Repeal of Ord. No. 93-076, acquisition and conveyance of Salem Lafayette Housing Project and cancellation of municipal tax liens against project 	03-22-1995 
95-032 	Transfer of property to J.P. Affordable Housing Co., Inc, repeal of Ord. Nos. C-973, C-979 and McC-226 	04-26-1995 
95-034 	Amendment to Ord. No. McC-192 authorizing transfer of property to Greenville Steering Non-profit Housing Corporation 	05-10-1995 
95-037 	Amendment to Ord. No. 93-080, transfer of property to Jersey City Development Corporation 	05-10-1995 
95-048 	Amendment to Ord. No. McC-400, transfer of property to Padua Housing Corp. 	05-24-1995 
95-061 	Transfer of property within the Martin Luther King Drive redevelopment area 	07-19-1995 
95-069 	Transfer of property to Enterprise Community Development Corporation 	08-16-1995 
95-086 	Transfer of city-owned property to the Jersey City School District 	09-27-1995 
95-098 	Conveyance of property to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	10-25-1995 
95-100 	Acquisition of 51-55 Pearsall Avenue from the Jersey City Housing Authority 	10-25-1995 
95-110 	Transfer of property to the Learning Emporium Pre School, Inc. 	11-21-1995 
95-119 	Transfer of property to the Astor Place Neighborhood Association, Inc. 	01-10-1996 
95-125 	Sale of city-owned property to the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, which includes approximately 1,400 acres of property in the Township of Rockaway (Block 30101, Lots 3 and 12; Block 50001, Lots 1 and 18; and Block 50003, Lots 19 and 20) and in the Borough of Kinnelon (Block 30, Lots 3 and 4, and Block 300, Lot 5) and approximately 2,700 acres of property in the Township of Jefferson (Block 265, Lots 8, 8.02, 9, 10 and 11; Block 268; Lot 1.01; Block 270, Lots 1, 2.11, 2.13, 2.20, 3, 4, 5, 5.01, 5.02, 5.03, 6, 7, 8 and 9; Block 271, Lots 1, 1.01, 3.01, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 10.0, 10.02, 10.03, 11 and 11.01; Block 336, Lots 43.02, 43.03 and 52; Block 338, Lots 1 and 3; and Block 339, Lot 1) 	05-08-1996 
96-019 	Sale of 9.55 acres in the Township of Parsippany-Troy Hills 	04-10-1996 
96-035 	Acceptance of property known as 19 and 31 Astor Place and the transfer of these properties to Astor Place Neighborhood Association, Inc. 	04-24-1996 
96-066 	Acceptance of property and transfer of this property to Astor Place Neighborhood Association, Inc. 	06-26-1996 
96-067 	Transfer of property to Astor Place Neighborhood Association, Inc. 	07-24-1996 
96-075 	Conveyance of property to the Jersey City Housing Authority 	07-24-1996 
96-089 	Acquisition of 591-599 Palisades Avenue for construction of new firehouse 	09-11-1996 
96-093 	Transfer of property to Granderson Corporation 	09-25-1996 
96-096 	Transfer of city-owned property within Turnkey and Ocean-Bayview Redevelopment Area to Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	09-25-1996 
96-101 	Transfer of city-owned property within Grove and Mercer Redevelopment Plan Area to Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	10-23-1996 
97-004 	Transfer of city-owned property within HUB District of the Martin Luther King Drive Redevelopment Plan Area to Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	02-11-1997 
97-005 	Sale of city-owned property located at Caven Point Road and Chapel Avenue (Block 1500, Lot 16) to the State-Operated School District and the lease of a portion of the same from the State-Operated School District 	06-11-1997 
97-012 	Transfer of city-owned property to Jersey City Development Corporation 	02-26-1997 
97-018 	Acquisition of 380-386 New York Avenue (Block 786, Lots 138, 139, 141 and 141) by purchase or condemnation for the construction and location of a new firehouse 	03-12-1997 
97-042 	Transfer of city-owned property within the Lafayette Park Redevelopment Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency for the Housing Authority's Lafayette II Project (Block 2086, Lots 1, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 2.A, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24.A, 25, 26, 27.D, 27.E, 27.F, 27.H, 27.J, 28, 29, 30.A, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 5.A, A, B C, D, 29, 30.A, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 5.A A, B, C and D) 	06-25-1997 
97-047 	Acquisition of property located at 89-101 Cambridge Avenue (Block 762, Lots 38A, 38, 9B and 42A), subject to an existing lease, and lease agreement, with an option to buy, with the Jersey City Parking Authority and assignment of lease to the Parking Authority 	06-25-1997 
97-050 	Sale of city-owned property at 9 Bayview Avenue (Block 1475, Lot 42) to Rev. Tyrone Chess under the Fair Housing Act 	08-13-1997 
97-063 	Amendment to Ord. No. 95-125, which authorized the contract of sale with the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, to delete Block 268, Lot 1A (Taylor Road property) and Block 270, Lots 2.11 and 2.13, and to add Block 70001, Lot 5 	09-24-1997 
97-085 	Transfer of Title of Lot A.4 in Block 1915, 88 Clifton Place, Margaret Hague Hospital, to Hudson County 	12-10-1997 
97-098 	Transfer of property located at Block 238, Lots 29 and 30, 44-46 Mercer Street, to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	01-14-1998 
98-045 	Acquisition by purchase of 22-24 Liberty Avenue 	05-13-1998 
98-124 	Transfer of city-owned property within the Liberty Harbor North Redevelopment Plan Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency: Block 198, Lot 9, 235 Grand Street (vacant land); Block 60, Lot 27.A, 139-193 Luis M. Marin Boulevard (occupied by the vacant former Flintkote building); Block 60, Lot 27C, 139-193 Luis M. Marin Boulevard (vacant land); Block 60, Lot 40, 139-193 Luis M. Marin Boulevard (vacant land); see MC-373, MCC-527, MC-670, 93-029 	09-23-1998 
98-128 	Transfer of 99 Rutgers Avenue to Fairmount Housing Corporation, Inc. (Block 1352, Lot C.7) 	09-23-1998 
98-135 	Acceptance of a deed from Jersey City Redevelopment Agency transferring Lots 40 (vacant land on the southwest corner of First and Monmouth Streets), 41 and 42 (vacant land on the easterly side of Brunswick Street between Christopher Columbus Drive and First Street) in Block 383 to the city 	10-14-1998 
98-152 	Transfer of property within the Ocean Bayview Redevelopment Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency for the Pindar Ocean Bayview Project 	11-10-1998 
98-155 	Transfer of property within the Martin Luther King Drive Redevelopment Plan Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	11-24-1998 
98-168 	Transfer of property within the Liberty Harbor Redevelopment Plan Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	01-13-1999 
98-169 	Transfer of property within the Caven Point Redevelopment Plan Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	01-13-1999 
98-170 	Transfer of property within the Hudson Exchange Redevelopment Plan Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	01-13-1999 
99-001 	Accepting dedication of certain property for sidewalks, roadways, utilities and other public uses from AJI Enterprises 	01-27-1999 
99-015 	Acquisition of Block 1871, Lots 33.B, 33.C and 33D (298-304 Academy Street or the Apple Tree House) 	04-28-1999 
99-019 	Acquisition of Block 1947, Lots G2, G3, G7, G12, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 32 and 32 (312, 314, 304 and 294 Randolph Avenue and 1009, 1011, 1012,1015, 1017, 1019, 1021 and 1023 Garfield Avenue) for the reimbursement of taxes liens and various costs 	02-10-1999 
99-036 	Conveyance of 100 Monitor Street to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	01-12-2000 
99-037 	Acquisition of Block 722.A, Lot 10 (302 Palisade Avenue) for a municipal parking lot 	03-24-1999 
99-038 	Acquisition of Block 722.A, Lot 9a (304 Palisade Avenue) for a municipal parking lot 	03-24-1999 
99-039 	Acquisition of Block 722.A, Lot 8b (304.5 Palisade Avenue) for a municipal parking lot 	03-24-1999 
99-040 	Acquisition of Block 722.A, Lot 8a (306 Palisade Avenue) for a municipal parking lot 	03-24-1999 
99-045 	Amendment to Ord. No. McC-99, dedication of public access walkway by K. Hovanian 	04-14-1999 
99-050 	Transfer of 405-407 Ocean Avenue to the Jersey City Development Corporation 	04-28-1999 
99-051 	Transfer of property within the Liberty Harbor Redevelopment Plan Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	04-28-1999 
99-069 	Sale of Block 30101, Lot 3 (Camp Hudsonia) to the Township of Rockaway 	05-12-1999 
99-076 	Sale of portion of property known as Reservoir No. 2 to State-Operated School District 	06-09-1999 
99-094 	Transfer of property within the Betz Brewery Redevelopment Plan Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	08-18-1999 
99-102 	Transfer of property within the Lafayette Park I Redevelopment Plan Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	08-18-1999 
99-113 	Dedicating to public lands owned by National Bulk Carriers, Inc., within the Hudson Exchange Redevelopment Area for the extension of Fourth Street west of Washington Boulevard to Metro Plaza Shopping Center 	09-08-1999 
99-114 	Dedicating to public lands owned by National Bulk Carriers, Inc., within the Hudson Exchange Redevelopment Area for the extension of Second Street east of Washington Boulevard and for the extension of Hudson Street north of the Harborside Redevelopment Area 	09-08-1999 
99-115 	Acquisition of Block 60, Lots 27A, 27A and 40 from the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	09-08-1999 
99-146 	Conveyance of Block 1, Lot 3 to the Township of North Bergen 	09-22-1999 
99-154 	Dedication of property as public right-of-way pending satisfaction of certain conditions with 55 Lotdev, LLC 	10-27-1999 
99-177 	Amendment to Ord. No. 97-042, transfer of property within the Lafayette Park Redevelopment Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency for the Housing Authority's Lafayette II Project 	12-15-1999 
99-188 	Transfer of property within the Exchange Place Redevelopment Plan Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	01-12-2000 
00-004 	Amendment to Ord. Nos. 95-119, 96-035 and 96-006, which authorized the transfer of real property to the Astor Place Neighborhood Association, Inc. 	01-26-2000 
00-009 	Acquisition of Block 1896, Lots 3A, 4A and 5, also known as 8-9 Foye Place 	02-23-2000 
00-018 	Acceptance of conveyance of Block 6, Lot 1A, from Hartz Mountain Industries, Inc., to the city 	03-22-2000 
00-067 	Sale of Block 60, parts of Lots 19H, 19Q, 19R, 20B, 27A, 27C and 40 to the New Jersey Transit for construction and operation of the light rail system 	06-28-2000 
00-086 	Transfer of city-owned property within the Majestic Theater Development Plan Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency (Block 237, Lot U, and Block 237, Lot 23; 275 and 279 Grove Street) 	07-19-2000 
00-104 	Acquisition of 302 and 304.5 Palisade Avenue (Block 722.A, Lots 8b and 10) by exchanging it for city-owned property known as 133 Leonard Street (amends Ord. Nos. 99-037 and 99-039) 	09-13-2000 
00-132 	Acquisition of certain property from the Jersey City Municipal Utilities Authority; conveyance of property to Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	10-11-2000 
00-133 	Authorizing acceptance of real properties from the Jersey City Development Corporation for the purpose of discharging tax liens; authorizing transfer of real properties back to Jersey City Development Corporation 	10-11-2000 
00-137 	Authorizing transfer of city-owned property within the Martin Luther King Drive Redevelopment Plan Area to Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	10-11-2000 
00-174 	Authorizing transfer and acceptance of real property to/from the state operated school district of Jersey City; transfer of real property to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency; acceptance of real property from the Jersey City Housing Authority (amends Ord. No. 99-172) 	01-10-2001 
01-029A 	Transfer of city-owned property within the Vacant Buildings Redevelopment Plan Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	03-24-2001 
01-066 	Authorization of city-owned property transfer within the Liberty Harbor North Redevelopment Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	06-13-2001 
01-068 	Grants permission for exchange of certain properties within the Caven Point Redevelopment Area 	06-13-2001 
01-075 	Authorization of transfer of city-owned property within the Liberty Harbor Redevelopment Plan Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	06-27-2001 
01-083 	Dedication of lands from Liberty Center Associates to public use within the Exchange Place North Redevelopment Agency 	06-27-2001 
01-101 	Authorizes transfer of city-owned property within the Ocean Bayview Redevelopment Plan Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	09-12-2001 
01-114 	Authorizes transfer of city-owned property within the Monticello Avenue Redevelopment Plan Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	10-10-2001 
01-119 	Authorizes exchange of city property for state property 	10-24-2001 
02-003 	Transfer of the interest of TCR 1 LP in the Jersey City I Urban Renewal 	01-23-2002 
02-031 	Transfer of city-owned property within the Greenvilla Redevelopment Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	03-27-2002 
02-032 	Transfer of city-owned property within the Ocean Bayview Redevelopment Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	03-27-2002 
02-033 	Transfer of city-owned property within the Monticello Avenue Redevelopment Plan Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	03-27-2002 
02-037 	Authorizes acquisition NUNC PRO TUNC of Block 1853 	03-27-2002 
02-059 	Authorizes transfer of city-owned property within the Morris Canal Redevelopment Agency. 	05-22-2002 
02-065 	Authorizes acquisition of 209 Ninth Street from the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	06-12-2002 
02-066 	Authorizes acquisition by purchase or condemnation of Block 200, Lot F (175 Montgomery Street) 	06-12-2002 
02-079 	Authorizes transfer of city-owned property within the Ocean Bayview Redevelopment Plan Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	06-26-2002 
02-081 	Conveyance of Block 1 Lot 3 to Hudson County 	07-17-2002 
02-085 	Accepts a deed in lieu of foreclosure for property known as Block 395.1, Lot 2 	08-14-2002 
02-097 	Transfer of city-owned property within the Turnkey Redevelopment Plan Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	09-12-2002 
02-098 	Transfer of city-owned property within the Morris Canal Redevelopment Plan Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	09-12-2002 
02-099 	Transfer of city-owned property within the Martin Luther King Drive Redevelopment Plan Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	09-12-2002 
02-100 	Transfer of 23 Cornelison Ave. and 52 Summit Avenue to Foundation of Housing, Inc., for the purpose of rehabilitating the properties for use as affordable housing units 	Defeated 
09-12-2002 
02-134 	Acquisition of Block 200, Lot R.1 	12-11-2002 
02-135 	Acquisition of Block 200, Lot S.1 	12-11-2002 
02-136 	Acquisition of Block 200, Lot A 	12-11-2002 
02-139 	Authorizes Fairmount Housing Corp. to sell 149 Grant Avenue to En Funding, LLC 	12-11-2002 
02-141 	Transfer of city-owned property within the Martin Luther King Drive Redevelopment Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	01-08-2003 
02-146 	Acquisition of three easements across property south of Christopher Columbus Drive for the Green Street Project 	01-08-2003 
02-147 	Transfer of city-owned property within the Vacant Buildings Redevelopment Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	01-08-2003 
03-004 	Conveyance of an easement across Block 100, Lot S, adjacent to Secaucus Road 	01-22-2003 
03-006 	Acquisition of Block 1970, Lot 5 	01-22-2003 
03-007 	Exercise of the city's right to buy the Martin Luther King Drive Community Education center from the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	02-26-2003 
03-016 	Sale of a portion of city-owned property to state operated school district of Jersey City 	02-26-2003 
03-025 	Conveyance of sixteen properties to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency for the construction of twenty-nine units of affordable housing 	Defeated 
02-11-2003 
03-028 	Conveyance of certain property within the Greenvilla Redevelopment Plan Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	Withdrawn 
02-11-2003 
03-042 	Transfer of city-owned properties within the Monticello Avenue Redevelopment Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	03-26-2003 
03-043 	Transfer of city-owned property within the Green Villa Redevelopment Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	03-26-2003 
03-045 	Dedicates as open space a portion of Hudson Street 	03-26-2003 
03-051 	Dedicates certain roadways, sidewalks and utilities from Newport Associates Development Company 	04-09-2003 
03-052 	Dedicates certain city-owned property on Cornelison and Summit Avenue as park lands 	04-09-2003 
03-056 	Transfer of city-owned property within the Martin Luther King Redevelopment Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	04-23-2003 
03-061 	Acquisition of Block 1301, Lot A from the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency for a new library building 	05-14-2003 
03-064 	Transfer of city-owned property within the Ocean Bayview/Turnkey Development Areas to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	05-14-2003 
03-073 	Conveyance of Block 2026.1, Lots 2.A, 3.A, 3.B and 4.A 	05-28-2003 
03-076 	Conveyance of 133 Lafayette Street, 222 Van Horne Street and 236 Van Horne Street to the Jersey City Community Housing Corporation 	Defeated 
05-28-2003 
03-077 	Conveyance of 16 Bergen Avenue to the Jersey City Community Housing Corporation 	06-11-2003 
03-080 	Transfer of city-owned property within the Martin Luther King Drive Development Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	Withdrawn 
05-28-2003 
03-082 	Transfer of city-owned property within the Monticello Avenue Redevelopment Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	Withdrawn 
05-28-2003 
03-086 	Conveyance of property within the Greenvilla Redevelopment Plan Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	06-11-2003 
VETOED 
06-20-2003 
03-087 	Conveyance of the Medical Center Complex to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	06-11-2003 
VETOED 
06-20-2003 
OVERRIDDEN 
by Council 08-13-2003 
03-092 	Conveyance of sixteen (16) properties to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	07-16-2003 
03-100 	Transfer of city-owned property within the Monticello Avenue Redevelopment Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	08-13-2003 
03-105 	Conveyance of the Medical Center Complex to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	Withdrawn 
06-20-2003 
03-111 	Dedicates Block 1628, Lot 205 along Sip Avenue for a public roadway 	09-10-2003 
03-133 	Dedicates a portion of Essex Street for roadway purposes 	10-08-2003 
03-136 	Conveyance of 94-100 Martin Luther King Drive to Community Empowerment Organization, Inc. 	10-22-2003 
03-137 	Conveyance of Block 1497, Lot 4 within the Caven Point Redevelopment Plan Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	10-08-2003 
Rescinded by 04-016 
03-143 	Conveyance of 111 Arlington Avenue to the Community Empowerment Organization, Inc. 	Defeated 
11-25-2003 
03-146 	Acquisition of 194 York Street for construction of a new City Hall Annex 	10-22-2003 
03-151 	Transfer of city-owned property within the Monticello Avenue Redevelopment Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	11-25-2003 
03-153 	Dedicates Second Street and Erie Street to be known as Bishop Paul Moore, Jr. Place 	01-14-2004 
03-156 	Acquisition of Block 2078-A, Lots 1, B, C, D, 9, 10, 11, 12, K, L, M, N, 15, 16, and part of Lots J4 from the state of New Jersey 	11-25-2003 
03-159 	Conveyance of 111 Arlington Avenue to the Community Empowerment Organization, Inc. 	12-10-2003 
03-160 	Conveyance of certain sites within the Martin Luther King Drive Redevelopment Area to St. James A.M.E. Development Corporation 	01-14-2004 
04-001 	Conveyance of 241 Martin Luther King Drive to Building an Empire, Inc. 	03-10-2004 
04-012 	Conveyance of 209 Ninth Street, Block 251, Lot 57 in addition to the payment of funds and acquisition of 253-255 and 257 Marin Boulevard, Block 200, Lots R.1, S.1 for the construction of a new City Hall Annex 	Defeated 
02-11-2004 
04-016 	Conveyance of a portion of the Caven Point Redevelopment Plan Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency, and rescinds Ord. 03-137 	02-25-2004 
04-022 	Conveyance of 209 Ninth Street, Block 251, Lot 57 in addition to the payment of funds and acquisition of 253-255 and 257 Marin Boulevard, Block 200, Lots R.1, S.1 for the construction of a new City Hall Annex 	03-10-2004 
04-032 	Conveyance of a portion within the Morris Canal Redevelopment Plan Area to the City of Jersey City and dedicates the property as a park 	03-24-2004 
04-035 	Acquisition of 204 Stegman Street from the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	04-14-2004 
04-036 	Conveyance of one property to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	04-14-2004 
04-037 	Transfer of city-owned property at 120-122 Monticello Avenue within the Monticello Avenue Redevelopment Agency to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	04-14-2004 
04-038 	Transfer of city-owned property at 15.5 Oak Street within the Martin Luther King Drive Redevelopment Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	04-14-2004 
04-039 	Authorizes the sale of Block 790 parts of Lot 1 to New Jersey Transit for the construction and operation of the Hudson Bergen Light Rail System 	04-14-2004 
04-049 	Acquisition of 88-96 Virginia Avenue from the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	05-12-2004 
04-050 	Conveyance of a portion of the Morris Canal Redevelopment Plan Area to the City of Jersey City and dedicates the property as a park 	05-12-2004 
04-054 	Transfer of city-owned property within the Exchange Place North Redevelopment Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	Withdrawn 
05-12-04 
04-057 	Acquisition of property located on Dwight Street from the Jersey City state-operated school district and the conveyance of property located on Bergen Avenue to the Jersey City state-operated school district 	06-09-2004 
04-058 	Acquisition of 222 Bergen Avenue for a parking facility for the public school district 	06-09-2004 
04-061 	Transfer of city-owned property within the Boland Street Redevelopment Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	06-23-2004 
04-066 	Conveyance of 265 Martin Luther King Drive to the Jersey City Community Housing Corporation 	Tabled 
06-23-2004 
04-083 	Transfer of city-owned property at 121 MLK Drive and 186-188 Woodlawn Avenue within the Martin Luther King Drive Redevelopment Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	09-08-2004 
04-089 	Acquisition of property located within Block 1951, Lot 33, commonly known as 24 Monticello Avenue from Astor Place Neighborhood Association Inc. 	09-08-2004 
04-096 	Acquisition by purchase or condemnation property located within Block 212, Lot M, Block 247, Lot 50A, Block 280, Lot 50A, Block 317.5, Lot 50A, Block 354.1, Lot 50A, Block 389.1, Lot 50 and Block 415, Lots 50 and 50.PL, commonly known as the Sixth Street Embankment 	09-08-2004 
04-105 	Transfer of city-owned property within the Martin Luther King Drive Redevelopment Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	09-22-2004 
04-111 	Acquisition of property located on 103-111 Martin Luther King Drive from the Jersey City Parking Authority; conveyance of property located at 302-308 Fairmont Avenue and 7 Boland Street to the Jersey City Parking Authority 	10-27-2004 
04-123 	Conveyance of 108 Storms Avenue to the Jersey City Community Housing Corporation 	10-27-2004 
04-124 	Conveyance of 299-301 Bergen Avenue to the Jersey City Community Housing Corporation 	10-27-2004 
04-136 	Acquisition of property located within Block 1301, Lot 8.A, commonly known as 222 Bergen Avenue; conveyance of Block 1421, Lot 11, commonly known as 94 Winfield Avenue 	11-10-2004 
04-139 	Conveyance of Block 2074, Lot G, commonly known as 364 Whiton Street to Jeremy Dopplet and David Waller 	11-23-2004 
04-145 	Acquisition of property located within Block 2081, Lots A1, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17A, 18A, 19A and 20A, commonly known as 73-85 Bishop Street from the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	01-12-2005 
05-006 	Transfer of partnership interest in 101 Hudson Urban Renewal Associates 	01-26-2005 
05-014 	Conveyance of certain unimproved property in Secaucus, known as Block 1 Lot 3, consisting of approximately 14 acres, to the American Littoral Society for recreational and educational purposes 	02-23-2005 
05-022 	Transfer of city-owned property within the LaFayette Park Redevelopment Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	03-09-2005 
05-036 	Conveyance of 99 Bright street, and confirming the conveyance of 101 Bright Street, to the state operated school district for the construction of new Public School #3 	04-13-2005 
05-041 	Amending Ordinance McC-410 authorizing the transfer of certain property within Block 844-5 to St. Joseph's School for the Blind and releasing the property from a right of reversion 	04-27-2005 
05-044 	Authorizing the transfer of city-owned property at 476, 478 and 498 Ocean Avenue within the Ocean Bayview Redevelopment Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	04-27-2005 
05-047 	Authorizing the conveyance of 29 Grant Avenue, 121 Grant Avenue and 123—125 Myrtle Avenue to the Jersey City Episcopal Community Development Corporation 	04-27-2005 
05-048 	Amending Ordinance 04-096 authorizing the City of Jersey City to acquire by purchase or condemnation certain property collectively known as the Sixth Street Embankment to include two additional properties, specifically Block 446, Lots 18A and 18B 	Defeated 
04-13-2005 
05-064 	Amending Ordinance 04-096 that authorized the city of Jersey City to acquire by purchase or condemnation certain property collectively known as the Sixth Street Embankment, to include one additional property, specifically Block 446, Lot 18A 	06-08-2005 
05-074 	Authorizing the acquisition of a portion of Block 20781.1 Lot 2 (a vacated portion of Maple Street) from the State of New Jersey 	06-22-2005 
05-082 	Authorizing the City of Jersey City to accept title to 528-530 Ocean Avenue from the Jersey City Development Corporation 	06-22-2005 
05-086 	Transfer of a one percent ownership interest in the Siena Urban Renewal Associates, LP 	06-22-2005 
05-098 	Conversion and transfer of the second amended financial agreement from Portofino Urban Renewal, LLC to Portofino Waterfront Urban Renewal, LLC 	08-10-2005 
05-099 	Termination of financial agreement, addendum and contribution agreement between the City of Jersey City and 50 Dey Street Urban Renewal, LLC 	08-10-2005 
05-100 	Termination of financial agreement between City of Jersey City and Salem Lafayette Urban Renewal Associates, LP 	08-10-2005 
05-103 	Authorizing the conveyance of 230 Stegman Street in settlement of the matter entitled Stegman Realty One, LLC; Stegman Realty Two, LLC; Stegman Acquisition, LLC and Stegman Street, LLC v. City of Jersey City Dk. No. HUD-L-4375-04 	08-10-2005 
05-104 	Authorizing the conveyance of 376-382 Bergen Avenue to Jersey City Community Housing Corporation, to effectuate the rehabilitation of 43 units of low income senior citizen rental housing 	Withdrawn 
07-13-2005 
05-109 	Authorizing the conveyance of 230 Stegman Street in settlement of the matter entitled Stegman Realty One, LLC; Stegman Realty Two, LLC; Stegman Acquisition, LLC and Stegman Street, LLC v. City of Jersey City Dk. No. HUD-L-4375-04 	Withdrawn 
08-10-2005 
05-110 	Termination of the financial agreement between the City of Jersey City and 30 River Court East Urban Renewal Company 	Withdrawn 
08-10-2005 
05-112 	Rescinding Ordinance 03-160 authorizing the conveyance of property to St. James A.M.E. Development Corporation and terminating the development agreement with St. James A.M.E. Development Corporation dated June 3, 2004 	09-14-2005 
05-119 	Terminating the financial agreement, addendum and contribution agreement between the City of Jersey City and Polar One East Urban Renewal Associates, LLC 	09-28-2005 
05-138 	Authorizing the acquisition of 21—25 Clinton Avenue from the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	10-12-2005 
05-140 	Accepting from Danitom Development, Inc. a dedication of certain roadways, sidewalks, and utilities located adjacent to 477-487 Communipaw Avenue 	10-12-2005 
05-141 	Authorizing the transfer of city-owned property within the Morris Canal Redevelopment Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	10-12-2005 
05-145 	Conveyance of certain unimproved property in Secaucus, known as Block 1 Lot 3, to the Hudson County or the American Littoral Society for recreational and educational purposes 	10-12-2005 
05-149 	Amending Ordinance 03-146 that authorized the acquisition of Block 200, part of Lot N1, more commonly known as 194 York Street to reduce the area to be acquired and reduce the purchase price 	10-26-2005 
05-164 	Conveyance of certain property within the Martin Luther King Drive Redevelopment Plan Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	11-22-2005 
06-019 	Authorizing conveyance of 376-382 Bergen Avenue to Jersey City Community Housing Corporation 	02-22-2006 
06-022 	Authorizing transfer of city-owned property within Martin Luther King Drive Redevelopment Area to Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	02-22-2006 
06-024 	Authorizing acquisition for new west district and fire facility 	04-12-2006 
06-076 	Authorizing the transfer of city-owned property within the Morris Canal Redevelopment area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency. 	06-28-2006 
06-095 	Authorizing the conveyance of Block 60, Lots 27A, 27C and 40, within the Liberty Harbor North Redevelopment Plan Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	08-16-2006 
06-096 	Amending Ordinance 03-051 accepting from Newport Associates Development Company a dedication of certain roadways, sidewalks and utilities located within the Jersey Avenue Redevelopment Area 	04-25-2007 
06-135 	Establishes abandoned property list and authorizes public officer to designate qualified rehabilitation entities 	11-21-2006 
06-138 	Authorizes execution of quitclaim deed from the City of Jersey City to 83-85 Waverly Street 	11-21-2006 
06-146 	Accepting from Centex Homes, LLC a dedication of certain roadway and utilities within Republic Container Redevelopment Area 	12-13-2006 
07-003 	Consenting to the assignment and sale of the membership interests of Morgan Holdings to Toll Morgan in the 126-142 Morgan Street Project 	01-24-2007 
07-010 	Authorizing the transfer of city-owned property within the Morris Canal Redevelopment Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	02-14-2007 
07-021 	Authorizing the City of Jersey City to (1) Acquire certain property from 159 Second Street Urban Renewal, LLC., and (2) Convey the property to the qualified and certain moderate income artists 	02-28-2007 
07-034 	Accepting from New Jersey City Affordable Housing, LLC. a dedication of a certain roadway Cul De Sac extension of Bernius Court within the Greenville Redevelopment Area 	03-14-2007 
07-055 	Authorizing the transfer of title to city-owned property at 429 - 431 Pacific Avenue. (Block 2091, Lot D & E) within the Lafayette Park I Redevelopment Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	04-11-2007 
07-071 	Authorizing the acquisition of 228 Bay Street from the Jersey City Parking Authority for the sum of $2,755,000 payable as follows: 1) Payment of $1,500,000; 2) Conveyance of 33 and 37 Oakland Avenue valued at $150,000; and 3) Release of certain indebtedness in the amount of $l,105,000 for projects at 871 Bergen Avenue & 89 - 101 Cambridge Avenue 	04-25-2007 
07-086 	Accepting a dedication of certain roadways, sidewalks and utilities located within the Water Street Redevelopment Area; extension of Grant Av, Soho Dr, Tribeca Av and Claremont Av 	05-09-2007 
07-089 	Amending ordinance that authorized the City of Jersey City to (1) Acquire certain property from 159 Second Street Urban Renewal, LLC; and (2) Conveyance the property to the qualified and certified moderate income artists to substitute new purchasers for unit #205 and Unit #605 	05-09-2007 
07-093 	Approving the conveyance of 25 condominium units from 95 Van Damure to 300 Communipaw, Inc. 	05-23-2007 
07-104 	Authorizing the execution of an agreement in which the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey will contribute $4,000,000 toward the construction of the Public Safety Communications Center at Bishop Street and the Parking. Facility at Grand Street and Jersey Avenue 	06-13-2007 
07-105 	Authorizing the conveyance of a deed to part of Block 60.06, Lot 2 (Formerly known as Block 60, Plot A) to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	06-13-2007 
07-112 	Authorizing an amendment to Ordinance 06-024 to include the acquisition by purchase or condemnation of Block 1931, Lot 26 for the New West District and Fire Facility Project 	06-27-2007 
07-119 	Amending Ordinance that authorized the City of Jersey City to (1) Acquire certain property from 159 Second Street Urban Renewal, LLC., and (2) Convey the property to the qualified and certified moderate income artists to substitute new purchasers for Unit #407 	06-27-2007 
07-128 	Authorizing the transfer of city-owned property within the Martin Luther King Drive Redevelopment Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency. (270, 272, 276 & 278 Martin Luther King Drive) 	07-18-2007 
07-138 	Authorizing the execution of two developers' agreements and the transfer of 155 Bergen Avenue, 119 Rutgers Avenue, 94 Wegman Parkway and 21-23 Orient Avenue pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:12-21(1) to the Jersey City Episcopal Community Development Corp., a Nonprofit Housing Corporation 	08-08-2007 
07-155 	Authorizing the transfer of city-owned property at 509 Martin Luther King Drive (Block 1960, Lot N.1) within the Martin Luther King Drive Redevelopment Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	09-11-2007 
07-159 	Authorizing the transfer of city-owned property within Lafayette Park Redevelopment Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency. (343 Johnston Avenue) 	09-26-2007 
07-164 	Authorizing the assumption of the City of Jersey City's mortgage affecting property known as 45-51 Martin Luther King Drive and the subordination of the city's mortgage to the mortgage of Community Preservation Corporation 	10-24-2007 
07-167 	Authorizing the acquisition of Block 1464, Lot 0000A, and more commonly known as 40 Van Nostrand Avenue, Jersey City, New Jersey 	10-24-2007 
07-174 	Authorizing the acquisition of Block 1464, Lot C, more commonly known as 36 Van Nostrand Avenue, Jersey City, New Jersey 	11-07-2007 
07-179 	Authorizing the transfer of city-owned property within the Morris Canal Redevelopment Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency. (453 Communipaw Avenue) 	11-28-2007 
07-180 	Authorizing the transfer of city-owned property within the Jackson Avenue Redevelopment Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency. (24 Monticello Avenue) 	11-28-2007 
07-188 	Authorizing the conveyance of certain property on or near Garfield Avenue to Jersey City Redevelopment Agency. (2 Dakota Street, 880 Garfield Avenue, 884 Garfield Avenue and 70 Carteret Avenue) 	01-09-2008 
08-013 	Authorizing the acquisition by purchase or condemnation of Block 1825.A, Lots A.6 and A.7 for the purpose of expanding the Boyd McGuiness Park 	03-26-2008 
08-015 	Authorizing the acquisition of Block 1464, Lot 16, more commonly known as 34 Van Nostrand Avenue, Jersey City, New Jersey 	02-27-2008 
08-018 	Authorizing the conveyance of Block 7045, Lot B.1, more commonly known by the street address of 100 Hoboken Avenue, to Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	03-12-2008 
08-019 	Authorizing the reacquisition of 111 Arlington Avenue from Community Empowerment Organization, Inc. to the City of Jersey City 	03-12-2008 
08-020 	Authorizing the acquisition of Block 1994, Lot 8.99, formerly known as Block 1994, Lots 8 & 9 more commonly known by the street address of 14 - 16 Orient Avenue from Martin Luther King Drive Urban Renewal Joint Venture Partnership 	03-12-2008 
08-026 	Terminating the financial agreement and prepayment agreement between the City of Jersey City and Brass Works Urban Renewal Company, LLC 	Withdrawn 
02-27-2008 
08-028 	Authorizing the conveyance of certain unimproved city-owned property to enable the State of New Jersey, to construct improvements to Route 1 & 9 - St. Paul's Avenue Bridge 	03-12-2008 
08-034 	Authorizing the 1) Acquisition of certain property from the Jersey City Municipality Utilities Authority and the Jersey City Incinerator Authority and 2) Conveyance of that property together with other city-owned property, to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	03-26-2008 
08-044 	Transfer of property to Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	04-23-2008 
08-059 	Accepting dedication of certain property located at the southerly portion of Marin Boulevard, including roadways, sidewalks, and utilities to be located therein, within the Liberty Harbor North Redevelopment Plan Area 	05-14-2008 
08-061 	Amending Ordinance 06-095 that authorized the conveyance of Block 60.15, Lots 1 and 2, and Block 60.26, Lot 1, formerly known as Block 60, Lots 27A, 27C and 40, within the Liberty Harbor North Redevelopment Plan Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	05-28-2008 
08-075 	Accepting dedication of certain property located at the southerly portion of Marin Boulevard, including roadways, sidewalks, and utilities to be located therein, within the Liberty Harbor North Redevelopment Plan Area 	06-11-2008 
08-094 	Authorizing the acquisition by purchase or condemnation of Block 1788, Lots 39 and 40, more commonly known as 255-261 Kearney Avenue, for a new fire house 	07-16-2008 
08-113 	Authorizing the conveyance of Block 1319, Lots A.09, A.08, A.07, A.03, 59, 58.A, and 57.A, more commonly known by the street addresses of 194, 196, 198, 200, 208, 210 and 212 Martin Luther King Drive respectively, to Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	08-20-2008 
08-123 	Authorizing the conveyance of certain unimproved city-owned property to enable the State of New Jersey to construct improvements to Route 7/Wittpenn Bridge 	09-10-2008 
08-172 	Authorizing the conveyance of 886 Bergen Avenue, Block 1872, Lot S1.99 to the Jersey City School District 	12-17-2008 
09-011 	Ordinance amending Ordinance 08-028 to approve the fair market value of certain property to be conveyed to the Department of Transportation for improvements to Route 1 & 9, and St. Paul's Avenue Bridge, and remove Block 640, Lot 108, 10 Cover Street from the property to be conveyed 	02-11-2009 
09-014 	An ordinance authorizing the transfer of city-owned property within the Morris Canal Redevelopment Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	02-25-2009 
09-015 	An ordinance authorizing the transfer of city-owned property within the Monticello Avenue Redevelopment Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	02-25-2009 
09-016 	An ordinance authorizing a one (1) year extension of the lease with Essex Plaza Management, L.L.C., for a portion of 361 Montgomery Street for use by the city as a senior citizen center 	02-25-2009 
09-020 	An ordinance authorizing the transfer of city-owned property within the Martin Luther King Drive Redevelopment Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	03-11-2009 
09-036 	Ordinance accepting from K. Hovanian at 77 Hudson Street Urban Renewal Company, LLC and EQR-Urban Renewal 77 Hudson Street, LLC a deed of easement of certain sidewalks, roadways and utilities located within the Colgate Redevelopment Areas and adjoining the easterly side of Greene Street between Grand Street and Sussex Street 	04-08-2009 
09-038 	Ordinance authorizing the acquisition by purchase or condemnation of a portion of the PJP Landfill Site, Truck Route 1&9 and Sip Avenue, Block 1627, Lots 1.P, 2.A, 3.B & 5.A, and Block 1639.A, Lots 1.C, 3, 4, 4.C, 6.A & 7, for use as open space and a park 	04-08-2009 
09-039 	Ordinance authorizing the acquisition by purchase or condemnation of Block 1510, Lots 29, X.1 & Y, and Block 1505.05, Lot D.1, more commonly known by the street address of 13-15 Linden Avenue, for a new municipal public works facility 	04-08-2009 
09-040 	Ordinance authorizing the conveyance of Block 1746, Lots C.4 and E.1 (Old Colony) to the County of Hudson 	04-08-2009 
09-041 	Ordinance authorizing the conveyance of Block 2073, Lots 1, A, 27.99, and 32-within the Morris Canal Redevelopment Plan Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	04-08-2009 
09-069 	An ordinance of the City of Jersey City, in the County of Hudson, New Jersey, providing for the acquisition of various fire department equipment and apparatus by means of a loan from the Hudson County Improvement Authority and appropriating $2,000,000.00 therefor, and providing for the issuance of $2,000,000.00 in general improvement bonds or notes of the City of Jersey City to finance the same 	06-17-2009 
09-089 	An ordinance authorizing the partial acquisition by purchase or condemnation of Block 1507, Lots 20, 21 and 20X (AKA 20T01), and the acquisition by purchase of easements for passage over certain N.J. Turnpike Authority and Contrail rights-of-way for a new municipal public works facility 	08-12-2009 
09-108 	Ordinance authorizing the acquisition from the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency of Block 1328, Lots 1.D, 1.E, 1.F, 1.G, 11.F, 11.H, 11.K, and 11.L within the Martin Luther King Drive Redevelopment Area 	10-28-2009 
09-128 	Ordinance authorizing the conveyance of 90 Virginia Avenue to the Jersey City Community Housing Corporation, a nonprofit corporation, to rehabilitate the property as fourteen units of low and moderate income condominium units 	01-13-2010 
09-129 	Ordinance amending Ordinance 04-123 approved on October 27, 2004 authorizing the conveyance of 108 Storms Avenue to the Jersey City Community Housing Corporation to rehabilitate the property as low and moderate income rental housing 	01-13-2010 
09-130 	Ordinance amending Ordinance 04-124 approved on October 27, 2004 authorizing the conveyance of 299-301 Bergen Avenue to the Jersey City Community Housing Corporation to rehabilitate the property as ten (10) units of low and moderate income rental housing 	01-13-2010 
10-001 	Ordinance accepting a dedication of certain land and improvements located within the Powerhouse Arts District Redevelopment Area 	01-27-2010 
10-055 	Authorizing conveyance of certain properties to the Jersey City Development Agency 	04-28-2010 
10-062 	Naming the ice skating rink at Pershing Field The Charlie Heger Ice Skating Rink 	04-28-2010 
10-102 	Authorizing conveyance of property to the Community Asset Preservation Alliance of Jersey City, Inc. to effectuate the rehabilitation of 13 units of low and moderate income rental housing 	08-04-2010 
10-118 	Authorizing transfer of city-owned property within the Martin Luther King Drive Redevelopment Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	09-29-2010 
10-119 	Authorizing the execution of a developer's agreement and the transfer of 34 Van Nostrand Avenue, 36 Van Nostrand Avenue, 38 Van Nostrand Avenue, and 40 Van Nostrand Avenue pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:12-21(j) to the Jersey City Episcopal Community Development Corporation 	09-29-2010 
10-126 	Amendment to Ordinance Number 10-055 which authorized the transfer of city-owned property within the Martin Luther King Drive Redevelopment Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	10-27-2010 
10-143 	Authorizing the city's acceptance of a deed from the trustees of the Free Public Library regarding 1843 Kennedy Boulevard, Block 1277.5, Lot 31.99 (a/k/a Greenville Public Library) 	11-23-2010 
11-005 	Authorizing 1) the sale of certain unimproved property and 2) amending the grant agreement with the Port Authority of New York/New Jersey to fund the PJP/Siegel acquisition 	01-26-2011 
11-013 	Consenting to the sale and assignment of the tax exemption and financial agreement from 70 Hudson Street Urban Renewal Associates, LLC. to RT 70 Hudson Urban Renewal, LLC 	02-09-2011 
11-014 	Consenting to the sale and assignment of the tax exemption and financial agreement from 90 Hudson Street Urban Renewal Associates, LLC, to RT 90 Hudson Urban Renewal, LLC 	02-09-2011 
11-034 	Authorizing the conveyance of 90 Virginia Avenue to the Jersey City Community Housing Corporation, for the purpose of constructing 10 emerging market residential condominium units and 3 affordable housing condominium units 	03-23-2011 
11-035 	Authorizing the conveyance of 242 Bergen Avenue to Jersey City Episcopal Community Development Corporation, for the purpose of constructing 12 units of affordable rental housing 	03-23-2011 
11-046 	Consenting to the sale and assignment of the tax exemption and financial agreement from PHM Urban Renewal Associates, LLC, to Gaia Journal Square Urban Renewal Associates, LLC 	04-27-2011 
11-049 	Authorizing the conveyance of certain unimproved city-owned property to enable the State of New Jersey to construct improvements to Route 7/Wittpenn Bridge 	05-11-2011 
11-090 	Adopting amendments to the zoning map of the Land Development Ordinance expanding the Restaurant Overlay Zone 	08-31-2011 
11-095 	Amending Ordinance 11-035 to authorize the conveyance of 242 Bergen Avenue to Bergen Court Inc., a non-profit corporation for the purpose of constructing 12 units of affordable rental housing 	08-31-2011 
12-003 	Adopting an amendment to the zoning map expanding the restaurant overlay zone 	01-25-2012 
12-010 	Accepting a dedication of certain land and improvements located within the Marion Works Office/Residential District (creation of new park 47 Dey St) 	02-08-2012 
12-032 	Authorizing the conveyance of certain property at 8 Erie St; 228 Bay St; and 223-231 First St to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	03-28-2012 
12-048 
Adopting an amendment to the zoning map further expanding the Restaurant Overlay Zone 	04-11-2012 
12-092 
Authorizing the conveyance of certain unimproved city-owned property known as Block 718, Lot 5, to Christ Hospital 	08-01-2012 
12-093 
Authorizing the transfer of city-owned property within the Bright and Varick Redevelopment Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	08-01-2012 
12-095 
Authorizing the transfer of city-owned property within the 826 Ocean Avenue Redevelopment Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	08-01-2012 
12-096 
Authorizing the transfer of Jersey City Redevelopment Agency-owned property within the Martin Luther King Drive Redevelopment Area to the city 	08-01-2012 
13-054 
Authorizing the execution of a deed of conservation easement for the properties located at Broadway and Sip Avenue and identified as Block 1627, Lots 1.P, 2.A, 3.B, 5.A and Block 1639.A, Lots 1.C, 3, 4, 4.C, 6.A, 7, collectively known as the Hackensack River Waterfront Park Acquisition Property 	05-08-2013 
13-055 
Authorizing the execution of a deed of conservation easement for the property known as block 1825.A, Lots A.6 and A.7, more commonly known as 91-95 Duncan Avenue (the Boyd McGuiness Park Expansion) 	05-08-2013 
13-121 
Authorizing the transfer of properties owned by the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency within the Morris Canal Redevelopment Plan area to the City for the creation of Berry Lane Park 	11-13-2013 
13-144 
Authorizing the City to sell City-owned property located in the Borough of Kinnelon, the Township of Jefferson, and the Township of Rockaway, which is known as the Split Rock Reservoir 	 1-15-2014 
14-064 
Vacating a portion of Grove Square consisting of approximately 3,451 square feet in order to align the street grid with the Liberty Harbor North Redevelopment Plan 	06-25-2014 
14-089 
Authorizing the conveyance of City-owned property located at 265 Martin Luther King Drive to the Urban League of Hudson County, a non-profit corporation pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:12-21(k) 	08-20-2014 
14-103 
Authorizing the City to file an offer of financial assistance (OFA) to acquire certain property collectively known as the Sixth Street Embankment from Conrail and such other Conrail properties as are necessary to connect with the main line in the vicinity of CP Waldo 	09-23-2014 
14-123 
Authorizing the transfer of Block 30305, Lot 6 to the New Jersey Turnpike Authority 	10-08-2014 
14-128 
Consent to 1) convey ownership of a project currently held solely by Grand LHN I Urban Renewal LLC, to include both KRE 18 Park Urban Renewal, LLC, and 18 Park Acquisition Urban Renewal, LLC, and result in joint and several ownership of the project by all three entities; and 2) assumption by all three entities of the financial agreement and the long term tax exemption 	10-08-2014 
14-167 
Authorizing the City to accept title and ownership of all real property and all personal property owned by the Jersey City Parking Authority and to assume all leases executed by the Jersey City Parking Authority 	01-14-2015 
14-175 
Ordinance authorizing the acquisition of Block 214, Lots 3 & 4 and Block 213, Lots 1 & 3 from 500 Manila Ave., LLC 	01-14-2015 
15-006 
Authorizing the transfer of City-owned property located at 362 Summit Avenue within the Journal Square 2060 Redevelopment Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	02-10-2015 
15-047 
Amending Ord. No. 03-061 to authorize the imposition of environmental deed restrictions on Block 23103, Lot 23, more commonly known as 271-285 Martin Luther King Drive, the Cunningham Library 	04-22-2015 
15-068 
Authorizing the transfer of City-owned property within the Bayfront I Redevelopment Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	05-27-2015 
15-075 
Authorizing the transfer of City-owned property within the Grand Jersey Redevelopment Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	06-10-2015 
15-110 
Authorizing the conveyance of 308 Whiton Street to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	09-09-2015 
15-111 
Accepting dedication of certain roadways, sidewalks, utilities, and a park located within the Liberty Harbor North Redevelopment Area 	09-09-2015 
15-186 
Authorizing the City of Jersey City to file an offer of financial assistance [OFA] to acquire certain property collectively known as the Sixth Street Embankment from Conrail, and such other Conrail properties as are necessary to connect with the main line in the vicinity of CP Waldo 	01-13-2016 
16-009 
Amending Ordinance 15-111 accepting the dedication of certain roadways, sidewalks, utilities, and a park located within the Liberty Harbor North Redevelopment Area 	01-27-2016 
16-017 
Authorizing the conveyance of Block 25101, Lot 51, more commonly known by the street address of 152 Martin Luther King Drive, to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	02-10-2016 
16-048 
Adopting an amendment to the zoning map expanding the Restaurant Overlay Zone 	03-23-2016 
16-056 
1) Authorizing the conveyance of Block 25101, Lot 51, more commonly known by the street address of 152 Martin Luther King Drive, to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency; and 2) rescinding Ordinance 16-017 	04-13-2016 
16-073 
Accepting from Unity Environmental Corp. a dedication of certain roadways, sidewalks and utilities located at the intersection of Franklin Street and Paterson Plank Road 	05-11-2016 
16-077 
Granting permission to 58 Giles, LLC, its successors and/or assigns, to make private improvements in the public right-of-way of 940 Pavonia Avenue, [a/k/a 58 Giles Avenue) Jersey City, New Jersey, also known on the tax map of the City of Jersey City as Block 10404, Lot 29 	05-11-2016 
16-089 
Adopting an amendment to the zoning map expanding the Restaurant Overlay Zone 	05-25-2016 
16-099 
Authorizing the City to convey all City-owned lots within the property known as Berry Lane Park to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency subject to the eventual reversion of the property for dedication as a City Park 	06-15-2016 
16-136 
Authorizing the execution of a developer's agreement and the transfer of 90 Virginia Avenue pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:12-21(I) to Garden State Episcopal Community Development Corporation, a nonprofit housing corporation 	09-14-2016 
16-158 
Authorizing the transfer of City-owned property within the Ocean/Bayview Redevelopment Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	10-26-2016 
16-166 
Authorizing the transfer of City-owned property within the Journal Square 2060 Redevelopment Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	11-09-2016 
16-175 
Amending Ordinance 16.073 accepting from Unity Environmental Corp. a dedication of certain roadways, sidewalks and utilities located at the intersection of Franklin Street and Paterson Plank Road 	11-22-2016 
17-020 
Accepting from COA 99 Hudson, LLC, a dedication of certain roadways, sidewalks and utilities within the Hudson Street right-of-way 	03-08-2017 
17-023 
Authorizing the transfer of certain City-owned real property, identified on the tax map of the City of Jersey City as Block 21504, Lot 6, to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency (65 Phillip Street) 	03-22-2017 
17-027 
Authorizing the conveyance of seven residential condominium units (A, B, C, D, E, F.1 and G) within Block 11612, Lot 2, and more commonly known by the street address of 311 Washington Street, to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	03-22-2017 
17-065 
Authorizing the exchange of City property for State property to realign Jersey Avenue South of Mill Creek and to execute conservation easements required by New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection in connection with the Hudson River Waterfront Walkway 	06-14-2017 
17-073 
Authorizing the City of Jersey City to sell property located at 26-30 Cook Street, 393 Hoboken Avenue, and 33-37 Oakland Avenue, Jersey City to the County of Hudson 	06-28-2017 
17-144 
Authorizing an amendment to Ordinance 17-073 adopted on June 28, 2017 to authorize an amendment to the agreement of sale with the County of Hudson dated June 29, 2017 for the sale of City-owned property at 26-30 Cook St, 393 Hoboken Av, and 33-37 Oakland Av, and the execution of an environmental remediation escrow agreement 	10-25-2017 
18-023 
Accepting the dedication of certain roadways, sidewalks, and utilities located within the Tidewater Redevelopment Area near Van Vorst Street and Dudley Street 	03-28-2018 
18-039 
Authorizing the City to sell property located at 65 Commercial Street, 20 Commercial Street, and 2 Commercial Street, Jersey City to the Jersey City Municipal Utilities Authority 	05-09-2018 
18-071 
Accepting from the Jersey City Housing Authority a dedication of a certain right-of-way within a portion of Lafayette Gardens known as Walter Mays Drive 	07-18-2018 
18-072 
Accepting from the Jersey City Housing Authority a dedication of a certain right-of-way within a portion of Lafayette Gardens known as Barbara Place 	07-18-2018 
18-073 
Accepting from the Jersey City Housing Authority a dedication of a certain right-of-way within a portion of Lafayette Gardens known as James Pop Curry Drive 	07-18-2018 
18-088 
Authorizing the conveyance of Block 25001, Lot 68.01, more commonly known by the street address of 174-178 Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive, to Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	08-15-2018 
18-132 
Authorizing the conveyance of property and execution of project agreements regarding Powerhouse Redevelopment and agreements in connection with settlement of litigation with Port Authority and other documents in connection therewith 	12-19-2018 
18-137 
Amending Ordinance 16-099 which authorized the conveyance of City-owned property to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency (JCRA) to (1) remove the parkland restrictions on Block 18901, Lots 7, 8, 9, 10 & 12 which were never intended to be part of Berry Lane Park and (2) authorize the City to accept conveyance of the remainder of the property for Berrylane Park 	12-19-2018 
19-008 
Authorizing the acquisition of Block 22502, Lots 36 and 37, more commonly known by the street addresses of 347-349 and 351-355 Martin Luther King Drive, respectively, from the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	02-14-2019 
19-013 
Authorizing the transfer of certain City-owned real property, identified on the tax map of the City of Jersey City as Block 15801, Lots 34, 70, 73, 77, 78 and 79.01 to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	02-27-2019 
19-037 
Accepting a dedication of certain land and improvements located within the Powerhouse Arts District Redevelopment Area at Provost Street between Bay Street and Morgan Street, authorizing the execution of a dedication agreement with 126-142 Morgan Street Urban Renewal, LLC and 134 Bay Street, LLC, the execution of a deed of easement with 126-142 Morgan Street Urban Renewal, LLC and 134 Bay Street, LLC, and the execution of a deed of easement with 126-142 Morgan Street Urban Renewal, LLC 	05-08-2019 
19-043 
Authorizing the conveyance of City-owned property located at 265 Martin Luther King Drive, a/k/a Block 23405, Lot 26, F/K/A Block 1306, Lot 28B to the Urban League of Hudson County, a non-profit corporation pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:12-21(k) 	05-08-2019 
 
TABLE 4. LEASE AND EASEMENT AGREEMENTS 
Ord. No. 	Subject Matter 	Date of Adoption 
C-890 	Easement 	02-09-1989 
C-905 	Lease with Spectrum Health Care Inc. 	03-29-1989 
C-907 	Lease with CET, Inc. 	03-09-1989 
C-911 	Lease with Greenville Steering Committee 	03-09-1989 
C-960 	Lease with Visiting Homemakers of Hudson County 	05-25-1989 
C-977 	Lease with Jersey City Fire Federal Credit Union 	05-25-1999 
C-978 	Lease with Jersey City Police Federal Credit Union 	05-25-1989 
C-982 	Easement granted to Point View Estates 	06-08-1989 
McC-12 	Easement granted to State of New Jersey 	09-13-1989 
McC-15 	Renewal and extension of lease agreement with Parking Authority 	09-13-1989 
McC-59 	Extension of existing lease with Visiting Homemakers of Hudson County 	10-25-1989 
McC-73 	Lease with Senior Support Services of Jersey City 	11-22-1989 
McC-107 	Renewal and extension of lease with Parking Authority 	03-14-1990 
McC-112 	Lease with Jersey City Public School District 	03-14-1990 
McC-163 	Lease with Parking Authority 	07-18-1990 
McC-201 	Lease with spectrum Health Care, Inc. 	09-12-1990 
McC-238 	Sublease agreement with Jersey City Economic Development Corp. 	12-05-1990 
McC-257 	Lease with Hudson County 	01-09-1991 
McC-263 	Lease with Senior Support Services of Jersey City 	01-23-1991 
McC-265 	Lease with Educational Arts Team of Jersey City 	01-23-1991 
McC-266 	Lease with Gong Club of Jersey City, Inc. 	01-23-1991 
McC-267 	Lease with Hudson County Health Services 	01-23-1991 
McC-274 	Lease with Jersey City Child Development Center 	02-13-1991 
McC-333 	Lease with B.A.L.C., Inc. 	06-26-1991 
McC-382 	Lease with 880 Bergen Avenue, Inc. 	10-23-1991 
McC-419 	Lease with Visiting Homemakers of Hudson County 	02-26-1992 
92-012 	Lease with Neighborhood Housing Services of Jersey City, Inc. 	03-11-1992 
92-072 	Lease with Jersey City Child Development Center 	06-24-1992 
92-119 	Easement granted to State of New Jersey 	09-16-1992 
92-120 	Easement granted to State of New Jersey 	09-16-1992 
92-122 	Lease with State Operated School District 	09-16-1992 
92-123 	Lease with Senior Support Services of Jersey City 	09-16-1992 
92-133 	Lease with Ukrainian National Urban Renewal Corp. 	09-30-1992 
92-134 	Acquisition by lease of portion of Lincoln Park 	09-30-1992 
92-136 	Lease with B.A.L.C., Inc. 	10-14-1992 
92-138 	Easement granted to Lillian Palumbo 	10-14-1992 
92-148 	Lease from Parking Authority 	10-28-1992 
92-163 	Extension of lease with Journal Square Associates 	10-24-1992 
92-167 	Amended lease with Ukrainian National Urban Renewal Corp. 	11-24-1992 
93-024 	Lease with Visiting Homemakers of Hudson County 	03-24-1993 
93-025 	Extension of lease for Division of Property Conservation 	03-24-1993 
93-026 	Lease with Family Collective Day Care Center, Inc. 	03-24-1993 
93-033A 	Acquisition by lease of portion of Lincoln Park 	04-14-1993 
93-061 	Lease with Parking Authority 	06-09-1993 
93-084 	Lease with Jersey City Random Corporation 	09-08-1993 
93-099 	Lease with Jersey City Child Development Center 	09-08-1993 
93-135 	Lease with New Jersey Department of Community Affairs 	11-23-1993 
93-143 	Easement granted to Port Authority Trans-Hudson Corporation 	12-08-1993 
93-154 	Lease with New Jersey Bell Telephone Company 	01-12-1994 
93-155 	Lease with Horizon Health Center 	01-12-1994 
93-156 	Lease of Loew's Theatre to Jersey City Economic Development Corporation 	01-14-1994 
94-004 	Lease with B.A.L.C., Inc. 	02-09-1994 
94-009 	Lease from Parking Authority 	02-23-1994 
94-026 	Lease with County of Hudson 	04-13-1994 
94-028 	Easement between city, Port Liberte Partners and state 	04-13-1994 
94-034 	Amendment of Ord. No. 93-033A 	04-27-1994 
94-041 	Lease with Family Collective Day Care Center, Inc. 	05-11-1994 
94-044 	Operating and license agreement with Jersey City Incinerator Authority 	05-25-1994 
94-072 	Lease to United Cerebral Palsy of Hudson County 	09-14-1994 
94-073 	Easement with St. Joseph's School for the Blind 	09-14-1994 
94-086 	Lease with Private Industry Council 	09-14-1994 
94-095 	Lease with New Jersey Department of Community Affairs 	10-12-1994 
94-096 	Extension of lease with Jersey City Child Development Center 	10-12-1994 
94-120 	Lease with County of Hudson 	12-28-1994 
94-139 	Renewal of lease with Horizon Health Center, Inc. 	01-11-1995 
94-140 	Lease with New Jersey Transit Corporation 	01-11-1995 
95-003 	Extension of lease with Jersey City Child Development Center 	02-22-1995 
95-015 	Amendment to Ord. No. McC-579 	03-08-1995 
95-023 	Lease with B.A.L.C., Inc. 	04-12-1995 
95-074 	Lease with Jersey City Parking Authority 	09-13-1995 
95-075 	Lease with Jersey City Child Development Center 	09-13-1995 
95-079 	Lease with New Jersey Department of Community Affairs 	09-13-1995 
95-080 	Lease with the Free Public Library of Jersey City 	09-13-1995 
95-120 	Lease with Horizon Health Center, Inc. 	01-10-1996 
95-121 	Lease with Visiting Homemakers of Hudson County 	01-10-1996 
96-036 	Lease with Horizon Health Center, Inc. 	04-24-1996 
96-040 	Lease with G & H Development and Construction 	05-08-1996 
96-065 	Lease with B.A.L.C., Inc. 	06-26-1996 
96-070 	Lease with Jersey City Board of Education 	06-26-1996 
96-074 	Lease with Sacred Heart School 	07-24-1996 
96-078 	Overhead utility easement granted to Borough of North Arlington 	08-14-1996 
96-079 	Lease with Visiting Homemakers of Hudson County 	08-14-1996 
96-110 	Lease with Jersey City Child Development Center 	11-13-1996 
96-120 	Lease with state-operated School District of Jersey City 	12-11-1996 
96-123 	Lease with nonprofit corporations or associations for public purposes in connection with Adopt a Lot Program 	12-30-1996 
97-003 	Lease with Visiting Homemakers of Hudson County 	01-22-1997 
97-005 	Sale of city-owned property located at Caven Point Road and Chapel Avenue (Block 1500, Lot 16) to the State-Operated School District and the lease of a portion of the same from the State-Operated School District 	06-11-1997 
97-020 	Lease agreement with Horizon Health Center, Inc., for office space at 706-714 Bergen Avenue 	03-12-1997 
97-027 	Lease agreement with the State of New Jersey for Block 2, Lot C, to be used as a park and a memorandum of understanding with Colgate-Palmolive Company and the State of New Jersey for development and maintenance of the park on Hudson and Essex Streets (Block 2, Lots A and C) known as "Veterans Park" 	04-09-1997 
97-036 	Lease agreement with the Parking Authority for on-street permit parking spaces in the Christopher Columbus Drive Permit Parking Zone 	04-23-1997 
97-047 	Acquisition of property located at 89-101 Cambridge Avenue (Block 762, Lots 38A, 38, 9B and 42A), subject to an existing lease, and lease agreement, with an option to buy, with the Jersey City Parking Authority and assignment of lease to the Parking Authority 	06-25-1997 
97-058 	Lease agreement with Sacred Heart School for the premises at 236-240 Martin Luther King Drive for the purpose of conducting remedial math and reading classes 	09-10-1997 
97-062 	Lease agreement with B.A.L.C., Inc., for the premises at 57-79 Storms Avenue for the purpose of conducting an educational and recreational program 	09-24-1997 
97-069 	Lease agreement with Let's Celebrate for property at 201 Cornelison Avenue, 335 Bergen Avenue and 28 Paterson Street in connection with the Meals on Wheels Program 	10-08-1997 
97-100 	Lease agreement with Visiting Homemakers of Hudson County for office space located at 586 Newark Avenue 	01-14-1998 
98-007 	Lease agreement with the Jersey City Child Development Center for property located at Block 235, Lots 168 and 169, 14 and 16 Bright Street 	02-25-1998 
98-025 	Lease agreement with Jersey City Connections, Inc., for office space located at 201 Cornelison Avenue 	03-25-1998 
98-026 	Lease agreement with the State Operated School District of Jersey City for vacant land located at 278-288 Duncan Avenue adjacent to Public School No. 39 	03-25-1998 
98-034 	Easement on portions of Monmouth Street, Pavonia Avenue and Ninth Street in City Block 393, petitioned by the Atrium at Hamilton Park, L.L.C. and 299 Pavonia Avenue Condominium Association, Inc. 	04-08-1998 
98-036 	Easement to Cotton Temple Church of God in Christ, Inc. to use a portion of the sidewalk area adjoining Lots 85, 86 and 87, Block 381-383 Bergen Avenue 	04-08-1998 
98-121 	Grant of a sanitary sewer easement to the Town of Kearny for the project known as the Sellers/Barszcewski Sanitary Sewer Project 	09-09-1998 
98-138 	Lease agreement with B.A.L.C., Inc. 	10-28-1998 
98-139 	Lease agreement with Sacred Heart School 	10-28-1998 
98-148 	Accepting slope easements, fee simple title and/or dedication of various lands owned by: Cali-Harborside (Fee) Associates, Inc., Town Cove Jersey City Urban Renewal, Inc., the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, Jersey City Redevelopment Agency, New Jersey Transit Corporation, Liberty Center Associates, Evergreen America Corporation, and Washington Tower Associates, L.L.C.; and dedicating city-owned land within the Exchange Place North and Hudson Exchange Redevelopment Areas 	11-10-1998 
98-149 	Easement through properties owned by Cali Harborside (Fee) Associates L.P. from the proposed extension of Greene Street to the Hudson River within the Exchange Place North and Hudson Exchange Redevelopment Areas 	11-10-1998 
98-164 	Lease agreement with New Hope Housing, Inc. for space located at 654 Bergen Avenue (lease term from 1-1-1999 to 12-31-2014) 	12-09-1998 
98-165 	Easement granted to Horizon Health Center, Inc. for sidewalk area adjacent to Lots 35 and 36, Block 1908, on Bergen Avenue 	01-13-1999 
98-171 	Easement to Hudson Hospitality Services Urban Renewal Associates, L.L.C., for area adjoining Lot 26, Block 15, on 6th Street 	01-13-1999 
98-174 	Lease agreement with Visiting Homemakers of Hudson County for space located at 586 Newark Avenue 	01-13-1999 
99-011 	Accepting easement from Fleet Bank, N.A. to provide emergency egress for the Hudson City Branch of the Jersey City Public Library 	02-10-1999 
99-013 	Lease agreement with Columbian Building Association for property located at 338 and 340 St. Pauls Avenue 	02-10-1999 
99-025 	Easement to the Jersey City Board of Education for property located in Block 1852, Lot 53 	02-24-1999 
99-031 	Sublease agreement with Jersey City Parking Authority for property located at 392-394 Central Avenue 	03-10-1999 
99-076 	Easement granted to the State-Operated School District for installing and maintaining landscaping on property known as Reservoir No. 2 	06-09-1999 
99-077 	Lease agreement with Jersey City Child Development Center for Block 235, Lots 168 and 169 	06-09-1999 
99-089 	Lease agreement with Let's Celebrate, Inc., for property at 201 Cornelison Avenue 	07-21-1999 
99-099 	Lease agreement with Jersey City Parking Authority for property located at 228 Bay Street and 223-231 First Street 	08-18-1999 
99-103 	Lease agreement with New Jersey Bell Telephone for property located at 71 Madison Avenue 	08-18-1999 
99-163 	Lease agreement with Sacred Hearth School 	11-10-1999 
99-168 	Easement to Montville Township Municipal Utilities Authority for Block 151, Lot 21 	11-23-1999 
99-176 	Lease agreement with B.A.L.C., Inc. 	12-15-1999 
99-178 	Lease agreement with Visiting Homemakers of Hudson County for space located at 586 Newark Avenue 	12-15-1999 
99-180 	Lease agreement with S.D.S. Corporation for ice skate concession stand at Pershing Field Ice Rink Facility 	12-15-1999 
99-191 	Lease agreement with 115 CCD Urban Renewal Corp. for space located at 115 Christopher Columbus Drive 	01-12-2000 
00-070 	Lease agreement with Jersey City State-Operated School District as tenant for property located at Block 1366, Lot 54A, Danforth Avenue, adjacent to PS #20 	06-28-2000 
00-089 	Lease of Block 235, Lots 168 and 169 (also known as 14 and 16 Bright Street) for the Jersey City Child Development Center 	08-16-2000 
00-096 	Use and access easement granted to Jersey City Municipal Utilities Authority in connection with improvements to sewerage system (Lot 12A in Block 2154.4 and Lot 10N in Block 1751) 	08-16-2000 
00-102 	Lease agreement Jersey City Employment and Training Program, Inc., to use a city-owned building at 121-125 Newark Avenue (Block 24, Lot C) 	08-16-2000 
00-163 	Lease agreement with Jersey City Parking Authority for seven parking spaces in the Parking Authority Lot No. 32 located at 277 Central Avenue 	11-21-2000 
00-164 	Authorizing the conveyance of an exclusive subsurface easement to the Port Authority Trans-Hudson Corporation for the Pavonia/Newport Station 	11-21-2000 
01-011 	Lease with Visiting Homemaker's of Hudson County 	01-24-2001 
01-022 	Lease agreement with B.A.L.C. Inc. for the purpose of creating an educational and recreational program 	02-28-2001 
01-044 	Conveyance of 99 Bright Street, Block 304, Lot Z to the state operated school district for the construction of new school #3 	04-11-2001 
01-049 	Fifty year lease of 400 Clendenny Avenue and 1033 Communipaw Avenue to Liberty Humane Society, Inc. 	04-25-2001 
01-067 	Accepts easements and dedications of land for public right-of-way from Cali Harborside (Fee) Associates, and Evergreen America Corporation within the Exchange Place North Redevelopment Area 	06-13-2001 
01-089 	Acknowledgement of substitution of a deed for a leasehold interest in property 	06-27-2001 
01-096 	Authorizes acceptance of deed in lieu of foreclosures for property located in Block 5, Lot 29 and Block 8, Lot 9 	09-12-2001 
01-113 	Authorization for city to lease property to the Child Development Agency 	10-10-2001 
01-124 	Authorizes conveyance of 721-1/2 Grand Street, 482 Communipaw Avenue and 5-3 Summit Avenue to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency for the construction of affordable housing 	11-28-2001 
02-002 	Authorization of city to enter into lease agreement as lessee with Visiting Homemakers of Hudson County as a lessor for office space 	01-23-2002 
02-023 	Authorization of lease agreement between the city and Knights of Columbus for certain property for use as a basketball court 	03-13-2002 
02-034 	Authorizes city to lease on-street permit parking spaces in the Christopher Columbus Drive permit parking zone from the parking authority 	03-27-2002 
02-043 	Granting township of Little Falls an easement in city-owned block 	04-10-2002 
02-057 	Authorizes city to enter into a lease agreement as lessee with 115 CCD Partners, LP as lessor for office space 	05-22-2002 
02-071 	Conveyance to Morris County and easement in city-owned Block 400 and Block 450, Lots 2 and 3, in Parsipanny-Troy Hills; and Block 79, Lot 17 in Boonton 	06-12-2002 
02-111 	Permission to New Jersey City University to enter into an agreement to lease space on an attach fiber-optic cable owned by Verizon-New Jersey, Inc. 	10-09-2002 
02-124 	Grants township of Little Falls an easement in city-owned Block 157, Lot 2 	11-26-2002 
02-125 	Release of public rights in an easement across 41-47 Broadway and 145 Van Wagnen Avenue 	11-26-2002 
02-140 	Easement agreement with the Port Authority of New York 	01-08-2003 
02-145 	Lease for Block 235, Lots 168 and 169 to the Jersey City Child Development Center 	01-08-2003 
03-005 	Conveyance of two easements to Municipal Utilities Authority 	01-22-2003 
03-008 	Lease agreement with Visiting Homemakers of Hudson County for office space 	01-22-2003 
03-060 	Conveyance of an easement to the New Jersey Meadowlands Commission 	05-28-2003 
03-075 	Deed easement from the state of New Jersey Department of Military and Veterans Affairs 	05-28-2003 
03-119 	Amendment of Ord. No. 98-164 	Withdrawn 
08-13-2003 
03-128 	Amendment of Ord. No. 98-164 	09-24-2003 
03-132 	Easement from GSJC Land, LLC 	10-08-2003 
03-149 	Lease agreement with the Jersey City Child Development Center for Block 235, Lots 168 and 169 	11-12-2003 
03-157 	Lease agreement with Visiting Homemakers of Hudson County for office space located at 586 Newark Avenue 	11-25-2003 
04-004 	Lease agreement with Liberty Humane Society, Inc., for public purpose located at 235 Jersey City Boulevard and terminates the lease of 400 Clendenny Avenue and 1033 Communipaw Avenue 	02-11-2004 
04-033 	Lease agreement with the Friends of the Loew's Theater for the Loew's Theater at Block 1863, Lot N24 	04-14-2004 
04-040 	Lease agreement with the Jersey City Economic Development Corporation for the kiosk and fountain at Journal Square 	Withdrawn 
03-24-2004 
04-045 	Lease agreement with the Journal Redevelopment Plan Area for the fountain and kiosk located on the easterly side of Kennedy Boulevard 	Withdrawn 
4-14-2004 
04-048 	Lease agreement with the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency for the kiosk and fountain at Journal Square 	Tabled 
06-01-2004 
04-060 	Lease agreement with Dress for Success Jersey City, Inc., for a portion of 121-125 Newark Avenue 	06-09-2004 
04-073 	Lease agreement with the Friends of the Loew's Theater for the Loew's Theater at Block 1863, Lot N24 	Tabled 
07-14-2004 
04-075 	Lease agreement with Metro-Spec Corporation for property located at 146 Belmont Avenue 	08-11-2004 
04-110 	Lease agreement with the Jersey City Child Development Center for property located at Block 235, Lots 168 and 169, commonly known as 14 and 16 Bright Street 	10-13-2004 
04-116 	Lease agreement with Saint John's Baptist Church for property located at Block 1963, Lot 12.A, commonly known as 826 Ocean Avenue 	10-27-2004 
04-127 	Lease agreement with Montgomery Associates, LP for property at Block 8, Lot C2, commonly known as 30 Montgomery Street 	10-27-2004 
05-004 	Developer's agreement including lease agreements affecting Bloc 204, Lots 1 through 6 a/k/a Fitzgerald-Holata Park and affecting Master Condominium units B an C within Block 205, Lot 35 a/k/a/ 100 Christopher Columbus Drive. 	01-26-2005 
05-015 	Authorizing the city to execute a ten year lease with Journal Square Plaza Urban Renewal Associates at One Journal Square Plaza 	02-23-2005 
05-041 	Amending Ordinance McC-410 approved on January 22, 1992 authorizing the transfer of certain property within Block 844.5 to St. Joseph's School for the Blind and releasing the property from a right of reversion 	04-27-2005 
05-061 	Authorizing a 5 year lease with Martin Luther King Drive Urban Renewal Joint Venture Partnership for a portion of 380-382 Martin Luther King Drive for use of governmental offices 	06-08-2005 
05-071 	Authorizing the city as lessee to extend and amend a lease agreement with 115 CCD Partners, LP as lessor for the office space located at 115 Christopher Columbus Drive, Jersey City 	06-22-2005 
05-111 	Authorizing a lease for up to five years with the Morris County Parks Commission 	Withdrawn 
08-10-2005 
05-129 	Authorizing the execution of easement agreements with Hartz Mountain Industries, Inc., Norfolk Southern Railway Company, and the County of Hudson in connections with the construction of city water pipelines in the town of Secaucus 	09-28-2005 
05-148 	Authorizing the lease of Block 235 Lots 168 and 169 a/k/a 14 and 16 Bright street to the Jersey City Child Development Center 	10-26-2005 
05-155 	Authorizing lease from the Jersey City Parking Authority of seven parking spaces in the Parking Authority Lot Number 32 located at 277 Central Avenue 	10-26-2005 
05-156 	Acceptance of an assignment from Hudson County of an easement agreement with the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey and the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection in connection with the Hudson River Waterfront Walkway. 	10-26-2005 
05-163 	Vacating a certain easement along Chapel Avenue 	02-22-2005 
05-166 	Approving agreements for the lease of certain equipment between the city of Jersey City and the Hudson County Improvement Authority 	11-22-2005 
06-006 	Lease agreement with State Department of Transportation 	01-25-2006 
06-008 	Ten-year lease agreement with Journal Square Plaza Urban Renewal Associates 	01-25-2006 
06-033 	Lease agreement with 18 Ash Street Realty, LLC 	03-22-2006 
06-036 	Lease agreement with Essex Plaza Management, LLC 	03-22-2006 
06-050 	Authorizing the execution of an agreement to transfer utilities and an easement agreement affecting Block 3, Lot 28 and Block 4, Lot 28, A/K/A 30 Hudson Street and 50 Hudson Street 	07-19-2006 
06-103 	Authorizing a one (1) year lease with Baldwin Asset Associates Urban Renewal Associates LLC for a portion of 201 Cornelison Avenue, Jersey City, New Jersey Block 1899; Lot 28 for use by the City as administrative offices for the Department of Health and Human Services 	09-13-2006 
06-110 	Authorizing the City of Jersey City to lease from the Jersey City Parking Authority seven parking spaces in the Parking Authority Lot Number 32 located at 277 Central Avenue 	09-27-2006 
06-115 	Authorizing the City of Jersey City to lease Block 235 Lots 168 & 169 a/k/a 14 & 16 Bright Street to the Jersey City Child Development Center 	10-11-2006 
06-127 	Authorizing the acquisition of an easement across Block 7, Lot 19, more commonly known by the street address of 15 Exchange Place from Hartz Mountain 	10-25-2006 
06-128 	Authorizing the City of Jersey City to enter into a lease agreement with Mount Sinai Full Gospel Church, a non-profit organization of the State of New Jersey, for the purpose of conducting an educational and recreational program pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:12-14(C) and N.J.S.A. 40A:12-15(J) 	10-25-2006 
06-168 	Authorizing the City of Jersey City to enter into a lease agreement with Saint John's Baptist Church a non-profit organization of the State of New Jersey, for the purpose of conducting an educational and recreational program pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:12-14(c) and N.J.S.A. 40A:12-15(j) 	01-10-2007 
07-027 	Authorizing the City of Jersey City to lease on-street parking spaces in the Christopher Columbus Drive Permit Parking Zone from the Jersey City Parking Authority 	02-28-2007 
07-033 	Authorizing the City of Jersey City to enter into a lease agreement as lessee with the Criterion Urban Renewal Company, LLC, as lessor for space located at 100 Clifton Place, Jersey City. (Police Motorcycle Squad) 	03-14-2007 
07-051 	Authorizing the City of Jersey City to renew a lease agreement with 18 Ash Street Realty, LLC for space located at 46 State Street, Jersey City, for use by the Jersey City Fire Department 	03-28-2007 
07-054 	Authorizing the City of Jersey City (Lessee) to enter into a lease agreement with Rialto-Capital Urban Renewal Company, LLC (Lessor) for the use of space at the Lessor's Building located at 4 Beacon Way, Jersey City 	03-28-2007 
07-057 	Authorizing the City of Jersey City to enter into a lease agreement as lessee with the Jersey City Housing Authority as lessor for space located at 3 New Heckman Drive, Jersey City 	04-11-2007 
07-072 	Authorizing City of Jersey City to enter into a lease agreement as Lessee with Hudson Lutheran Housing Corporation as Lessor for space located at 1065 Summit Avenue, Jersey City. (Public Safety Radio Transmission) 	04-25-2007 
07-077 	Authorizing an assignment to the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey of a lease between the City of Jersey City and the State of New Jersey, Department of Transportation for a portion of city-owned property known as Block 395.1, Lot 2 IN 	05-09-2007 
07-091 	Authorizing a One (1) year lease with Essex Plaza Management, LLC., for a portion of 361 Montgomery Street for use by the city as a Senior Citizen Center 	05-23-2007 
07-096 	Authorizing the execution of an Easement agreement between the City of Jersey City and the Port Authority Trans Hudson Corporation (PATH) permitting PATH to install and maintain security improvements on a portion of Magnolia Avenue west of Summit Avenue 	06-13-2007 
07-136 	Authorizing the leasing of city-owned property at Block 360, Lot 1 on the tax map of Cedar Grove to North End Fire Company #1 for the purpose of parking vehicles in connection with the provision of fire protection 	08-08-2007 
07-150 	Authorizing the City of Jersey City to execute a modification to the City's lease agreement with Montgomery Associates, LP for additional leased space for rooftop antennas 	08-22-2007 
07-151 	Authorizing the City of Jersey City to enter into a five year sublease agreement as sublessee with Citimarkets, LLC, as sublessor for office space located at 360 Martin Luther King Drive, Jersey City 	08-22-2007 
07-154 	Authorizing the City of Jersey City to amend City Ordinance 07-027 for leasing on street parking spaces in the Christopher Columbus Drive permit parking zone from the Jersey City Parking Authority 	09-11-2007 
07-161 	Authorizing the City of Jersey City to lease from the Jersey City Parking Authority seven parking spaces in the Parking Authority lot number 32 located at 277 Central Avenue 	09-26-2007 
07-169 	Authorizing the City of Jersey City to enter into a lease agreement as lessee with 255-261 Kearney Avenue, LLC as lessor for fire house/garage space located at 255-261 Kearney Avenue, Jersey City for the Jersey City Fire Department 	10-24-2007 
07-181 	Authorizing the City of Jersey City to renew a lease agreement with 18 Ash Street Realty, for space located at 46 State Street, Jersey City for use by the Jersey City Fire Department 	11-28-2007 
07-191 	Authorizing a second amendment to City Ordinance 07-027 for leasing on street parking spaces in the Christopher Columbus Drive permit parking zone from the Jersey City Parking Authority 	01-09-2008 
08-008 	Authorizing the City of Jersey City to enter into a lease agreement with Saint John's Baptist Church, a non-profit organization of the State of New Jersey, for the purpose of conducting an Educational and Recreation Program pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A: 12-14 (C) and N.J.S.A. 40A: 12-15 (J) 	02-13-2008 
08-031 	Authorizing the City of Jersey City as lessee to extend and amend a lease agreement with 115 CCD Partners, LP as lessor for office space located at 115 Christopher Columbus Drive, Jersey City 	03-26-2008 
08-096 	Authorizing the execution of an agreement to sublease certain property located at 392-394 Central Avenue from the Jersey City Parking Authority 	07-16-2008 
08-122 	Authorizing the City of Jersey City to lease from the Jersey City Parking Authority seven parking spaces in the Parking Authority Lot Number 32 located at 277 Central Avenue 	09-10-2008 
08-141 	Authorizing the execution of an easement agreement among the City of Jersey City, Honeywell International Inc. and Bayfront Redevelopment LLC permitting Honeywell to install and maintain an underground pipeline on city-owned property known as Block 1751, Lot 11 and city-leased property known as Block 1290.1, Lot 2E 	10-07-2008 
08-149 	Authorizing the renewal of a lease agreement between the City of Jersey City as lessee and 18 Ash Street Realty, LLC, as lessor, for fire and emergency storage space in the premises located at 46 State Street, Jersey City, New Jersey 	11-12-2008 
08-150 	Authorizing the renewal of a lease agreement between the City of Jersey City as lessee and 255-261 Kearney Avenue, LLC as lessor for fire house/garage space located at 255-261 Kearney Avenue, Jersey City for the Jersey City Fire Department 	11-12-2008 
09-007 	An ordinance authorizing the City of Jersey City to lease on-street parking spaces in the Christopher Columbus Drive Permit Parking Zone from the Jersey City Parking Authority 	01-28-2009 
09-029 	Ordinance authorizing the City of Jersey City to enter into a one year lease agreement with Saint John's Baptist Church, a non-profit organization of the State of New Jersey, for the purpose of conducting a recreational program pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:12-14(C) and N.J.S.A. 40A:12-15(J) 	03-25-2009 
09-035 	Ordinance authorizing the execution of a maintenance agreement and deed of easement affecting the Plaza Area at Journal Square in connection with the construction of Condominium Units A B and C of the 1 Journal Square Condominium 	04-08-2009 
09-056 	An ordinance authorizing the City of Jersey City to enter into a five (5) year lease agreement with the Roxy Urban Renewal Company, LLC for a portion of 201 Cornelison Avenue, Jersey City 	05-22-2009 
09-061 	An ordinance authorizing an amendment to the lease, by way of a memorandum of understanding, for the Loew's Theater, Block 1863, Lot N24, to the Friends of the Loew's Inc., a non-profit corporation 	05-22-2009 
09-066 	Ordinance amending Ordinance 05-103 adopted on August 10, 2005 to permit Stegman Realty One, LLC; Stegman Realty Two, LLC; Stegman Acquisition, LLC and Stegman Street, LLC to offer for rent rather than for sale residential units at 228-230 Stegman Street 	06-03-2009 
09-067 	Ordinance to authorizing the imposition of a conservation easement and deed restrictions on the "gateway sites" as required under the Honeywell Settlement Consent Order 	06-03-2009 
09-073 	An ordinance authorizing a lease agreement between the City of Jersey City and Verizon New Jersey Inc. for property located at 71 Madison Avenue, Jersey City, New Jersey 	06-17-2009 
09-099 	Ordinance authorizing the City of Jersey City to lease from the Jersey City Parking Authority seven (7) parking spaces in the Parking Authority Lot Number 32 located at 277 Central Avenue 	09-23-2009 
09-123 	Ordinance authorizing the imposition of deed restrictions on St. Pauls Avenue between Charlotte Avenue and Duffield Avenue, Duffield Avenue between Howell Street and an area north of St. Pauls Avenue, and Howell Street between Charlotte Avenue and Duffield Avenue 	12-16-2009 
09-124 	Ordinance removing the affordability restrictions from: 1) a deed dated December 31, 1986 and 2) a correctory deed dated August 26, 1987 concerning Block 1985, Lot L-14 also known as 136-138 Grant Avenue owned by Fairmount Housing Corporation 	12-16-2009 
10-025 	Authorizing renewal of lease agreement between City as lessee and 18 Ash Street Realty, LLC, as lessor, for fire and emergency storage space 	03-10-2010 
10-050 	Authorizing City to enter into one-year lease agreement with Saint John's Baptist Church for the purpose of conducting a recreational program pursuant to N.J.S.A 40A:12-14(C) and N.J.S.A. 40A:12-15(J) 	04-14-2010 
10-060 	Authorizing execution of agreement between City and Light Tower Fiber Long Island, LLC, to permit installation, use and maintenance of telecommunications facilities within certain public rights-of-way 	04-28-2010 
10-080 	Authorizing execution of easement agreement between City and Honeywell International, Inc. permitting Honeywell to enter into underwater property owned by City to perform remediation work 	06-23-2010 
10-083 	Authorizing execution of rights-of-way use agreement between City and Lexent Metro Connect, LLC to permit the installation of fiber optic cabling through existing innerducts located in existing underground conduits within certain public rights-of-way 	07-14-2010 
10-084 	Removing affordability restrictions from deeds 	07-14-2010 
10-090 	Authorizing imposition of environmental deed restrictions on certain property 	08-04-2010 
10-100 	Authorizing execution of easement agreement between City and the Port Authority Trans Hudson Corporation permitting PATH to install and maintain security improvements at Exchange Place and to install new concrete pavements in front of PATH station on Christopher Columbus Drive 	08-04-2010 
11-015 	Authorizing a lease agreement between the City of Jersey City, as lessee, and 18 Ash Street Realty, LLC as lessor, for fire and emergency storage space in the premises at located at 46 State Street 	02-09-2011 
11-019 	Authorizing the leasing of vacant land and open space land shown to be in need of improvements to non-profit corporations or associations for public purposes in connection with the city "adopt a lot" program 	02-23-2011 
11-056 	Authorizing the City to enter into a one-year lease agreement with Saint John's Baptist Church for the purpose of conducting a recreational program pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:12-14(c) and N.J.S.A. 40A:12-15(j) 	05-11-2011 
11-122 	Authorizing the execution of an agreement with the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey pertaining to a Marine Terminal on the Port Jersey Boulevard, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 32:1-144 	10-12-2011 
11-134 	Authorizing the City to execute a forty-three (43) month lease agreement with Central Parking System of New Jersey, Inc. for parking spaces located at 2 Journal Square 	11-09-2011 
11-144 	Ordinance authorizing the execution of an agreement to lease certain property located at 392-394 Central Avenue from the Jersey City Parking Authority 	11-22-2011 
11-157 	Authorizing a three-year lease on property to Friends of Lifers for an urban farm 	01-11-2012 
12-011 	Authorizing the execution of a deed notice imposing deed restrictions on property known as 73-85 Bishop St 	02-08-2012 
12-030 	Authorizing the City to execute a grant of license and right of entry agreement with Hudson Conduit Associates, LLC to permit the City to install and maintain 48 strand fiber in conduit owned by Hudson Conduit Associates 	03-28-2012 
12-033 	Authorizing the City to lease City-owned property at 103-105 Oxford Av to the Jersey City Public Schools 	03-28-2012 
12-034 	Authorizing the City to lease City-owned property at 109 Oxford Av to the Jersey City Public Schools 	03-28-2012 
12-035 	Authorizing the City to lease City-owned property at 268 Varick St to the Jersey City Public Schools 	03-28-2012 
12-058 
Authorizing a three-year lease subject to 60-day cancellation notice, with the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency for a portion of the hub shopping center located at 380-382 Martin Luther King Hub Plaza for the use of governmental offices 	05-09-2012 
12-075 
Authorizing the city to enter into a one-year lease agreement with Saint John's Baptist Church, a non- profit organization of the State of New Jersey, for the purpose of conducting a recreational program pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:12-14(c) and N.J.S.A. 40A:12-15(j) 	06-13-2012 
12-076 
Authorizing a second amendment to the city's lease with Journal Square Plaza Urban Renewal Associates for One Journal Square Plaza, Block 586.5, Lot Plot .B 	06-13-2012 
12-097 
Authorizing the imposition of deed restrictions on a portion of St. Pauls Av between Duffield Av and Charlotte Av and a portion of Duffield Av between Howell St and Meadow St 	08-01-2012 
12-107 
Authorizing the city to execute an amendment to its lease with 30 Montgomery Property, LLC, for office space at 30 Montgomery Street, Block 8, Lot C2 	09-12-2012 
12-124 
Amending Ordinance 12-076 authorizing a third amendment to the city's lease with Journal Square Plaza Urban Renewal Associates for One Journal Square Plaza, Block 586.5, Lot Plot B to include the construction of improvements by the landlord as additional rent 	10-10-2012 
13-024 
Authorizing the City of Jersey City to execute a lease with Imperial Parking Corporation for parking spaces located near 1 Journal Square Plaza 	02-27-2013 
13-025 
Authorizing the City of Jersey City to execute a lease with Rand Parking, Inc., for parking spaces located near 1 Journal Square Plaza 	02-27-2013 
13-043 
Authorizing the City of Jersey City as lessee to extend a fourth amended lease agreement with 115 CCD Partners as lessor for office space at 115 Christopher Columbus Drive 	04-24-2013 
13-067 
Authorizing the City to enter into a sublease as lessee with Moishe's Self Storage, LLC for storage space at 10 Senate Place 	06-19-2013 
13-078 
Authorizing the execution of a quitclaim deed releasing property known as 87 Newkirk Street also known as Block 12204, Lot 12 from an easement held by the City 	06-19-2013 
13-085 
Authorizing the City to extend a one year lease agreement with Saint John's Baptist Church, a non-profit organization of the State of New Jersey, for the purpose of conducting a recreational program pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:12-14(c) and N.J.S.A. 40A:12-15(j) 	08-28-2013 
13-089 
Authorizing the execution of a rights-of-way use agreement between the City and Sunesys, LLC to permit the installation of fiber optic cabling through existing innerducts, attach to existing poles, and construct new facilities where necessary within certain public rights-of-way for purposes of providing telecommunication services 	09-11-2013 
13-090 
Authorizing the sale of slope easements to the State of New Jersey affecting real properties owned by the City in the Town of Kearny known as Route 7, Section 1, Parcels ER62B and UE62C 	09-11-2013 
13-096 
Authorizing an easement agreement with the Jersey City Municipal Utilities Authority for improvements affecting Block 31001, Lot 12 and Block 50001, Lot 1 (the Split Rock Dam and Split Rock Road) 	09-11-2013 
13-106 
Amending Ordinance 12-124 authorizing a fourth amendment to the City's lease with Journal Square Plaza Urban Renewal Associates for One Journal Square Plaza, Block 586.5, Lot Plot .B to amend the construction costs of improvements to include the architect fees by the landlord 	10-09-2013 
13-107 
Authorizing the execution of a deed of easement agreement with Public Service Electric and Gas Company for no consideration to permit the installation, use, maintenance and repair of a gas line to service the Linden Avenue Municipal complex 	10-09-2013 
13-109 
Authorizing the City to execute a lease agreement with Harwood Corporation for parking spaces located at 2854 Kennedy Boulevard 	10-09-2013 
13-139 
Authorizing an amendment to a lease agreement with Rand Parking, Inc. for parking spaces located at Two Journal Square Plaza 	12-18-2013 
13-145 
Authorizing the City to lease 199-205 Summit Avenue, Jersey City with 199-201 Summit Avenue, LLC 	01-15-2014 
14-011 
Authorizing the City to enter into a month to month extension of the sublease with Moishe's Self Storage, LLC at 10 Senate Place, Jersey City for up to twelve months effective as of November 1, 2013 	02-11-2014 
14-040 
Authorizing the execution of an agreement to lease certain property located at 392-394 Central Avenue from the Jersey City Parking Authority 	04-09-2014 
14-055 
Authorizing a lease agreement between the City of Jersey City and Verizon New Jersey Inc. for property located at 71 Madison Avenue 	05-28-2014 
14-056 
Authorizing the City of Jersey City to enter into a lease agreement as lessee with E.A. Tolentino and H. Clay Irving III, for the use of their vacant, unimproved lot located at Block 15202, Lot 31, more commonly known as 157-161 Summit Avenue, in Jersey City, for parking 	05-28-2014 
14-057 
Authorizing the City of Jersey City to enter into a lease agreement as lessee with Evangelismos Greek Orthodox Church for the use of 29 parking spaces located at Block 15103, Lot 1, more commonly known as 651 Montgomery Street, in Jersey City 	05-28-2014 
14-098 
Authorizing the City to execute a six-month lease agreement with 3000 Kennedy Blvd, LLC for the use of 27 parking spaces at 3000 John F. Kennedy Boulevard to be used for Journal Square employee parking 	09-10-2014 
14-121 
Authorizing the execution of a temporary easement and license agreement on City-owned property located at 13 Linden Avenue, Jersey City, New Jersey to accommodate two solar renewable energy installations in connection with a solar power energy services agreement entered into by and among the City, the Hudson County Improvement Authority and Hudson Energy Solar Corporation 	10-08-2014 
14-122 
Authorizing the execution of a grant of conservation restriction/easement agreement for public access to the waterfront among the City of Jersey City and Liberty Harbor Holding, LLC as grantors, LHN Owner Urban Renewal, LLC as the developer, and the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection as grantee 	10-08-2014 
14-146 
Authorizing the City of Jersey City to execute a lease agreement with Harwood Corporation for 20 parking spaces located at 2854 Kennedy Boulevard 	11-25-2014 
14-160 
Authorizing the termination of an existing deed notice and the imposition of a new deed notice on property owned by the City of Jersey City known as 362 Summit Avenue also known as Block 12301, Lot 2 	12-17-2014 
14-176 
Authorizing the imposition of a deed notice on property owned by the City known as Mary Benson Park also known as Block 10901, Lots 129 and 130 	01-14-2015 
14-178 
Authorizing the City to extend its sublease with Moishe's Self Storage, LLC, for storage space at 10 Senate Place, Jersey City, for five additional months, retroactive to November 1, 2014 	01-14-2015 
14-179 
Authorizing the execution of a developer's agreement and deed of easement with Journal Square I Urban Renewal, LLC and Journal Squared ("J 2 ") Condominium Association, Inc., affecting a portion of Magnolia Avenue 	01-14-2015 
14-180 
Authorizing the execution of an emergency access easement agreement with Journal Square Associates, LLC ("JSA") and the Port Authority Trans-Hudson Corporation ("PATH") permitting emergency vehicles of the City to travel across property owned by JSA and PATH 	01-14-2015 
15-019 
Authorizing the City to execute a month-to-month lease not to exceed six months with 3000 Kennedy Blvd, LLC for the use of 27 parking spaces at 3000 Kennedy Boulevard, Jersey City 	03-11-2015 
15-020 
Authorizing the City to enter into a lease/purchase agreement as lessee with Jersey City Municipal, LLC, as lessor for office space to be constructed at the MLK Hub on a portion of Lot 17, Block 21201 at the intersection of Kearney Avenue and Martin Luther King Drive 	03-11-2015 
15-056 
Authorizing the City to lease City-owned property at 13-15 Linden Avenue to the Jersey City Incinerator Authority 	05-13-2015 
15-057 
Authorizing the City to execute a lease agreement with Harwood Corporation for 20 parking spaces located at 808 Pavonia Avenue 	05-13-2015 
15-069 
Authorizing a fifth amendment to the City's lease with Journal Square Plaza Urban Renewal Associates for One Journal Square Plaza, Block 586.5, Lot Plot B to amend the term and square footage of space 	05-27-2015 
15-085 
Authorizing the City to enter into a lease agreement with the Farms in the Heights, a New Jersey not-for-profit, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:12-14(c) 	06-24-2015 
15-092 
Authorizing the City to enter into a month-to-month tenancy with Rescore Montgomery, LLC for off-street parking at 711 Montgomery Street 	07-15-2015 
15-093 
Granting permission to Christopher Columbus Drive, LLC, successors and assigns, to make private improvements in the Christopher Columbus Drive public right-of-way adjacent to the property located at 190 Christopher Columbus Drive, Jersey City, New Jersey, also known on the tax maps of the City as Block 12703, Lot 4 	07-15-2015 
15-099 
Authorizing the City to execute a ten-year lease with the Jersey City Housing Authority for approximately 25,839 square feet of space at Building #8, 420 U.S. Highway 1 	08-19-2015 
15-139 
Authorizing the City to execute a month-to-month lease not to exceed six months effective as of October 1, 2015 with 3000 Kennedy Blvd, LLC for the use of 29 parking spaces at 3000 Kennedy Boulevard, Jersey City 	10-28-2015 
15-150 
Authorizing a sixth amendment to the City's lease with Journal Square Plaza Urban Renewal Associates for One Journal Square Plaza, Block 586.5, Lot Plot B to amend the term 	11-10-2015 
15-158 
Authorizing the City to extend a lease with the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency for office space at the Hub Shopping Center located at 380-382 Martin Luther King Drive 	11-24-2015 
15-159 
Amending Ordinance 15-020 to authorize the City to amend its lease/purchase agreement with Jersey City Municipal, LLC for office space to be constructed at the MLK Hub on a portion of Lot 17, Block 21201 	11-24-2015 
15-166 
Authorizing the City to enter into a lease with Jackson Hill Main Street Management Corporation for the use of Block 17905, Lots 18, 20 & 21, more commonly known as 612-616 Communipaw Avenue, for a community garden 	12-16-2015 
15-167 
Authorizing the City to enter into a month-to-month tenancy with Rescore Montgomery, LLC for off-street parking at 711 Montgomery Street 	12-16-2015 
15-168 
Authorizing the City of Jersey City, as tenant, to extend for a one-year term a lease agreement with 18 Ash Street Realty, LLC, as landlord, for space located at 46 State Street, Jersey City 	12-16-2015 
15-180 
Authorizing the City of Jersey City to enter into a lease with Dwight Street Block Association for the use of Block 24101, Lot 2, more commonly known as 75 Bayview Avenue, for a community garden 	01-13-2016 
15-181 
Authorizing the City of Jersey City to enter into a lease with Jersey City Community Gardening Inc. for the use of Block 389, Lots 19 and 20, more commonly known as 174-176 Brunswick Street, for a community garden 	01-13-2016 
16-016 
Authorizing the City of Jersey City to lease City-owned property known as Block 28201, Lots 10 and 12 through 16 also known as Ralph Taylor Memorial Park to the Jersey City Public School District 	02-10-2016 
16-036 
Authorizing the City of Jersey City to enter into a lease with Jackson Hill Main Street Management Corporation for the use of Block 1931, Lots 22 and 25, more commonly known as 91-93 Harrison Avenue, for a community garden 	02-24-2016 
16-051 
Authorizing the City of Jersey City to renew its lease with 199-201 Summit Avenue, LLC for the City of Jersey City's rental of office space at 199-205 Summit Avenue, Jersey City for two additional years 	04-13-2016 
16-052 
Exercising the City's option to extend the term of the lease with Evangelismos Greek Orthodox Church for the use of 29 parking spaces located at Block 15103, Lot 1, more commonly known as 651 Montgomery Street, for one year 	04-13-2016 
16-054 
Authorizing the City of Jersey City to execute a lease agreement with Harwood Corporation for 20 Parking Spaces located at 808 Pavonia Avenue 	04-13-2016 
16-055 
Authorizing the execution of a Deed of Easement with 110 First Street Urban Renewal Associates, LLC and the "A" Condominium Association, Inc. affecting Block 11603, Lot 41 a/k/a the First Street Park 	04-13-2016 
16-064 
Authorizing the City of Jersey City to renew the lease with Riverview Neighborhood Association for the use of Block 5202, Lots 26 and 27, for a community garden 	04-27-2016 
16-065 
Authorizing the City of Jersey City to renew the lease with Riverview Community Garden for the use of Block 3002, Lot 2, more commonly known as 285 Ogden Avenue, for a Community Garden 	04-27-2016 
16-074 
Authorizing the imposition of an environmental deed notice on Block 28201, Lots 10 and 12 through 16 also known as Ralph Taylor Memorial Park 	05-11-2016 
16-075 
Authorizing the City of Jersey City to execute a month-to-month lease not to exceed six months effective as of April 1,2016 with 3000 Kennedy Blvd, LLC for the use of 25 parking spaces at 3000 Kennedy Boulevard, Jersey City 	05-11-2016 
16-076 
Authorizing the City of Jersey City to execute an amendment to a lease agreement with 30 M Acquisitions, LLC for approximately 33,650 square feet of space at 30 Montgomery Street, Block 8, Lot C2 	05-11-2016 
16-091 
Authorizing the City of Jersey City to enter into a lease with Jersey Citywide Debutante and Cotillion Association for the use of Block 1409, Lot P, more commonly known as 81 Garfield Avenue, for a community garden 	06-15-2016 
16-098 
Authorizing a seventh amendment to the City's lease with Journal Square Plaza Urban Renewal Associates for One Journal Square Plaza, Block 586.5, Lot Plot B to amend the term 	06-15-2016 
16-134 
Authorizing the City to execute a month-to-month lease effective October 1, 2016 with 3000 Kennedy Blvd. LLC for the use of 25 parking spaces at 3000 Kennedy Boulevard, Jersey City 	09-14-2016 
16-135 
Authorizing an amended settlement agreement with Community Builders, Inc., for a termination of the lease and release of the City's option to purchase a portion of property located at 654 Bergen Avenue 	09-14-2016 
16-152 
Authorizing the City to enter into a lease agreement with the Jersey City Employment and Training Program (JCETP), a New Jersey not-for-profit, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:12-14(c) 	10-12-2016 
17-003 
Authorizing the settlement agreement resolving the federal and state litigation concerning Block 11612, Lot 2, more commonly known as 311 Washington Street Units 2A, 2B, 2C, 2D, 2E, 2F and 2G and conveying condominium units 2E and 2F to Washington Commons in exchange for repairs and renovations to all seven units 	01-25-2017 
17-015 
Exercising the City's option to extend the term of the lease with Evangelismos Greek Orthodox Church for the use of 29 parking spaces located at Block 15103, Lot 1, more commonly known as 661 Montgomery Street, for one year 	02-08-2017 
17-017 
Granting permission to 207 Van Vorst Street Realty Company LLC, its successors and assigns, to make private improvements in the Sussex Street right-of-way north of Van Vorst Street adjacent to property located at 193-197-213 Van Vorst Street, Van Vorst Street and Marin Boulevard, Jersey City, New Jersey, also known on the tax maps of the City of Jersey City as Block 14205, Lots 14.02, 15, 16, 17.01 and 18 	02-22-2017 
17-031 
Authorizing the execution of a corrective deed for Block 16302, lot 40 in the City of Jersey City pursuant to Green Acres requirements 	03-22-2017 
17-036 
Authorizing the City of Jersey City to enter into parking lot leases at 733-735 Newark Ave. and 68-70 Cottage St. due to parking displaced by the Pulaski Skyway Project 	04-12-2017 
17-039 
Ratifying the execution of an easement agreement between the City of Jersey City (grantor) and Jersey City Municipal, LLC (grantee) permitting the grantee to install building foundations underneath the public rights-of-way at Kearny Avenue and Dr. Martin Luther King Drive and extinguishing the utility easement set forth in City Ordinance 97-067 adopted on September 24, 1997 	04-26-2017 
17-045 
Authorizing the City of Jersey City to execute a lease with Community Uplifting Project, Inc. for the use of Block 17905, Lots 18, 20 and 21, more commonly known as 612-614 Communipaw Avenue and Block 1931, Lots 22 and 25 more commonly known as 91-93 Harrison Avenue, for a community garden 	04-26-2017 
17-046 
Authorizing the City of Jersey City to renew the leases of Block 389, Lots 19 and 20 (174-176 Brunswick Street); Block 1409, Lot P (81 Garfield Avenue); Block 3002, Lot 2 (285 Ogden Avenue); Block 5202, Lots 28 and 29 (105 Ogden Avenue); Block 12904, Lot 1 (280 Grove Street) and Block 1905, Lot 36 (447 Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive) as part of the City's Adopt-a-Lot Community Garden Program 	04-26-2017 
17-050 
Authorizing the City of Jersey City to extend the lease of City-owned property at 103-105 Oxford Avenue to the Jersey City Public Schools 	05-10-2017 
17-051 
Authorizing the City of Jersey City to extend the lease of city-owned property at 109 Oxford Avenue to the Jersey City Public Schools 	05-10-2017 
17-064 
Authorizing the City of Jersey City to execute a lease agreement with Harwood Corporation for 20 parking spaces located at 808 Pavonia Avenue 	05-24-2017 
17-156 
Authorizing the City to extend the lease with the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency for office space located at 380-382 Martin Luther King Drive 	11-29-2017 
17-157 
Granting permission to 280 Newark, LLC for a balcony encroachment over a portion of the right-of-way of Newark Avenue, and the right-of-way of Third Street for the benefit of Lot 1.01 in Block 11010, land now or formerly of 280 Newark, LLC. The balcony encroachment is intended to encompass the overhead entrance canopy and floor slab balconies which project beyond the boundary lines of Lot 1.01 in Block 11010 and into the aforementioned rights-of-way 	11-29-2017 
17-164 
Authorizing the City to renew the leases of Block 389, Lots 19 and 20 (174-176 Brunswick Street); Block 1409, Lot P (81 Garfield Avenue); Block 3002, Lot 2 (285 Ogden Avenue); Block 5202, Lots 28 and 29 (105 Ogden Avenue); Block 12904, Lot 1 (280 Grove Street) and Block 1905, Lot 36 (447 Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive) as part of the City's Adopt-a-Lot Community Garden Program 	12-13-2017 
18-005 
Authorizing the City, as tenant, to extend for a one-year term a lease agreement with 18 Ash Street Realty, LLC, as landlord, for space located at 46 State Street, Jersey City 	02-14-2018 
18-029 
Authorizing the City to execute a lease with Community Uplifting Project, Inc., for the use of Block 17905, Lots 18, 20 and 21, more commonly known by the street address of 612-614 Communipaw Av, and Block 1931, Lots 22 and 25, more commonly known by the street address of 91-93 Harrison Av, for use as a community garden 	04-25-2018 
18-031 
Authorizing the City, as tenant, to extend for a two-month term a lease agreement with 199-201 Summit Avenue, LLC as landlord, for space located at 199-205 Summit Avenue 	04-25-2018 
18-040 
Authorizing the City to enter into a lease/purchase agreement as lessee with 342 Investors, LLC, as lessor, for office space to be constructed on Block 22601, Lot 36 at the intersection of Martin Luther King Drive and Kearny Avenue and a parking deck with commercial space on Block 22601, Lots 10 through 15, Lots 24 through 35, Lot 37 and Lots 16.15 and 23.01 	05-09-2018 
18-069 
Authorizing the City to execute an amendment to a lease agreement with 30 Montgomery Partners, LLC for approximately 11,400 square feet of space at 30 Montgomery Street, Block 8, Lot C2 for a term of one year 	06-27-2018 
18-094 
Authorizing the City of Jersey City to amend a lease agreement from Harwood Corporation for the use of an additional 15 parking spaces located at 808 Pavonia Avenue 	09-12-2018 
18-103 
Authorizing the acceptance of a gift of an easement for access purposes in connection with the preliminary and final major subdivision of lands designated as Block 21901, Lots 5-10 and Block 24601, Lots 1-12 on the application of Bayfront Redevelopment LLC 	09-12-2018 
18-104 
Authorizing the execution of a 40-year lease agreement with the Morris County Park Commission regarding the development, management and maintenance of a recreational trail at the Jersey City Reservoir in Boonton 	09-26-2018 
18-127 
Authorizing the execution of a rights-of-way use agreement between the City of Jersey City and SQF, LLC D/B/A Tilson to permit the installation of antennas and related communications equipment on existing utility poles and street light fixtures and if necessary to install new or replacement street light fixtures and utility poles within certain public rights-of-way for purposes of providing telecommunication services 	11-20-2018 
18-128 
Authorizing the City to execute a lease agreement for a term of one year with LM Plaza 4A Parking LLC for the use of 29 parking spaces located at 135 Greene Street 	02-14-2019 
18-136 
Authorizing the City of Jersey City to renew the leases of Block 9905, Lots 8 & 9 (174-176 Brunswick Street); Block 30003, Lot 45 (81 Garfield Avenue); Block 3002, Lot 2 (285 Ogden Avenue); Block 5202, Lot 28 (105 Ogden Avenue); and Block 19503, Lot 36 (447 Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive) as part of the City's Adopt-a-Lot Community Garden Program 	12-19-2018 
19-007 
Authorizing the City, as tenant, to extend for a one-year term a lease agreement with 18 Ash Street Realty, LLC, as landlord, for space located at 46 State Street, Jersey City 	02-14-2019 
19-016 
Authorizing the City to enter into a month to month tenancy with the Martin Luther King Drive Urban Renewal Joint Venture Partnership for office space located at 380-382 Martin Luther King Drive 	03-13-2019 
19-023 
Ratifying the execution and acceptance from Park Avenue Landing, LLC of a deed of easements for roadway purposes and a temporary construction easement and the execution and acceptance from Liberty Harbor Holding, LLC of a deed of temporary construction easement in connection with the construction of a new roadway connecting Jersey Avenue and Phillip Street 	04-10-2019 
19-024 
Authorizing the execution of a grant of easement agreement with Public Service Electric and Gas Company to permit the installation, use, maintenance and repair of a pole anchor on City-owned property known as Block 2304, Lot 16 near the intersection of Congress Street and New York Avenue 	04-10-2019 
19-025 
Authorizing the City, as tenant, to renew a lease agreement with the County of Hudson for recreational fields at Lincoln Park West 	04-10-2019 
19-028 
Authorizing the execution of a rights-of-way use agreement between the City and Extenet Systems, Inc. to permit the installation of antennas and related communications equipment on existing utility poles and street light fixtures and if necessary to install new or replacement street light fixtures and utility poles within certain public rights-of-way for purposes of providing telecommunication services 	04-24-2019 
19-060 
Authorizing the City to execute a lease agreement with Harwood Corporation for 36 parking spaces located at 808 Pavonia Avenue 	06-12-2019 
19-061 
Authorizing the execution of a rights-of-way use agreement between the City and New Cingular Wireless PCS, LLC to permit the installation of antennas and related communications equipment on existing utility poles and street light fixtures and if necessary to install new or replacement street light fixtures and utility poles within certain public rights-of-way for purposes of providing telecommunication services 	06-12-2019 
 
TABLE 5. REDEVELOPMENT PLANS 
Ord. No. 	Subject Matter 	Date of Adoption 
C-876 	Transfer of property within Ocean Bayview Redevelopment Area 	01-12-1989 
C-877 	Transfer of property within Ocean Bayview Redevelopment Area 	01-12-1989 
C-878 	Transfer of property for School No. 2 Redevelopment Project 	04-13-1989 
C-882 	Approving redevelopment plan for Colgate Study Area 	01-26-1989 
C-885 	Creation of right-of-way and implementation of Newport City Redevelopment Plan 	02-02-1989 
C-932A 	Transfer of property within Montgomery Street Redevelopment Area 	04-13-1989 
C-986 	Amendments to Droyers Point Redevelopment Plan 	06-08-1989 
C-994 	Amendments to Colgate Redevelopment Plan 	06-08-1989 
C-1003 	Amendments to Journal Square Redevelopment Plan 	06-22-1989 
McC-42 	Amendments to Liberty Harbor Redevelopment Plan 	09-27-1989 
McC-47 	Transfer of property to Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	10-25-1989 
McC-62 	Amendments to Claremont Industrial Park Redevelopment Plan 	10-25-1989 
McC-157 	Amendments to Green Villa Redevelopment Plan 	10-25-1989 
McC-165 	Transfer of property to Liberty Harbor North Redevelopment Plan Area 	07-18-1990 
McC-169 	Transfer of property within Ocean Bayview Redevelopment Area to Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	06-27-1990 
McC-207 	Transfer of property within Turnkey Redevelopment Area to Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	09-26-1990 
McC-256 	Finding with respect to Exchange Place Redevelopment Plan 	01-09-1991 
McC-259 	Amendments to Henderson Street Redevelopment Plan 	01-23-1991 
McC-285 	Dedication of various lands owned by National Bulk Carriers, Inc., to public 	02-27-1991 
McC-290 	Acquisition of certain easements to TPI Urban Renewal Corp. 	03-13-1991 
McC-301 	Transfer of property within Turnkey Redevelopment Area to Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	05-08-1991 
McC-304 	Amendments to Greenville Industrial Redevelopment Plan 	04-10-1991 
McC-315 	Transfer of property within Monticello Avenue Redevelopment Area to Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	04-24-1991 
McC-316 	Transfer of property within Green Villa Redevelopment Area to Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	04-24-1991 
McC-323 	Amendments to Monticello Avenue Redevelopment Plan 	05-22-1991 
McC-324 	Dedication of certain areas within Newport Redevelopment Area 	08-21-1991 
McC-344 	Transfer of property within Green Villa Redevelopment Area to Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	08-21-1991 
McC-359 	Amendments to Green Villa Redevelopment Plan 	09-25-1991 
McC-363 	Transfer of property within Green Villa Redevelopment Area to Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	09-11-1991 
McC-420 	Amendments to Grove and Mercer Redevelopment Plan 	06-24-1992 
McC-421 	Redevelopment plan for the 1091/2, 111 and 113 Wayne Street Study Area 	03-11-1992 
92-053 	Easement agreement for certain easements and parcels within Newport Redevelopment Area 	05-27-1992 
92-105 	Amendments to Jersey Avenue North and Jersey Avenue West Redevelopment Plans; creating Jersey Avenue Redevelopment Plan 	08-19-1992 
92-116 	Transfer of property within Liberty Park I Redevelopment Area to Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	09-16-1992 
92-121 	Amendments to Turnkey Redevelopment Plan 	09-30-1992 
92-139 	Transfer of property within Lafayette Park I Redevelopment Area to Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	10-14-1992 
92-160 	Transfer of property within Lafayette Park I Redevelopment Area to Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	11-10-1992 
92-164 	Amendments to Greenville Industrial Redevelopment Plan 	11-10-1992 
92-173 	Amendments to Ocean Bayview Redevelopment Plan 	11-24-1992 
93-021 	Vacation of area of Provost Street in Newport Redevelopment Area 	03-10-1993 
93-029 	Adoption of Grand Jersey Redevelopment Plan 	03-24-1993 
93-033 	Transfer of property within Lafayette Park I Redevelopment Area to Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	03-24-1993 
93-051 	Dedication of certain phase II roadways within the Newport Redevelopment Zone 	05-19-1993 
93-113 	Dedicating various lands owned by National Bulk Carriers, Inc., to public 	10-13-1993 
93-138 	Adoption of Martin Luther King Redevelopment Plan; amendments to Jackson Avenue, Green Villa and Turnkey Redevelopment Plans 	12-08-1993 
94-008 	Transfer of property within Lafayette Park I Redevelopment Area to Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	02-23-1994 
94-035 	Tax exemption for project to be constructed by J.H. and R.C. Senior Homes Urban Renewal Associates 	04-27-1994 
94-040 	Amendments to Harsimus Cove South Urban Redevelopment Association's tax abatement 	05-11-1994 
94-061 	Transfer of property within Martin Luther King Drive Redevelopment Area to Jersey City Redevelopment Area 	08-17-1994 
94-065 	Tax exemption for H.P. Lincoln Urban Renewal Company; Jersey Avenue Redevelopment Area 	08-17-1994 
94-116 	Amendment to the Colgate Redevelopment Plan 	12-14-1994 
95-052 	Amendments to the Martin Luther King Drive, Greenvilla and Turnkey Redevelopment Plans 	06-28-1995 
96-017 	Rescinding Ord. Nos. 95-036 and 95-099 	02-28-1996 
96-020 	Transfer of property within the "HUB" District of the Martin Luther King Drive Redevelopment Plan Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	03-13-1996 
96-025 	Amending C-323, authorizing the transfer of property to the Jersey City Redevelopment Corporation for the development of the Wilkinson-Bayview Project under the Fair Housing Act 	03-27-1996 
96-038 	Morgan and Washington Street Redevelopment Plan 	05-08-1996 
96-049 	Amendments to Lafayette Park I Redevelopment Plan 	05-22-1996 
96-061 	Amendments to Holland Tunnel Redevelopment Plan 	06-26-1996 
97-013 	Amendments to Colgate Redevelopment Plan to make provisions to accommodate the Essex-Hudson Street Light Rail alignment and to amend other provisions of the plan and amendment to Ord. Nos. C-882, C-994 and 94-116 	03-12-1997 
97-044 	Amendments to the Betz Brewery Redevelopment Plan 	06-25-1997 
97-054 	Amendment to the land use provisions of the Colgate Redevelopment Plan amending Ord. Nos. C-882, C-994, 94-116 and 97-013 	08-13-1997 
97-056 	Amendment to the Liberty Harbor Redevelopment Plan amending Ord. Nos. J-578, MC-373, MC-527, MC-670, MC-651, C-959, McC-42, McC-47, McC-165, McC-290 and McC-351 	09-10-1997 
97-057 	Amendment to the Caven Point Redevelopment Plan 	09-10-1997 
97-091 	Amendment to the Paulus Hook Urban Renewal Plan to change its name to the Paulus Hook Redevelopment Plan and revise development standards within the plan 	12-23-1997 
97-092 	Amendment to the Gregory Project Area Redevelopment Plan 	12-23-1997 
97-095 	Adopting amendments to the Jersey Avenue Redevelopment Plan 	04-22-1998 
98-019 	Amendment to the Betz Brewery Redevelopment Plan 	03-25-1998 
98-021 	Amendment to the Turnkey Redevelopment Plan 	03-25-1998 
98-046 	Liberty Harbor Redevelopment Plan amendment; see J-578, MC-373, MC-527, MC-670, MC-651, MC-681, C-959, McC-42, McC-47, McC-165, McC-290, 97-056 	05-13-1998 
98-076 	Colgate Redevelopment Plan amendment to rehabilitate existing building on Block 69, Lot C-1, street address 65 York Street, to be changed to 95 Greene Street (corner of York, Greene and Grand Streets); see C-882, C-994, 94-116, 97-013, 98-042 	06-24-1998 
98-077 	Montgomery Gateway Redevelopment Plan amendment, changing sign regulations in the Old Colony Square shopping center 	06-10-1998 
98-086 	Ocean/Bayview Redevelopment Plan amendment 	07-22-1998 
98-137 	Liberty Harbor Redevelopment Plan amendment, designating Liberty State Park as a Park Zone 	10-14-1998 
98-166 	Montgomery Gateway Redevelopment Plan amendment 	01-13-1999 
98-167 	Village Study Area Redevelopment Plan amendment 	01-13-1999 
99-003 	Adoption of Newkirk-Academy Summit Redevelopment Plan 	01-27-1999 
99-005 	Amendments to Ninth Street Redevelopment Plan 	01-27-1999 
99-017 	Amendments to Greenville Industrial Redevelopment Plan 	02-10-1999 
99-035 	Adoption of Morris Canal Redevelopment Plan 	03-24-1999 
99-079 	Incorporating Journal Square East Study Area into the Journal Square Redevelopment Plan Area and adopting amendments to the Journal Square Redevelopment Plan 	06-23-1999 
99-080 	Amendments to Exchange Place North Redevelopment Plan 	06-23-1999 
99-090 	Adoption of Majestic Theater Redevelopment Plan 	07-21-1999 
99-092 	Amendments to Hudson Exchange Redevelopment Plan 	07-21-1999 
99-093 	Amendments to Liberty Harbor Redevelopment Plan 	07-21-1999 
99-096 	Adoption of Vacant Buildings Redevelopment Plan 	08-18-1999 
99-106 	Adoption of Armory Redevelopment Plan 	08-18-1999 
99-109 	Amendment to Vacant Buildings Redevelopment Plan 	09-08-1999 
99-137 	Adoption of Summit Community Center Redevelopment Plan 	09-08-1999 
99-153 	Amendments to Greenville Industrial Redevelopment Plan 	11-10-1999 
99-160 	Amendments to Colgate Redevelopment Plan 	10-27-1999 
99-167 	Adoption of Tidewater Basin Redevelopment Plan 	11-10-1999 
99-184 	Amendments to Montgomery Street Redevelopment Plan 	01-12-2000 
99-187 	Amendments to Martin Luther King Drive and Turnkey Redevelopment Plans 	01-12-2000 
99-189 	Amendments to Hudson Exchange and Exchange Place North Redevelopment Plan 	01-12-2000 
00-007 	Adoption of Republic Container Redevelopment Plan 	02-09-2000 
00-012 	Incorporating the Journal Square Extension Study Area, A.K.A. Block 1864, Lot 22, into the Journal Square Redevelopment Plan Area and adopting amendments to the Journal Square Redevelopment Plan 	03-08-2000 
00-014 	Amendments to Liberty Harbor North Redevelopment Plan to incorporate the Grand and Canal Redevelopment Area as part of the Liberty Harbor North Redevelopment Area 	05-10-2000 
00-028 	Adoption of Water Street Redevelopment Plan 	04-12-2000 
00-029 	Amendments to Exchange Place North Redevelopment Plan 	04-12-2000 
00-030 	Amendments to Martin Luther King Drive Redevelopment Plan 	04-12-2000 
00-039 	Amendments to Colgate Redevelopment Plan 	04-26-2000 
00-063 	Amendment to Jersey Avenue Redevelopment Plan 	06-14-2000 
00-077 	Amendments to Colgate Redevelopment Plan 	07-19-2000 
00-101 
Adopting the Communipaw West Community Center Redevelopment Plan 	09-27-2000 
00-105 	Amendment to Montgomery Street Redevelopment Plan 	09-13-2000 
00-123 	Amendments to Hudson Exchange Redevelopment Plan 	09-27-2000 
00-127 	Amendments to Colgate Redevelopment Plan 	09-27-2000 
00-170 	Adoption of Grove Street Station # Redevelopment Plan 	01-10-2001 
01-001 	Transfer of property within TURNKEY redevelopment Area 	01-24-2001 
01-052 	Amends the Lafayette Park 1 Redevelopment 	04-25-2001 
01-053 	Amends the Liberty Harbor North Redevelopment Plan 	05-16-2001 
01-071 	Amends Liberty Harbor North Redevelopment Plan 	06-13-2001 
01-097 	Amends Martin Luther King Drive Redevelopment Plan 	09-12-2001 
01-108 	Amends Journal Square Redevelopment Plan 	09-26-2001 
01-118 	Amends Droyers Point Redevelopment Plan 	10-24-2001 
01-127 	Amends Exchange Place North Redevelopment Plan 	11-28-2001 
01-133 	Amends Liberty Harbor North Redevelopment Plan 	01-09-2002 
02-010 	Amends Morris Canal Redevelopment Plan 	02-27-2002 
02-011 	Amends Greenville Industrial Redevelopment Plan 	02-27-2002 
02-036 	Amends the Morris Canal Redevelopment Plan and Acquisition Map 	03-27-2002 
02-056 	Amendments to the Martin Luther King Drive Redevelopment Plan 	05-22-2002 
02-080 	Amendment to the Liberty Harbor Redevelopment Plan 	07-17-2002 
02-094 	Merger of TCR Jersey City I Urban Renewal into Windsor at Jersey City Urban Renewal, LLC 	09-12-2002 
02-108 	Amendments to the Lafayette Park Redevelopment Plan 	09-25-2002 
02-110 	Amendments to the Grand Jersey Development Plan 	09-25-2002 
02-121 	Amendments to the Morris Canal Redevelopment Plan 	11-13-2002 
03-002 	Sale of an affordable housing project and the transfer of a tax abatement agreement from Audubon Park Associates to Audubon Urban Renewal Associates, LP 	01-22-2003 
03-030 	Amendments to the Martin Luther King Drive Redevelopment Plan 	03-26-2003 
03-038 	Amendments to the Turnkey Redevelopment Plan 	03-26-2003 
03-039 	Amendments to the Grove Street Station II Redevelopment Plan 	03-26-2003 
03-066 	Amendments to the Monticello Avenue Redevelopment Plan 	05-28-2003 
03-097 	Amendment to Water Street Redevelopment Plan 	07-02-2003 
03-135 	Adoption of Western Gateway Redevelopment Plan 	09-24-2003 
03-158 	Amendment to Hudson Exchange Redevelopment Plan 	Defeated 
12-10-2003 
03-164 	Amendment to Hudson Exchange Redevelopment Plan 	01-14-2004 
04-003 	Amendment to Vacant Building Redevelopment Plan 	01-28-2004 
04-017 	Amendment to Jersey Avenue Redevelopment Plan 	Defeated 
02-25-2004 
04-024 	Adoption of Sip Avenue Gateway Redevelopment Plan 	03-10-2004 
04-025 	Amendment to Jersey Avenue Redevelopment Plan 	03-10-2004 
04-026 	Re-appropriating funds to provide for assistance to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	03-24-2004 
04-027 	Expansion of Water Street Redevelopment Plan 	03-24-2004 
04-029 	Amendment to Hudson Exchange Redevelopment Plan 	03-24-2004 
04-043 	Expansion of Water Street Redevelopment Plan 	Tabled 
04-28-2004 
04-044 	Adoption of Boland Street Redevelopment Plan 	04-28-2004 
04-074 	Adoption of Columbus Corner Redevelopment Plan 	08-11-2004 
04-082 	Amendment to Morris Canal Redevelopment Plan 	08-11-2004 
04-099 	Amendment to Jersey Avenue Redevelopment Plan 	10-13-2004 
04-118 	Adoption of Powerhouse Arts District Redevelopment Plan; amendment to the boundary and standards of Hudson Exchange, Exchange Place North, Morgan and Washington, and the Bay Street Redevelopment Plan Areas 	10-27-2004 
04-119 	Amendment to Sip Avenue Gateway Redevelopment Plan 	10-27-2004 
04-120 	Amendment to Ocean/Bayview Redevelopment Plan 	10-27-2004 
04-121 	Amendment to Colgate Redevelopment Plan 	10-27-2004 
05-007 	Adopting the NJCU West Campus Redevelopment Plan 	02-09-2005 
05-011 	Adopting the Powerhouse Arts District Redevelopment Plan and adopting amendment to the Powerhouse Arts District Redevelopment Plan and reamending the boundaries of Hudson Exchange, Exchange Place North, Morgan and Washington, and Bay Street Redevelopment Areas and Redevelopment Plans 	02-23-2005 
05-024 	Adopting the West Side Avenue Redevelopment Plan 	03-23-2005 
05-029 	Amendment to Liberty Harbor North Redevelopment Plan 	03-23-2005 
05-058 	Amendment to Summit Avenue Redevelopment Plan 	06-08-2005 
05-080 	Amendment to Grove Street NDP Area Redevelopment Plan 	06-22-2005 
05-081 	Amendment to Martin Luther King Drive Redevelopment Plan 	06-22-2005 
05-101 	Adopting amendments to the Jersey Avenue Redevelopment Plan to eliminate the restriction on light industrial uses north of the Erie Lackawanna railroad tracks 	08-20-2005 
05-139 	Adopting amendments to the Claremont Industrial Redevelopment Plan 	10-12-2005 
05-160 	Amends to the Village Study Area Redevelopment Plan 	11-22-2005 
05-172 	Amendments to Morris Canal Redevelopment Plan 	01-11-2006 
06-020 	Amendments to Colgate Redevelopment Plan 	02-22-2006 
06-021 	Adopting Morgan/Grove/Marin (MGM) Redevelopment Plan 	02-22-2006 
06-039 	Amendment to Liberty Harbor North Redevelopment Plan 	04-12-2006 
06-040 	Amendments to Turnkey Redevelopment Plan 	04-12-2006 
06-043 	Amendments to Martin Luther King Drive Redevelopment Plan 	04-12-2006 
06-044 	Adopting Majestic Theater II Redevelopment Plan 	04-12-2006 
06-045 	Adopting Merseles Street Redevelopment Plan 	04-12-2006 
06-046 	Amendments to Republic Container Redevelopment Plan 	04-12-2006 
06-047 	Amendment to Green Villa Redevelopment Plan 	04-12-2006 
06-052 	Adopting Saint Francis Hospital Adaptive Re-Use Redevelopment Plan 	04-26-2006 
06-065 	Adopting the Bates Street Redevelopment Plan 	05-24-2006 
06-072 	Adopting an amendment to the Journal Square Redevelopment Plan 	06-14-2006 
06-087 	Adopting the 325 Palisade Avenue Redevelopment Plan 	07-19-2006 
06-092 	Adopting amendments to the Colgate Redevelopment Plan 	08-16-2006 
06-097 	Adopting amendments to the Powerhouse Arts District Redevelopment Plan 	08-16-2006 
06-100 	Adopts the Hoboken Avenue Redevelopment Plan 	09-13-2006 
06-118 	Adopting the Hackensack River Edge Redevelopment Plan 	10-11-2006 
06-129 	Adopting amendments to the Morris Canal Redevelopment Plan 	11-08-2006 
06-132 	Adopting amendments to the Martin Luther King Drive Redevelopment Plan 	11-08-2006 
06-136 	Adopting amendments to the Powerhouse Arts District Redevelopment Plan 	11-21-2006 
06-166 	Adopting amendments to the Ninth Street II Study Area Redevelopment Plan 	01-10-2007 
07-007 	Adopting amendments to the Vacant Buildings Redevelopment Plan 	02-14-2007 
07-013 	Implementing Campaign Reform for Redevelopment contracts within the City of Jersey City 	Defeated 
01-24-2007 
07-018 	Adopting amendments to the Turnkey Redevelopment Plan 	02-28-2007 
07-019 	Adopting an amendment to the Liberty Harbor North Redevelopment Plan 	02-28-2007 
07-020 	Adopting amendments to the Ocean/Bayview Redevelopment Plan 	02-28-2007 
07-023 	Adopting an amendment to the Hackensack River Edge Redevelopment Plan 	02-28-2007 
07-028 	Requiring Apprenticeships and Project Labor Agreements on certain public construction contracts and construction contracts for which a tax abatement has been granted 	Defeated 
10-24-2007 
07-037 	Adopting an amendment to the Jersey Avenue Redevelopment Plan 	03-14-2007 
07-038 	Adopting an amendment to the Morris Canal Redevelopment Plan regarding community empowerment 	03-14-2007 
07-039 	Adopting an amendment to the Morris Canal Redevelopment Plan regarding mixed use 	03-14-2007 
07-040 	Adopting amendments to the Martin Luther King Drive Redevelopment Plan 	03-14-2007 
07-041 	Adopting an amendment to the Grove Street II Redevelopment Plan 	Withdrawn 
02-28-2007 
07-042 	Adopting an amendment to the Journal Square Redevelopment Plan 	03-14-2007 
07-050 	Adopting amendments to the Martin Luther King Drive Redevelopment Plan 	Withdrawn 
03-14-2007 
07-062 	Adopting a revised Monticello Avenue Redevelopment Plan 	04-25-2007 
07-087 	Adopting an amendment to the Grove Street II Redevelopment Plan 	Defeated 
10-24-2007 
07-098 	Adopting an amendment to the Journal Square Redevelopment Plan 	06-13-2007 
07-099 	Adopting an amendment to the Grove Street II Redevelopment Plan providing for Shoppers' Parking 	06-13-2007 
07-100 	Adopting an amendment to the Exchange Place North Redevelopment Plan 	06-13-2007 
07-109 	Adopting amendments to the Tidewater Redevelopment Plan 	06-27-2007 
07-110 	Adopting amendments to the Liberty Harbor North Redevelopment Plan 	06-27-2007 
07-111 	Authorizing the transfer of city-owned property within Morris Canal Redevelopment Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	06-27-2007 
07-131 	Authorizing the acquisition of a Riparian Grant from the State of New Jersey for Block 60, Lots 27B, 27E, 41 and 51 within the Liberty Harbor North Redevelopment Plan 	08-08-2007 
07-141 	Amending the Martin Luther King Drive Redevelopment Plan to add the Warner Avenue Martin Luther King Drive Extension Study Area 	08-22-2007 
07-142 	Adopting an amendment to the Journal Square Redevelopment Plan 	08-22-2007 
08-007 	Amending the NJCU West Campus Redevelopment Plan 	02-13-2008 
08-025 	Adopting the Bayfront I Redevelopment Plan 	03-12-2008 
08-029 	Adopting the Bright Street Redevelopment Plan 	03-26-2008 
08-039 	Adopting amendments to the Powerhouse Arts District Redevelopment Plan 	04-09-2008 
08-043 	Adopting the Hopkins and Central Avenues Redevelopment Plan 	04-23-2008 
08-053 	Amendment to the Hackensack River Edge Redevelopment Plan 	05-14-2008 
08-059A 	Amending the Martin Luther King Drive Redevelopment Plan to add the Claremont Avenue MLK Extension Study Area 	05-28-2008 
08-060 	Adopting an amendment to the Morris Canal Redevelopment Plan 	05-28-2008 
08-081 	Amendment to the Hackensack River Edge Redevelopment Plan 	06-25-2008 
08-082 	Amending the Jersey Avenue Park Redevelopment Plan 	06-25-2008 
08-083 	Amending the Liberty Harbor Redevelopment Plan 	06-25-2008 
08-084 	Amending the boundary between the Morris Canal Redevelopment Plan and the Claremont Redevelopment Plan 	06-25-2008 
08-085 	Amending the Morris Canal Redevelopment Plan by removing lands south of the Light Rail R-O-W from the Morris Canal Area, renaming them as the Canal Crossing Redevelopment Plan Area and adopting new standards to guide their redevelopment 	Defeated 
06-25-2008 
08-086 	Adopting the 826 Ocean Avenue Redevelopment Plan 	06-25-2008 
08-099 	Amending the Monticello Avenue Redevelopment Plan 	08-06-2008 
08-104 	Adopting the 23-25 Duncan Avenue Redevelopment Plan 	08-06-2008 
08-111 	Amending the Hopkins and Central Avenues Redevelopment Plan 	08-20-2008 
08-120 	Adopting the Newark Avenue Downtown Redevelopment Plan 	09-24-2008 
08-121 	Adopting amendments to the Village Study Area Redevelopment Plan 	09-10-2008 
08-131 	Amending the NJCU West Campus Redevelopment Plan 	Withdrawn 
09-10-2008 
08-132 	Adopting an amendment to the Colgate Redevelopment Plan to extend the plan's duration to forty years 	09-24-2008 
08-142 	Adopting the Danforth Avenue Transit Village Redevelopment Plan 	10-07-2008 
08-145 	Amending the Liberty Harbor Redevelopment Plan to prohibit monopole towers 	10-22-2008 
08-156 	Amending the Monticello Avenue Redevelopment Plan to incorporate the Monticello Avenue Extension Study Area 	11-25-2008 
08-157 	Adopting an amendment to the School No. 2 Redevelopment Plan 	11-25-2008 
08-158 	Adopting an amendment to the Grand Jersey Redevelopment Plan to allow public parking garages 	11-25-2008 
08-160 	Adopting an amendment to the Dixon Crucible Redevelopment Plan to allow restaurants and cafes as a principal use 	11-25-2008 
08-169 	Amend the Morris Canal Redevelopment Plan boundary by removing Block 1916, Lots 18A, 17B, and 12; Block 2083, Lots 85A and 95 and making them part of the Medical Center Study Area Redevelopment Plan 	12-17-2008 
08-170 	Amend the Medical Center Study Area Redevelopment Plan by renaming it the Beacon Redevelopment Plan and adopting new standards to guide its redevelopment 	12-17-2008 
08-171 	Amend the Morris Canal Redevelopment Plan by removing lands south of the Light Rail R-O-W from the Morris Canal Area, and renaming them as the Canal Crossing Redevelopment Plan area and adopting new standards to guide their redevelopment 	Defeated 
11-25-2008 
09-006 	Ordinance of the Municipal Council of the City of Jersey City to amend the Morris Canal Redevelopment Plan by removing lands south of the Light Rail R-O-W from the Morris Canal Area, re-naming them as the Canal Crossing Redevelopment Plan Area and adopting new standards to guide their redevelopment 	01-28-2009 
09-050 	Ordinance amending Ordinance 07-188 that authorized the conveyance of Block 2026.A, Lot 3.A and Block 2026.1, Lots 3.B, 2a and 4.A within the Canal Crossings Redevelopment Plan Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	04-22-2009 
09-053 	Ordinance of the Municipal Council of the City of Jersey City amending the Jersey Avenue Park Redevelopment Plan to allow partial block sites to participate in the bonus provisions 	05-20-2009 
09-054 	Ordinance of the Municipal Council of the City of Jersey City adopting amendments to the Hackensack River Edge Redevelopment Plan permitting several industrial uses 	05-20-2009 
09-055 	Ordinance authorizing the conveyance of Block 1931, Lot 1.A, more commonly known by the street address of 520 Bergen Avenue, within the Monticello Avenue Redevelopment Plan Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	05-20-2009 
09-063 	Ordinance authorizing the conveyance of Block 60, Lots 19H and 19G and Block 2145, Lot 41T within the Grand Jersey Redevelopment Plan Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	05-22-2009 
09-071 	Ordinance of the Municipal Council of the City of Jersey City adopting an amendment to the Morris Canal Redevelopment Plan 	06-17-2009 
09-090 	Ordinance of the Municipal Council of the City of Jersey City adopting the Summit and Fairmount Redevelopment Plan 	08-12-2009 
09-092 	Ordinance adopting an amendment to the Tidewater Basin Redevelopment Plan to remove Block 166, Lots 1 and 2 from the acquisition schedule 	09-09-2009 
09-117 	Ordinance to adopt the Cambridge and North Redevelopment Plan 	11-24-2009 
09-118 	Ordinance establishing a conservation restriction affecting properties owned by the City of Jersey City known as Block 1627, Lots 1.P, 2.A, 3.B, 5.1 and Block 1639.A, Lots 1.C, 3, 4,4.C, 6.A and 7 	11-24-2009 
09-125 	Ordinance approving the application for state incentive grant by Newport Office Center VI, LLC subject to New Jersey Economic Development Authority approval 	12-16-2009 
10-004 	Ordinance adopting the second set of amendments to the NJCU West Campus Redevelopment Plan 	01-27-2010 
10-026 	Amendments to the Martin Luther King Drive Redevelopment Plan 	03-10-2010 
10-028 	Amendments to the Village Study Area Redevelopment Plan 	03-10-2010 
10-036 	Amendments to the Tidewater Basin Redevelopment Plan 	03-24-2010 
10-053 	Amendments to the Tidewater Basin Redevelopment Plan—Grand and Marin Subdistrict 	04-28-2010 
10-064 	Amendments to the Morris Canal Redevelopment Plan to create Transit Oriented Development (TOD) subdistricts 	05-12-2010 
10-076 	Amendments to HUB District of the Martin Luther King Drive Redevelopment Plan 	06-09-2010 
10-082 	Amendments to the Claremont Redevelopment Plan 	07-14-2010 
10-103 	Adopting Journal Square 2060 Redevelopment Plan 	08-25-2010 
10-104 	Amendments to the Morris Canal Redevelopment Plan 	08-25-2010 
10-105 	Amendments to the Martin Luther King Drive Redevelopment Plan 	08-25-2010 
10-115 	Adopting amendments to the Morris Canal Redevelopment Plan to revise fees for plan amendments 	09-29-2010 
10-117 	Authorizing transfer of city-owned property within the Martin Luther King Drive Redevelopment Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	09-29-2010 
10-124 	Adopting amendments to the Liberty Harbor Redevelopment Plan 	10-13-2010 
10-130 	Adopting amendments to the Martin Luther King Drive Redevelopment Plan clarifying elevator requirements 	11-10-2010 
10-131 	Adopting amendments to the Newport Redevelopment Plan to amend permitted uses 	11-10-2010 
10-134 	Adopting amendments to the Ocean/Bayview Redevelopment Plan to permit medical offices 	11-10-2010 
10-147 	Adopting amendments to Bates Street Redevelopment Plan to prohibit natural gas pipelines and to revise site plan review procedure 	11-23-2010 
10-148 	Adopting amendments to Caven Point Redevelopment Plan to prohibit natural gas pipelines and to revise site plan review procedure and amendment fees 	11-23-2010 
10-149 	Adopting amendments to Grand Jersey Redevelopment Plan to prohibit natural gas pipelines and to revise site plan review procedure and amendment fees 	11-23-2010 
10-150 	Adopting amendments to Greenville Industrial Redevelopment Plan to prohibit natural gas pipelines and to revise site plan review procedure and amendment fees 	11-23-2010 
10-151 	Adopting amendments to Jersey Avenue Light Rail Redevelopment Plan to prohibit natural gas pipelines and to revise site plan review procedure and amendment fees 	11-23-2010 
10-152 	Adopting amendments to Jersey Avenue Park Redevelopment Plan to prohibit natural gas pipelines and to revise site plan review procedure and amendment fees 	11-23-2010 
10-153 	Adopting amendments to Jersey Avenue Tenth Street Redevelopment Plan to prohibit natural gas pipelines and to revise site plan review procedure and amendment fees 	11-23-2010 
10-154 	Adopting amendments to Liberty Harbor Redevelopment Plan to prohibit natural gas pipelines and to revise site plan review procedure 	11-23-2010 
10-155 	Adopting amendments to Montgomery Street Redevelopment Plan to prohibit natural gas pipelines and to revise site plan review procedure and amendment fees 	11-23-2010 
10-156 	Adopting amendments to Morris Canal Redevelopment Plan to prohibit natural gas pipelines and to revise site plan review procedure 	11-23-2010 
10-165 	Adopting amendments to Turnkey Redevelopment Plan 	12-15-2010 
10-174 	Amending the Liberty Harbor North Redevelopment Plan 	01-12-2011 
10-175 	Amending the Exchange Place North Redevelopment Plan City View District 	01-12-2011 
11-004 	Re-instating the prior Liberty Harbor Redevelopment Plan 	01-26-2011 
11-024 	Amending the Morris Canal Redevelopment Plan to amend standards for ground floor residential uses in the Mixed Use A Subdistrict 	02-23-2011 
11-027 	Amending the Lafayette Park Redevelopment Plan to create a new Lafayette Village Zone with R-3 zoning standards and to revise site plan review procedure 	03-09-2011 
11-029 	Amending the Hudson Exchange Redevelopment Plan to eliminate conditional uses and replace the boundary map 	03-23-2011 
11-032 	Amending the Grand Jersey Redevelopment Plan to implement comprehensive new urbanist development standards from the area 	03-23-2011 
11-039 	Amending the Bright Street Redevelopment Plan 	04-13-2011 
11-040 	Adopting the Block 239 Lot 47 Redevelopment Plan 	04-13-2011 
11-042 	Amending the Village Study Area Redevelopment Plan 	04-13-2011 
11-054 	Adopting amendments to the Montgomery Gateway Redevelopment Plan adding an Adaptive Reuse District 	05-11-2011 
11-058 	Adopting the 8 Erie Street Redevelopment Plan 	05-25-2011 
11-071 	Adopting amendments to the Morris Canal Redevelopment Plan to permit residential re-use of All Saints School 	06-29-2011 
11-072 	Adopting amendments to the Exchange Place North Redevelopment Plan to add the deviation clause 	06-29-2011 
11-074 	Adopting amendments to the Liberty Harbor North Redevelopment Plan relating to Redevelopment Plan Block 5 	07-20-2011 
11-089 	Adopting the McGinley Square East Redevelopment Plan 	10-12-2011 
11-091 	Adopting amendments to the Montgomery Gateway Redevelopment Plan to permit emergency and ambulance dispatch centers and to remove outdated procedures from the plan 	08-31-2011 
11-092 	Adopting amendments to the Monticello Avenue Redevelopment Plan to allow a shoppers parking lot as a conditional use 	08-31-2011 
11-135 	Adopting the Bright and Varick Redevelopment Plan 	11-09-2011 
11-146 	Authorizing the conveyance of city-owned property within the Ocean Bayview Redevelopment Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	12-14-2011 
11-147 	Adopting the Ninth and Brunswick Redevelopment Plan 	12-14-2011 
11-158 	Authorizing a license agreement extension of city-owned property at 627 Grand Street within the Morris Canal Redevelopment Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	01-11-2012 
12-009 	Adopting height amendments to the Ninth Street II Study Area Redevelopment Plan 	02-08-2012 
12-027 	Adopting map change amendments to the Beacon Redevelopment Plan and revising outdated language 	03-14-2012 
12-037 	Adopting amendments to the Powerhouse Arts District Redevelopment Plan to encourage consolidation and development on undersized parcels in the Transition Subdistrict 	03-28-2012 
12-041 	Adopting amendments to the Grand Jersey Redevelopment Plan 	03-28-2012 
12-047 
Adopting amendments to the Luis Munoz Marin Boulevard Redevelopment Plan 	04-11-2012 
12-059 
Adopting amendments to the Hudson Exchange Redevelopment Plan and changing its name to Harsimus Cove Station Redevelopment Plan 	05-09-2012 
12-082 
Adopting the 1 Exchange Place Redevelopment Plan 	06-27-2012 
12-083 
Adopting amendments to the Morris Canal Redevelopment Plan to create Berry Lane Park Subdistricts, to incorporate new block and lot numbers, and to reorganize the content of the plan 	06-27-2012 
12-084 
Adopting amendments to the Newport Redevelopment Plan to amend maps and definitions 	06-27-2012 
12-099 
Adopting amendments to the West Side Avenue Redevelopment Plan 	08-01-2012 
12-100 
Adopting amendments to the 325 Palisade Avenue Redevelopment Plan 	08-01-2012 
12-110 
Adopting amendments to the Jersey Avenue Light Rail Redevelopment Plan Parking Standards 	09-12-2012 
12-111 
Adopting amendments to the Jersey Avenue Park Redevelopment Plan Parking Standards 	09-12-2012 
12-115 
Adopting amendments to the Majestic II Redevelopment Plan regulations relating to use, density, and building configuration 	09-27-2012 
12-117 
Adopting amendments to the Jersey Avenue Park Redevelopment Plan New Tax Block 6006 (formerly Tax Block 330) 	09-27-2012 
12-119 
Adopting amendments to the Exchange Place North Redevelopment Plan to update fees, procedures, and metes and bounds 	09-27-2012 
12-126 
Adopting amendments to the Liberty Harbor North Redevelopment Plan relating to Redevelopment Plan Block S 1, 3, and 19 through 27 	10-10-2012 
12-141 
Adopting amendments to the Journal Square 2060 Redevelopment Plan 	11-28-2012 
12-142 
Adopting amendments to the Exchange Place North Redevelopment Plan to codify the planning board approvals granted 70-90 Columbus Drive 	11-28-2012 
12-143 
Adopting an amendment to the definition of work/live unit in the Morgan/Grove/Marin (MGM) Redevelopment Plan 	11-28-2012 
13-004 
Adopting amendments to the Sip Avenue Gateway Redevelopment Plan permitting houses of worship 	02-13-2013 
13-005 
Adopting amendments to the Turnkey Redevelopment Plan 	02-13-2013 
13-007 
Adopting amendments to the Canal Crossing Redevelopment Plan to create consistency between Land Development Ordinance definitions and permitted uses in the plan 	02-13-2013 
13-018 
Amending the Claremont Redevelopment Plan to clarify uses and fees 	02-27-2013 
13-019 
Adopting amendments to the Hoboken Avenue Redevelopment Plan to clarify permitted uses 	02-27-2013 
13-023 
Accepting from LT Realty COMPANY, LLC a dedication of certain roadways, sidewalks and utilities located within the Colgate Redevelopment Plan Area 	02-27-2013 
13-028 
Adopting an amendment to the Colgate Redevelopment Plan to clarify uses and provide legible maps 	03-13-2013 
13-029 
Adopting the Route 440-Culver Redevelopment Plan 	03-13-2013 
13-036 
Adopting amendments to the Liberty Harbor North Redevelopment Plan relating to Redevelopment Plan Blocks 16,17, the widening of Park View Avenue, new parks and civic facilities 	03-28-2013 
13-041 
Adopting amendments to the Martin Luther King Drive Redevelopment Plan increasing height limits at the hub 	04-24-2013 
13-051 
Amending the Saint Francis Hospital Redevelopment Plan to change the name to Hamilton Square Redevelopment Plan and to revise development standards 	05-08-2013 
13-052 
Adopting amendments to the Newark Avenue Downtown Redevelopment Plan 	05-08-2013 
13-074 
Adopting amendments to the Webster Avenue Redevelopment Plan Area for Block 2905 Lot 29 permitted uses 	06-19-2013 
13-075 
Adopting amendments to the Morgan/Grove/Marin (MGM) Redevelopment Plan to create a community benefit bonus provision 	06-19-2013 
13-092 
Adopting amendments to the Journal Square 2080 Redevelopment Plan regarding split zoned development sites 	09-11-2013 
13-093 
Adopting amendments to the Water Street Redevelopment Plan to create a high rise zone and update terms throughout for consistency with the zoning glossary 	09-11-2013 
13-094 
Adopting amendments to the Village Study Area Redevelopment Plan to clarify permitted uses 	09-11-2013 
13-099 
Adopting amendments to the Danforth Avenue Transit Village Redevelopment Plan to allow for an industrial overlay 	09-25-2013 
13-102 
Adopting amendments to the Liberty Harbor North Redevelopment Plan to add dog and cat daycare and overnight boarding as a permitted use with specific restrictions 	10-09-2013 
13-103 
Adopting amendments to the Morris Canal Redevelopment Plan to prohibit liquor stores 	10-09-2013 
13-117 
Adopting amendments to the Powerhouse Arts District Redevelopment Plan to assist in the rehabilitation of the landmark Butler Brothers Warehouse 	10-23-2013 
14-014 
Adopting amendments to the Exchange Place Redevelopment Plan to add medical offices as a permitted use 	02-26-2014 
14-023 
Adopting amendments to the Montgomery Street Redevelopment Plan to reorganize content and create a mixed use district 	03-12-2014 
14-024 
Adopting amendments to the Morris Canal Redevelopment Plan to expand an adaptive reuse district 	03-12-2014 
14-046 
Repealing Ordinance 13.099 amending the Danforth Avenue Transit Village Redevelopment Plan 	05-14-2014 
14-047 
Adopting amendments to the Paulus Hook Redevelopment Plan to permit the subdivision of developed property while requiring the sum of the new multiple lots to meet the applicable zoning requirements 	05-14-2014 
14-048 
Adopting amendments to the McGinley Square East Redevelopment Plan 	05-14-2014 
14-060 
Adopting amendments to the McGinley Square East Redevelopment Plan to require a bonus fee for floor area above eight (8) stories 	06-11-2014 
14-065 
Adopting amendments to the Liberty Harbor North Redevelopment Plan to amend the regulating standards relating to Block 1 of the Redevelopment Plan 	06-25-2014 
14-071 
Adopting the Block 10102 Redevelopment Plan 	06-25-2014 
14-072 
Adopting amendments to the Luis Munoz Marin Boulevard Redevelopment Plan 	06-25-2014 
14-076 
Adopting amendments to the Morris Canal Redevelopment Plan to create an adaptive reuse district and modify density 	07-16-2014 
14-097 
Adopting amendments to the Journal Square 2060 Redevelopment Plan 	09-10-2014 
14-107 
Adopting amendments to the Ninth & Brunswick Redevelopment Plan to expand permitted uses, modify parking requirements, and other administrative items 	09-23-2014 
14-108 
Adopting amendments to the Village Redevelopment Plan to permit apartment buildings on Block 11110 	09-23-2014 
14-120 
Adopting amendments to the Tidewater Basin Redevelopment Plan to create a Mixed Use District 	10-08-2014 
14-135 
Adopting amendments to the Journal Square 2060 Redevelopment Plan 	10-22-2014 
14-144 
Removing lots from the Danforth Transit Village Redevelopment Plan and adopting the Chapel Avenue Industrial Park Redevelopment Plan 	11-25-2014 
14-165 
Adopting amendments to the Harsimus Cove Station Redevelopment Plan to alter the street grid, add open space, and make minor design regulation changes 	12-17-2014 
14-173 
Adopting amendments to the Tidewater Basin Redevelopment Plan to modify mixed use district uses and clarify language 	01-14-2015 
14-174 
Adopting amendments to the Ocean Bayview Redevelopment Plan to bring language up to date 	01-14-2015 
15-014 
Adopting amendments to the Colgate Redevelopment Plan to alter the height and open space of Block 14507 and make minor design and regulation changes 	02-25-2015 
15-022 
Adopting amendments to the Montgomery Street Redevelopment Plan to allow self storage uses 	03-11-2015 
15-024 
Adopting amendments to the Liberty Harbor Redevelopment Plan to allow self storage uses 	03-11-2015 
15-043 
Adopting amendments to the Village Redevelopment Plan to permit townhouses 	04-08-2015 
15-049 
Adopting amendments to the Powerhouse Arts District Redevelopment Plan Rehabilitation Sub-District 	08-19-2015 
15-050 
Adopting the Garfield Avenue Redevelopment Plan 	05-13-2015 
15-051 
Adopting amendments to the Morgan/Grove/Marin (MGM) Redevelopment Plan to create a community benefit bonus provision on Block 11508 along the Luis Munoz Marin Boulevard frontage and to expand the four-story Sub-District "A" Zone 	05-13-2015 
15-053 
Adopting amendments to various redevelopment plans to add formula business restrictions 	05-13-2015 
15-066 
Adopting amendments to the Morris Canal Redevelopment Plan to modify permitted uses, height, and density, as well as create an affordable housing provision in TOD-W Zone 	05-27-2015 
15-067 
Adopting amendments to the Tidewater Basin Redevelopment Plan to allow medical offices 	05-27-2015 
15-083 
Adopting amendments to the Powerhouse Arts District Redevelopment Plan creating a new Southern Edge Transition District 	06-24-2015 
15-114 
Amending the Vacant Buildings Redevelopment Plan 	09-09-2015 
15-143 
Adopting amendments to the Powerhouse Arts District Redevelopment Plan Rehabilitation Subdistrict to accommodate the adaptive reuse of the historic Merchants' Refrigeration Company Building for self-storage and first floor commercial space, which property is located at 133 Second Street and designated as Block 11502, Lot 1 on the tax map of the City 	10-28-2015 
15-144 
Adopting the Scatter Site Redevelopment Plan 	10-28-2015 
15-160 
Adopting amendments to the Henderson Street South Redevelopment Plan to modify the duration of the plan 	11-24-2015 
15-182 
Adopting amendments to the TOD-N Zone of the Morris Canal redevelopment plan 	01-13-2016 
15-183 
Adopting amendments to the zoning map of the Morris Canal Redevelopment Plan 	01-13-2016 
15-187 
Adopting the Ocean Avenue South Redevelopment Plan 	01-13-2016 
16-010 
Authorizing the transfer of City-owned property within the Morris Canal Redevelopment Area to the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency 	01-27-2016 
16-014 
Adopting amendments to the Journal Square 2060 Redevelopment Plan creating a new Zone 12 and bonus incentives for office space 	02-10-2016 
16-031 
Adopting amendments to the Water Street Redevelopment Plan to incentivize affordable housing 	02-24-2016 
16-050 
Adopting amendments to the Morris Canal Redevelopment Plan to create an affordable housing provision in the TOD-W Zone 	03-23-2016 
16-072 
Adopting amendments to the Liberty Harbor North Redevelopment Plan to amend the regulating standards relating to Block 10 of the Redevelopment Plan 	05-11-2016 
16-090 
Adopting amendments to the Morris Canal Redevelopment Plan in the TOD-W Zone for Blocks 15802 and 19003 	05-25-2016 
16-093 
Amending the Scatter Site Redevelopment Plan 	06-15-2016 
16-094 
Adopting amendments to the Morris Canal Redevelopment Plan to provide standards for the R-2 Zone and specify required community benefits 	06-15-2016 
16-095 
Adopting amendments to the Ninth & Brunswick Redevelopment Plan to expand permuted uses 	06-15-2016 
16-097 
Adopting amendments to the Journal Square 2060 Redevelopment Plan concerning parcels previously declared in need of redevelopment 	06-15-2016 
16-106 
Bond ordinance of the City providing aid to the West Campus Redevelopment Project located in the City and appropriating $16,000,000 therefor, and providing for the issuance of $16,000,000 in bonds or notes of the City to finance part of the cost thereof 	07-13-2016 
16-107 
Approving an amendment to the Journal Square Lofts Urban Renewal, LLC, financial agreement dated May 11, 2016, to correct the unit number and property address 	07-13-2016 
16-110 
Adopting amendments to the Village Redevelopment Plan to permit apartment buildings on Block 12701, Lots 8, 9, 10 and 12 	07-13-2016 
16-125 
Adopting amendments to the bates street redevelopment plan 	09-14-2016 
16-126 
Adopting the Jackson Hill Redevelopment Plan 	09-14-2016 
16-127 
Adopting amendments to the Lafayette Park Redevelopment Plan 	09-14-2016 
16-128 
Adopting amendments to the Montgomery Gateway Redevelopment Plan 	09-14-2016 
16-156 
Amending the Paulus Hook Redevelopment Plan to remove Tax Block 13102 and to create the Block 13102 Redevelopment Plan 	10-12-2016 
16-163 
Adopting amendments to the Journal Square 2060 Redevelopment Plan to amend Zone 10 	10-26-2016 
16-164 
Adopting amendments to the Journal Square 2060 Redevelopment Plan to add a public arts fund bonus 	10-26-2016 
16-165 
Adopting amendments to the Journal Square 2060 Redevelopment Plan to adjust zone boundaries and corner lot bonuses 	10-26-2016 
16-170 
Adopting amendments to the mixed use zones of the Morris Canal Redevelopment Plan 	11-09-2016 
16-174 
Adopting amendments to the Ocean Bayview Redevelopment Plan to include adaptive reuse provisions 	11-22-2016 
16-194 
Approving the execution of (1) a financial agreement with PH Urban Renewal LLC and (2) a pledge agreement related to the authorization and issuance by the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency (JCRA) of redevelopment area bonds (non-recourse to the full faith and credit of the City) not to exceed $1,000,000.00 and determining various other matters in connection therewith 	02-08-2017 
17-001 
Adopting amendments to the Water Street Redevelopment Plan creating standards for split zoned development sites 	01-25-2017 
17-002 
Adopting amendments to the Liberty Harbor Redevelopment Plan for the creation of the Science and Technology District 	01-25-2017 
17-032 
Adopting amendments to Jersey Avenue Park Redevelopment Plan to create the Emerson District 	03-22-2017 
17-081 
Adopting the Route 440-Culver Extension Study Area into the Route 440-Culver Redevelopment Plan 	06-28-2017 
17-082 
Adopting amendments to the Harsimus Cove Station Redevelopment Plan to alter the Building Regulating Plan Map and Intensity Summary Table of the West Neighborhood District 	07-19-2017 
17-087 
Adopting amendments to Jersey Avenue Park Redevelopment Plan regarding heights and administrative clauses 	07-19-2017 
17-136 
Adopting amendments to Dixon Crucible Redevelopment Plan to institute a scattered site district and associated standards 	10-11-2017 
17-172 
Adopting amendments to the Grand Jersey Redevelopment Plan to create a new park zone and revise other general design and development standards of the plan 	12-13-2017 
17-174 
Adopting amendments to the Journal Square 2060 Redevelopment Plan to amend bonus standards for the construction and extension of Central Avenue and Homestead Place 	12-13-2017 
17-175 
Amending and supplementing Chapter 345, Zoning, for Zone 3 to allow houses of worship as a permitted use 	12-13-2017 
18-011 
Adopting the Enos Jones Redevelopment Plan 	03-14-2018 
18-015 
Adopting amendments to the Montgomery Gateway Redevelopment Plan regarding medical offices use 	03-14-2018 
18-052 
Adopting amendments to the Morgan Grove Marin Redevelopment Plan regarding standards and requirements of the community benefit bonus on Block 11508 	06-13-2018 
18-076 
Adopting amendments to the Chapel Avenue Industrial Park Redevelopment Plan to include the industrial area governed by the Danforth Avenue Transit Village Redevelopment Plan and thereby eliminating the Danforth Avenue Transit Village Redevelopment Plan 	07-18-2018 
18-089 
Adopting amendments to the zoning map of the Morris CanalRedevelopment Plan 	08-15-2018 
18-090 
Adopting amendments to the Enos Jones Redevelopment Plan incorporating property north of Ninth Street and thereby eliminating the Ninth and Brunswick Redevelopment Plan 	08-15-2018 
18-118 
Adopting amendments to the Berry Lane Park Zones of the Morris Canal Redevelopment Plan 	10-10-2018 
18-126 
Adopting amendments to the Journal Square 2060 Redevelopment Plan to amend height standards in Zone 4, and create a new district, Zone 4A 	11-07-2018 
18-139 
Adopting amendments to the TOD-North Zone of the Morris Canal Redevelopment Plan 	12-19-2018 
18-140 
Adopting the Tonnele Avenue Light Industrial Area Redevelopment Plan 	12-19-2018 
18-146 
Adopting amendments to the Mixed Use "D" Zone of the Morris Canal Redevelopment Plan 	01-09-2019 
19-009 
Adopting amendments to the Colgate Redevelopment Plan regarding research/testing laboratories and permitted uses 	02-27-2019 
19-010 
Adopting amendments to the Jersey Avenue Light Rail Redevelopment Plan to implement the Saint Lucy Overlay Bonus 	02-27-2019 
19-015 
Adopting an amendment to the Journal Square 2060 Redevelopment Plan to modify the corner lot bonuses map 	03-13-2019 
19-019 
Adopting amendments to the Adaptive Reuse District and the Residential District of the Garfield Avenue Redevelopment Plan 	03-27-2019 
19-027 
Adopting amendments to the Canal Crossing Redevelopment Plan regarding the expansion of permitted uses and amendment of the ground floor frontage regulating plan 	04-24-2019 
19-038 
Repealing Ordinances 15-052 and 15-053 imposing restrictions on formula businesses within certain redevelopment areas 	05-08-2019 
19-046 
Adopting amendments to Block 15801 of the Transit Oriented Development North Zone in the Morris Canal Redevelopment Plan 	05-08-2019 
 
TABLE 6. TAX ABATEMENTS/URBAN RENEWALS (LIMITED DIVIDEND) 
Ord. No. 	Subject Matter 	Date of Adoption 
C-891 	Tax abatement with River City Flagship Urban Renewal Association 	01-26-1989 
C-892 	Tax abatement with Claremont Urban Renewal Corporation 	01-26-1989 
C-901 	Tax abatement with Center Court Urban Renewal Association 	02-23-1989 
C-902 	Tax abatement with 101 Hudson Urban Renewal Associates 	02-23-1989 
C-927 	Tax abatement with 115 C.C.D. Urban Renewal Corp. 	03-23-1989 
C-930 	Tax abatement with Jersey City Episcopal Housing, Inc. 	03-23-1989 
C-931 	Tax abatement with Newport Office Center II Urban Renewal Company 	05-25-1989 
C-954 	Tax abatement with P.H.M. II Urban Renewal Associates 	05-25-1989 
C-955 	Tax abatement with Kennedy Place Urban Renewal Associates 	05-25-1989 
C-956 	Tax abatement with Sternco-Permaline Corporation 	05-25-1989 
C-961 	Tax abatement with T.P.I. Urban Renewal Corporation 	06-08-1989 
C-968 	Tax abatement with Tower America Urban Renewal Company 	05-25-1989 
vetoed 06-02-1989 
veto overridden 06-08-1989 
C-984 	Tax abatement with Port Liberte Urban Renewal Association 	05-25-1989 
C-997 	Tax abatement with 600 Pavonia Avenue Urban Renewal Associates 	06-22-1989 
C-999 	Tax abatement with Lutheran Residence Corporation 	06-22-1989 
C-1002 	Tax abatement with Let's Celebrate, Inc. 	06-22-1989 
McC-2 	Amendment of tax abatement with Resurrection House (School 18) Housing Corporation 	09-27-1989 
McC-4 	Tax abatement with Exchange Place Urban Renewal Association 	09-27-1989 
McC-51 	Amendment of tax abatement with 101 Hudson Urban Renewal Associates 	10-11-1989 
McC-52 	Amendment of tax abatement with Exchange Place Urban Renewal Association 	10-25-1989 
McC-52A 	Amendment of tax abatement with Exchange Place Urban Renewal Association 	10-25-1989 
McC-90 	Tax abatement with New Community Ocean Bayview Housing Corporation 	01-10-1990 
McC-96 	Bond to authorize public improvements in Greenville Yard Area 	01-24-1990 
McC-113 	Tax abatement with New Community Ocean Bayview Housing Associates, L.P.I. 	03-14-1990 
McC-114 	Tax abatement with Lutheran Residence Corporation 	03-28-1990 
McC-116 	Tax abatement with Fairmount Housing Corporation 	03-28-1990 
McC-117 	Tax abatement with Journal Square Associates 	04-11-1990 
McC-135 	Tax abatement with 151-151A Martin Luther King, Jr., Drive Cooperative Association 	04-25-1990 
McC-136 	Tax abatement with 169 Martin Luther King, Jr., Drive Cooperative Association 	04-25-1990 
McC-149 	Authorizing settlement of Midland Health Care Associates v. City of Jersey City by approving tax abatement agreement with Midland Health Care Associates 	04-25-1990 
McC-214 	Amendment of tax abatement with Happens Associates Urban Renewal Association 	12-19-1990 
McC-216 	Repeal of Ord. No. C-613 	10-24-1990 
McC-218 	Repeal of Ord. Nos. C-930 and McC-2 and tax abatement with Resurrection House (School No. 18) Housing Corporation 	11-20-1990 
McC-244 	Tax abatement with Neighborhood Housing Services of Jersey City Holding Company, Inc. 	01-09-1991 
McC-245 	Repeal of Ord. No. C-819 	12-19-1990 
McC-279 	Tax abatement with Bay Street Urban Renewal Development Corporation 	04-24-1991 
McC-279A 	Transfer of Bay Street Urban Renewal Project to Bay Street Urban Renewal Development Corporation 	04-10-1991 
McC-290 	Acquisition of certain utility easements by TPI Urban Renewal Corp. 	03-13-1991 
McC-312 	Amendment of tax abatement with Grove Street Urban Renewal Corporation 	04-10-1991 
McC-337 	Repeal of Ord. No. McC-148 	07-17-1991 
McC-341 	Amendment of tax abatement with M.L.H. Urban Renewal Corporation 	08-21-1991 
McC-350 	Amendment of tax abatement with Puerto Rican Lutheran Housing Corporation 	09-11-1991 
McC-354 	Tax abatement with Euell Development Limited Dividend Housing Corporation 	09-25-1991 
McC-362 	Requiring execution of first source and affirmative action agreement by recipient of any tax abatement or exemption of federal or state grant awarded by or through the city 	09-25-1991 
McC-380 	Amendment of tax abatement with Arlington Associates 	10-23-1991 
McC-397 	Tax abatement with New Community Ocean Bayview Housing Associates 	01-08-1992 
McC-411 	Tax abatement with Puerto Rican Lutheran Corporation 	02-11-1992 
92-001 	Repeal of Ord. No. C-648 	03-11-1992 
92-006 	Transfer of property to Bread and Roses, Inc. 	03-11-1992 
92-007 	Assignment of tax abatement to Bread and Roses, Inc. 	03-11-1992 
92-011 	Repeal of Ord. No. C-1002 	03-11-1992 
92-064 	Repeal of Ord. No. C-766 	06-10-1992 
92-086 	Amendment of tax exemption of Old Colony Square Associates and assignment of tax exemption to K.B. Colony Realty Associates 	09-16-1992 
92-099 	Franchise granted to 101 Hudson Urban Renewal Associates 	09-16-1992 
92-129 	Amendment of tax abatement with Grove Street Urban Renewal Corporation 	09-30-1992 
92-130 	Tax abatement with Villa Borinquen II Urban Renewal Associates 	09-30-1992 
92-133 	Lease with Ukrainian National Urban Renewal Corp. 	09-30-1992 
92-167 	Amendment of lease with Ukrainian National Urban Renewal Corp. 	09-30-1992 
93-014 	Repeal of Ord. No. C-891 	02-24-1993 
93-015 	Repeal of Ord. No. C-901 	02-24-1993 
93-032 	Tax exemption for Mid City Apartments, L.P. 	03-24-1993 
94-010 	Repeal of all prior ordinance relating to long-term and five-year term tax exemptions and/or abatements 	03-09-1994 
94-011 	Grant of five-year tax exemptions for certain industrial and commercial structures 	03-09-1994 
94-019 	Five-year tax exemption to N.O.L. Properties 	03-23-1994 
94-035 	Tax exemption for senior citizen housing project to be constructed by J.H. and R.C. Senior Homes Urban Renewal Associates, L.P. 	04-27-1994 
94-040 	Amendments to tax abatement for Harsimus Cove South Urban Redevelopment Association 	05-11-1994 
94-058 	Tax abatement with Hudson Eagle Distributing Company 	07-20-1994 
94-062 	Tax abatement to Portside Urban Renewal Association 	07-20-1994 
94-065 	Tax exemption for housing project to be constructed by H.P. Lincoln Urban Renewal Company 	08-17-1994 
94-066 	Tax exemption for senior housing; Fairmount Hotel Urban Renewal Associates 	08-17-1994 
94-067 	Amendment of Port Liberte Phase I tax abatement financial agreement 	08-17-1994 
94-109 	Thirty-year tax exemption for an affordable housing project by Greenville Steering Committee Non-profit Urban Renewal Housing Corporation 	11-22-1994 
94-110 	Thirty-year tax exemption for a senior citizen affordable housing project by Padua Court Urban Renewal Entity 	11-22-1994 
94-112 	Amendment to fifteen-year tax abatement of Tower America Urban Renewal Corp. 	11-22-1994 
95-010 	Amendment to clarify amount of tax exemption service charge in Ord. No. 92-130 	03-08-1995 
95-035 	Amendment to the tax exemption financial agreement with Mid-City Apartments, L.P., for affordable housing 	05-10-1995 
95-056 	Tax abatement for the Mid-City Apartments (Landex) Project 	06-28-1995 
95-078 	Tax abatement for Franklin Park Project 	09-13-1995 
96-022 	Requiring execution of first source and affirmative action agreement by recipient of any tax abatement or exemption of federal or state grant awarded by or through the city (NOTE: This ordinance was challenged in the Federal District Court in February 1997 and was struck down as unconstitutional.) 	03-13-1996 
96-008 	Consolidation of the Portside commercial and residential tax abatements 	02-14-1996 
96-010 	Tax exemption for St. John's Church 	02-14-1996 
96-011 	Forty-year tax exemption for a senior citizens affordable housing project to be constructed by New Community Hudson Senior Housing Corporation 	02-14-1996 
96-026 	Thirty-year tax exemption for an affordable housing project to be constructed by Salem Lafayette Urban Renewal Associates, L.P. 	03-27-1996 
96-027 	Thirty-year tax exemption for a senior citizens affordable housing project for Summit Urban Renewal Nonprofit Corporation 	03-27-1996 
96-059 	Thirty-year tax exemption for a senior citizens affordable housing project to be constructed by Earl Homes Urban Renewal, L.P. 	06-12-1996 
96-080 	Amendment to Ord. No. 96-011 	08-14-1996 
96-081 	Thirty-year tax exemption for a single-room occupancy affordable housing project to be constructed by New Hope Urban Renewal, L.P. 	08-14-1996 
96-102 	Tax abatement for North Pier Urban Renewal Associates 	10-23-1996 
96-104 	Assignment of tax abatement for Plaza II and III Urban Renewal Associates, L.P., to Cal-Harbor II and III Urban Renewal Associates, L.P. 	10-23-1996 
96-105 	Assignment of tax abatement for Plaza IV Urban Renewal Associates, L.P., to Cal-Harbor IV Urban Renewal Associates, L.P. 	10-23-1996 
96-107 	Assignment of tax abatement for Plaza VI Urban Renewal Associates, L.P., to Cal-Harbor VI Urban Renewal Associates, L.P. 	10-23-1996 
96-116 	Bifurcation and assignment of fifteen-year tax abatement of Tower America Urban Renewal Corp. 	11-26-1996 
96-119 	Amendment to thirty-year tax exemption for Salem Lafayette Urban Renewal Associates, L.P. (amendment to Ord. No. 96-026) 	11-26-1996 
97-015 	Five-year tax exemption for Mitchell MacGregor in the amount of $25,000 on new improvements to a dwelling located at 294 Fourth Street (Block 316, Lot Z) 	03-12-1997 
97-016 	Five-year tax exemption for Michael A. Balducci in the amount of $32,600 on new improvements to a dwelling located at 57 Rutgers Avenue and 2 McAdoo Avenue (Block 1359, Lots 9 and 10) 	03-12-1997 
97-019 	Amendment to Grove Street Urban Renewal Corporation tax abatement for property located at Block 203, Lots 1 through 27, and assignment to Cali-Grove Street Urban Renewal Associates, LP (amendment to Ord. Nos. C-260, McC-312 and 92-129) 	03-12-1997 
97-030 	Assignment and modification of a Harsimus Cove South Urban Redevelopment Association tax abatement to Hudson Hospitality Services Urban Renewal Associates of property located at Block 15, Lots C-71, C-1, C-2, C-10, C-18, C-21, C-31, C-24, C-9 and C-22 (amendment to Ord. Nos. C-448, C-449 and C-450) 	04-16-1997 
97-035 	Thirty-year tax exemption for a low-and moderate-income affordable transition housing project to be constructed at 657-659 Bergen Avenue(Block 1823, Lot 1B) by Project Home Urban Renewal Entity 	04-23-1997 
97-046 	Twenty-year tax exemption for a retail center to be constructed on property located at Block 1995, Lot 1, Block 1996, Lot 1, and Block 1997, Lot 1, by Martin Luther King Drive Urban Renewal Joint Venture Partnership, Inc. 	06-25-1997 
97-059 	Thirty-year tax exemption for a low-income affordable and market rate housing project located at 73 Morris Street, 61-71 Morris Street and 59 Morris Street (Block 66, Lots 1a, N and P) to be constructed by the Evergreen West, L.L.C. 	09-10-1997 
97-070 	Assignment of a thirty-year tax exemption from Harsimus Cove South Urban Development Association for a portion of the property located at Block 15, Lot B, to Town Cove II Jersey City Urban Renewal, Inc.; execution of an amended financial agreement; amendment to Ord. Nos. C-448, C-449 and C-450 	10-08-1997 
97-071 	Transfer of Newport L.G. and NLGI Inc.'s partnership interest in Newport Tower Urban Renewal Company to Trizec Hahn Newport Inc. and Trizec Hahn NP Inc. and acknowledgment of the service charge due 	10-08-1997 
97-072 	Thirty-year tax exemption for a housing project to be constructed on property located at 20 River Court (Block 20, Lot 2.09) by 20 River Court West Urban Renewal Company 	10-08-1997 
97-073 	Thirty-year tax exemption for a housing project to be constructed on property located at 30 River Court (Block 20, Lots 2.29 and 2.10) by 30 River Court East Urban Renewal Company 	10-08-1997 
97-074 	Thirty-year tax exemption for a low-income affordable and market rate housing project located at 73 Morris Street, 61-71 Morris Street and 59 Morris Street (Block 66, Lots 1a, N and P) to be constructed by Evergreen West, L.L.C.; repeal of Ord. No. 97-059 	10-08-1997 
97-089 	Five-year tax exemption on new improvements for the Reservoir Heights Village, Block 837, Lots 1 through 17 	12-23-1997 
98-028 	Thirty-year tax exemption for a low-income affordable housing project to be constructed by Let's Celebrate Urban Renewal, L.L.C. 	03-25-1998 
98-032 	Thirty-year tax exemption for project to be constructed by Belmont Guest House Urban Renewal Associates, L.L.C. on Block 1819, Lot 30, a.k.a. 188-190 Belmont Avenue 	04-08-1998 
98-033 	Thirty-year tax exemption for project to be constructed by Seaview Guest House Urban Renewal Associates, L.L.C. on Block 1411, Lot A.1, a.k.a. 92 Old Bergen Road or 125 Seaview Avenue 	04-08-1998 
98-038 	Twenty-year tax exemption for project to be constructed by N.O.C. III Urban Renewal Limited Liability Company consisting of approximately 2.1 acres known as 599 Washington boulevard [note: N.O.C. a.k.a. Newport Office Center (NOC)] 	04-22-1998 
98-042 	Twenty-year tax exemption for project to be constructed by 90 Hudson Street Urban Renewal Associates, L.L.C. on property located in the Colgate Redevelopment Area, a.k.a. Block 6, Lot 1A (Hartz Mountain Industries, Inc.) 	05-13-1998 
98-048 	Assumption of amended financial agreement from Portside Apartments Urban Renewal Company, L.L.C. to the Towers at Portside Urban Renewal Company, L.L.C. (see C-631, C-632, 96-008); project located at 100 Warren Street, Block 60, Lot 34 	05-13-1998 
98-053 	Assignment of a twenty-year tax exemption from Harsimus Cove South Urban Redevelopment Association to Portofino Tower Urban Renewal Associates, L.L.C.; conversion of project from residential condominiums to market rate rental units (see C-448, C-449, C-450, C-757, 94-040, 96-107, 97-030, 97-070, 98-053, 98-089) 	05-27-1998 
98-068 	Fifteen-year tax exemption for a hotel project to be constructed by Newport Hotel One Urban Renewal Limited Liability Company, to construct a project on Block 20, Lot 2.32, a.k.a. 540 Washington Boulevard 	05-27-1998 
98-087 	Twenty-year tax exemption for project to be constructed by Siena Urban Renewal Associates, L.P. at 107-129 Montgomery Street 	07-22-1998 
98-088 	Fifteen-year tax exemption for project to be constructed by Public School No. 2 Urban Renewal Company, L.L.C., at 60-66 Erie Street 	07-22-1998 
98-089 	Fifteen-year tax exemption for project to be constructed by Candlewood Jersey City Urban Renewal, L.L.C., rescinding in part the Harsimus Cove South Urban Renewal Redevelopment Association commercial tax exemption and the Cal-Harbor VI Urban Renewal Associates, L.P. tax exemptions (see C-448, C-449, C-450, C-757, 94-040, 96-107, 97-030, 97-070, 98-053) 	07-22-1998 
98-091 	Five-year tax exemption for property designated as Block 1978, Lot 9, a.k.a. 415 Martin Luther King Drive 	08-12-1998 
98-092 	Five-year tax exemption for property designated as Block 1425, Lot 23, a.k.a. 64 Linden Avenue 	08-12-1998 
98-093 	Five-year tax exemption for property designated as Block 1267, Lot D, a.k.a. 257 Linden Avenue 	08-12-1998 
98-094 	Five-year tax exemption for property designated as Block 1283, Lot A.8, a.k.a. 1995-7 Kennedy Boulevard 	08-12-1998 
98-095 	Five-year tax exemption for property designated as Block 1835, Lot 4.B, a.k.a. 41 Highland Avenue 	08-12-1998 
98-097 	Five-year tax exemption for property designated as Block 1835, Lot 3D, a.k.a. 45 Highland Avenue 	08-12-1998 
98-098 	Five-year tax exemption for property designated as Block 520, Lot 12B, a.k.a. 3 East Street 	08-12-1998 
98-099 	Five-year tax exemption for property designated as Block 99, Lot P, a.k.a. 214 Warren Street 	08-12-1998 
98-100 	Five-year tax exemption for property designated as Block 207, Lot 22, a.k.a. 364 Grove Street 	08-12-1998 
98-101 	Five-year tax exemption for property designated as Block 275, Lot 30, a.k.a. 21 Erie Street 	08-12-1998 
98-102 	Five-year tax exemption for property designated as Block 282, Lot 27.A, a.k.a. 251 Eighth (8th) Street 	08-12-1998 
98-103 	Five-year tax exemption for property designated as Block 314, Lot 12, a.k.a. 304 Second Street 	08-12-1998 
98-115 	Twenty-year tax exemption for a project to be constructed by New Jersey Residential Urban Renewal Company, L.L.C., and rescission of the prior tax exemption for the property (Port Liberte II), Block 1497, parts of Lots 27, 28, 29 and 30; Block 1500, parts of Lots 24 and 25, consisting of approximately 111 acres adjacent to Caven Point Road (see C-984, 94-067) 	08-12-1998 
98-123 	Amending the thirty-year tax exemption for the project to be constructed by 30 River Court East Urban Renewal Company at Block 20, Lots 2.29 and 2.10 (formerly known as parts of Lots 2.09 and 2.10); see Ord. 97-073 	09-09-1998 
98-140 	Five-year tax exemption for property at Block 947, Lot 11, 14 Cliff Street 	10-28-1998 
98-154 	Twelve-year tax exemption for a project to be constructed by Barrett Urban Renewal within Block 1507, Lot 2401, of the Greenville Industrial Redevelopment Plan Area 	12-09-1998 
98-161 	Assignment of a tax exemption financial agreement from Exchange Place Urban Renewal Associates Limited Partnership to BBV Exchange Centre Urban Renewal Limited Partnership for 10 Exchange Place 	12-09-1998 
99-022 	Thirty-year tax exemption for an affordable housing project for low-, moderate-and market-rate households to be constructed by Lafayette Village Urban Renewal Limited Partnership and rescinding Ord. No. 98-028 	02-24-1999 
99-032 	Thirty-year tax exemption for affordable housing project to be constructed by 99 Rutgers Urban Renewal L.P. 	03-10-1999 
99-043 	Twenty-year tax exemption for commercial office building to be constructed by N.O.C. IV Urban Renewal Co., L.L.C. 	04-14-1999 
99-044 	Twenty-year tax exemption for office project to be constructed by 70 Hudson Street Urban Renewal Associates, L.L.C. 	04-14-1999 
99-048 	Twenty-year tax exemption for market-rate residential rental project to be constructed by TCR Jersey City I Urban Renewal, L.L.C. 	04-14-1999 
99-0062 	Twenty-year tax exemption for commercial project to be constructed on Block 10, Lot 2 by Cal-Harbor V Urban Renewal Associates, LP, and rescinding Ord. Nos. C-751 and 96-106 	04-28-1999 
99-063 	Twenty-year tax exemption for commercial project to be constructed on Block 8, Lot 1 by Cal-Harbor VII Urban Renewal Associates, LP, and rescinding Ord. Nos. C-754 and 96-108 	04-28-1999 
99-081 	Twenty-year tax exemption for commercial office rental project to be constructed by 74 Grand Street Urban Renewal, LLC 	06-23-1999 
99-082 	Twenty-year tax exemption for market-rate residential condominium project to be constructed by Sugar House Urban Renewal Company, LLC, and rescinding Ord. No. 98-002 	06-23-1999 
99-083 	Limited dividend tax exemption from 151-151A Martin Luther King Jr. Drive Cooperative Association to Fairmount Housing Corp. 	06-23-1999 
99-084 	Tax exemption for Harsimus Cove South Urban Redevelopment Association to Marbella Tower Urban Renewal Associates, L.L.C. 	06-23-1999 
99-086 	Fifteen-year tax exemption for commercial project to be constructed by Cal-Harbor So. Pier Urban Renewal Associates, L.P., and rescinding Ord. No. 96-013 	06-23-1999 
99-095 	Amending fifteen-year tax exemption for project to be constructed by Candlewood Jersey City Urban Renewal, LLC 	08-18-1999 
99-116 	Five-year tax exemption for property designated as Block 1269, Lot 18, a.k.a. 48 Grieco Drive 	09-08-1999 
99-117 	Five-year tax exemption for property designated as Block 516, Lot 23A, a.k.a. 240 Baldwin Avenue 	09-08-1999 
99-118 	Five-year tax exemption for property designated as Block 1905, Lot 6, a.k.a. 19 Orchard Street 	09-08-1999 
99-119 	Five-year tax exemption for property designated as Block 1797, Lot 44, a.k.a. 85 Clendenny Avenue 	09-08-1999 
99-120 	Five-year tax exemption for property designated as Block 1849, Lot 17, a.k.a. 117 Garrison Avenue 	09-08-1999 
99-122 	Five-year tax exemption for property designated as Block 1849, Lot 16, a.k.a. 119 Garrison Avenue 	09-08-1999 
99-123 	Five-year tax exemption for property designated as Block 915, Lot 20.SO, a.k.a. 150 Columbia Avenue 	09-08-1999 
99-124 	Five-year tax exemption for property designated as Block 918, Lot 182, a.k.a. 231 Terrace Avenue 	09-08-1999 
99-125 	Five-year tax exemption for property designated as Block 918, Lot 183, a.k.a. 233 Terrace Avenue 	09-08-1999 
99-126 	Five-year tax exemption for property designated as Block 918, Lot 184, a.k.a. 235 Terrace Avenue 	09-08-1999 
99-127 	Five-year tax exemption for property designated as Block 918, Lot 185, a.k.a. 237 Terrace Avenue 	09-08-1999 
99-128 	Five-year tax exemption for property designated as Block 918, Lot 186, a.k.a. 239 Terrace Avenue 	09-08-1999 
99-129 	Five-year tax exemption for property designated as Block 918, Lot 187, a.k.a. 241 Terrace Avenue 	09-08-1999 
99-130 	Five-year tax exemption for property designated as Block 918, Lot 188, a.k.a. 243 Terrace Avenue 	09-08-1999 
99-131 	Five-year tax exemption for property designated as Block 918, Lot 189, a.k.a. 245 Terrace Avenue 	09-08-1999 
99-132 	Five-year tax exemption for property designated as Block 918, Lot 190, a.k.a. 247 Terrace Avenue 	09-08-1999 
99-133 	Five-year tax exemption for property designated as Block 918, Lot 69, a.k.a. 253 Terrace Avenue 	09-08-1999 
99-134 	Five-year tax exemption for property designated as Block 918, Lot 70, a.k.a. 255 Terrace Avenue 	09-08-1999 
99-135 	Five-year tax exemption for property designated as Block 918, Lot 71, a.k.a. 257 Terrace Avenue 	09-08-1999 
99-136 	Five-year tax exemption for property designated as Block 918, Lot 72, a.k.a. 259 Terrace Avenue 	09-08-1999 
99-140 	Five-year tax exemption for property designated as Block 99, Lot A, a.k.a. 199 Washington Street 	09-08-1999 
99-152 	Thirty-year tax exemption for affordable housing project for low-, moderate-and market-rate households to be constructed by Lafayette Community Limited Partnership 	10-13-1999 
99-155 	Five-year tax exemption for property designated as Block 806, Lot A.1, a.k.a. 725-41 Secaucus Road 	10-27-1999 
99-156 	Five-year tax exemption for property designated as Block 806, Lot A.2, a.k.a. 745 Secaucus Road 	10-27-1999 
99-157 	Five-year tax exemption for property designated as Block 806, Lot A.3, a.k.a. 723 Secaucus Road 	10-27-1999 
99-159 	Tax exemption for property owned by Bramhall Urban Renewal, LP, and rescinding Ord. No. 97-029 	10-27-1999 
99-190 	Twenty-year tax exemption for commercial project to be constructed by NOC V Urban Renewal Company, LLC 	01-12-2000 
00-019 	Assignment of tax exemption from Cali-Grove Street Urban Renewal Associates, LP, to Commerz New Jersey Urban Renewal, LP 	03-22-2000 
00-022 	Twenty-year tax exemption for a mixed residential and commercial market rate rental project to be constructed by 25 River Drive South Urban Renewal Company (Block 20, Lots 2.05, 2.11 and 2.26) 	04-12-2000 
00-023 	Twenty-year tax exemption for a mixed residential and commercial market rate rental project to be constructed by Essex Waterfront Urban Renewal Company, LLC (Block 34, Lots 3-13) 	04-12-2000 
00-024 	Twenty-year tax exemption for a market rate residential and commercial condominium units project to be constructed by 103-105 Greene Street Urban Renewal Company, LLC (Block 70, Lot R-2) 	04-12-2000 
00-025 	Transfer of 50% of interest of Mack-Cali Realty, LP, in Cal-Harbor So. Pier Urban Renewal Associates, LP, to HT-Jersey Pier, LP (Block 10, Lots 7.02, 9 and 10) (amends Ord. No. 99-086) 	04-12-2000 
00-031 	Amendment to tax exemption and financial agreement for N.O.C. IV Urban Renewal Co., LLC (Block 20, Lots 1.17 and 1.18) 	05-10-2000 
00-036 	Twenty-year tax exemption for an office project to be constructed by 77 Hudson Street Urban Renewal Associates, LLC (Block 36, Lot 1A) 	04-26-2000 
00-042 	Twenty-year tax exemption for an office project to be constructed by GSJC 30 Hudson Urban Renewal, LLC, and 30 Hudson Street Lessor Urban Renewal, LLC (Block 3, Lots 27 and 28, and Block 4, Lot 27) 	04-26-2000 
00-043 	Twenty-year tax exemption for an office project to be constructed by GSJC 50 Hudson Urban Renewal, LLC, and 50 Hudson Street Lessor Urban Renewal, LLC (Block 4, Lot 28) 	04-26-2000 
00-081 	Twenty-year tax exemption for a commercial project to be constructed by NOC VI Urban Renewal Company, LLC (570 Washington Boulevard; Block 20, Lot 2.07) 	07-19-2000 
00-082 	Twenty-year tax exemption for a commercial project to be constructed by NOC VII Urban Renewal Company, LLC (480 Washington Boulevard; Block 20, part of Lot 2.24) 	07-19-2000 
00-083 	Twenty-year tax exemption for a residential project to be constructed by EQR-Lincoln Urban Renewal Jersey City, LLC (153 Warren Street; Block 60, Lots 31A, 32A and 50, and Block 65, part of Lot 1G) 	07-19-2000 
00-084 	Twenty-year tax exemption for a residential condominium project to be constructed by TCR Pier House Urban Renewal Company, LLC (15 Warren Street; Block 60, Lot 33) 	07-19-2000 
00-090 	Twenty-year tax exemption for a residential project to be constructed by EQR-Lincoln Urban Renewal Jersey City North Pier, LLC (Harborside North Pier; Block 10, Lots 12, 13 and part of 7) 	08-16-2000 
00-091 	Twenty-year tax exemption for a residential project to be constructed by Liberty Waterfront Urban Renewal Entity, LLC (39 Essex Street; Block 33, Lot 4-14) 	08-16-2000 
00-106 	Ordinance approving twenty (twenty year tax exemption for market rate and commercial condominium units project to be constructed by Raine Court Urban Renewal, LLC, an urban renewal entity, pursuant to the Law Term Tax Exemption Law N.J.S.. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	10-20-2000 
00-107 	Approving a 20 year tax exemption for a market rate residential rental project, pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law 	09-27-2000 
00-112 	Twenty-year tax exemption for a residential rental/commercial project to be constructed by Millennium Towers Urban Renewal, LLC (Grove Street; Block 294.5, Lot PL.A) 	09-13-2000 
00-124 	Twenty-year tax exemption for a residential project to be constructed by Henderson Lofts Urban Renewal, LLC (685-691 Henderson Street, Block 228, Lots C.2, C.4 and 4) 	09-27-2000 
00-125 	Corrective amendment to tax exemption and financial agreement for NOC VI Urban Renewal, LLC (amends Ord. No. 00-81) 	09-27-2000 
00-129 	Fifteen-year tax exemption for a commercial project to be constructed by Department Store 3 Urban Renewal Corp. (Washington Boulevard, Block 20, Lot 1.11) 	09-27-2000 
00-134 	Amendment to tax exemption for TCR Pier House Urban Renewal Company, LLC (15 Warren Street, Block 60, Lots 33 and 33A) (amends 00-084) 	10-11-2000 
00-141 	Twenty-year tax exemption for market rate residential and commercial condominium units project to be constructed by Fulton's Landing Urban Renewal Company, LLC (Van Vorst Street, Block 130, Lot 49) 	10-25-2000 
00-144 	Five-year tax exemption for property located in Block 1269, Lot 92, commonly known as 395—427 Danforth Avenue 	10-25-2000 
00-145 	Five-year tax exemption for property located in Block 20, Lot 4.03 commonly known as 611—613 Washington Boulevard 	10-25-2000 
00-146 	Twenty-year tax exemption for a commercial project to be constructed by Plaza X Urban Renewal Associates, LLC (Hudson Street, Block 15, Lots 35 and 36) 	10-25-2000 
00-147 	Fifteen-year tax exemption for a commercial project to be constructed by the Atrium at Hamilton Park Urban Renewal Associates, LLC (350 Ninth Avenue, Block 394, Lot 30, and Block 393, Lots B, C, D, E, H, J, K and 4) 	10-25-2000 
00-155 	Amendment to tax exemption and financial agreement for Cal-Harbor V Urban Renewal Associates, LP (Block 10, Lot 2) (amends Ord. No. 99-062) 	11-08-2000 
00-156 	Amendment to tax exemption and financial agreement for Cal-Harbor So Pier Urban Renewal Associates, LP (Block 10, Lot 7.02) (amends Ord. No. 00-025) 	11-08-2000 
00-157 	Approving sale of project and assignment of tax exemption from Barrett Urban Renewal Corporation to Summit/Greenwich Urban Renewal, LLC 	11-08-2000 
00-172 	Twenty-year tax exemption for a residential project to be constructed by Columbus Towers I Urban Renewal, LLC (303 Warren Street, Block 138, Lot T) 	01-10-2001 
00-175 	Fifteen-year tax exemption for a residential project to be constructed by Marbella Tower Urban Renewal Associates, LLC (425 Washington Boulevard, Block 15, Lot 28) (repeals Ord. No. 99-084) 	01-10-2001 
01-006 	Tax exemption for low and moderate income rental housing; Bostwick Court Urban Renewal Associates, L.P. 	01-24-2001 
01-006 	Tax exemption for low and moderate income rental housing; Bostwick Court Urban Renewal Associates, L.P. 	01-24-2001 
01-014 	Ten-year tax exemption for commercial project to be constructed by 50 Dey Street Urban Renewal LLC 	02-14-2001 
01-015 	Amendment of tax exemption of CQR-Lincoln Jersey City North Pier Urban Renewal, L.L.C. to EQR-LPC Urban Renewal North Pier, L.L.C. 	02-14-2001 
01-021 	Amendment to the tax exemption and financial agreement for Essex Waterfront Urban Renewal Entity, LLC 	02-28-2001 
01-025 	Twenty-year tax exemption for a commercial project to be constructed by Hotel at Newport Urban Renewal LLC 	02-28-2001 
01-028 	Twenty-year tax exemption for a market rate residential rental/commercial to be constructed by Vector Urban Renewal Associates I, LP 	02-28-2001 
01-037 	Amendment to tax exemption and financial agreement for Henderson Lofts Urban Renewal, LLC 	03-28-2001 
01-038 	Amendment to tax exemption and financial agreement for Bramhall Urban Renewal 	03-28-2001 
01-039 	Clarification of twenty-year tax exemption for a commercial project to be constructed by Hotel at Newport Urban Renewal LLC 	03-28-2001 
01-069 	Approves a 12-year tax exemption for an industrial project to be constructed by Caven Point Urban Renewal Associates 	06-13-2001 
01-070 	Approves a 12-year tax exemption for an industrial project to be constructed by Polar One East Urban Renewal Associates, L.L.C. 	06-13-2001 
01-079 	Clarification of Ord. 00-083, regarding tax exemption for EQR-Lincoln Urban Renewal 	06-27-2001 
02-019 	Amends tax exemption for Candlewood Jersey City Urban Renewal, L.L.C. 	02-27-2001 
02-020 	Amends tax exemption agreement with 101 Hudson Urban Renewal Associates 	02-27-2002 
02-024 	Authorization for cancellation of taxes for certain property owned by Grace Hill Tabernacle Inc. 	03-13-2002 
02-025 	Authorizes amendment to tax exemption of and financial agreement with 25 River Drive South Urban Renewal Company 	03-13-2002 
02-026 	Authorizes amendment to tax exemption of and financial agreement with Department Store 3 Urban Renewal Corporation 	03-13-2002 
02-047 	Repeals text of Administrative Code regarding tax exemptions granted through ordinance passage 	04-24-2002 
02-048 	Approves tax exemption 	04-24-2002 
02-055 	Approves a twenty-year tax exemption for an urban renewal affordable housing project to be constructed by New Jersey City Affordable Housing, L.L.C. 	Withdrawn 
04-10-2002 
02-064 	Approves a 15-year tax exemption for an urban renewal affordable housing project to be constructed by New Jersey City Urban Renewal Affordable Housing, L.L.C. 	06-12-2002 
02-072 	Approves a 30-year tax exemption for an urban renewal affordable housing project to be constructed by Lafayette Family Urban Renewal Associates, L.P. 	06-12-2002 
02-077 	Approves a 12-year tax exemption for a commercial project to be constructed by Keystone Greenville Urban Renewal L.L.C. 	06-26-2002 
02-078 	Approves 12 year tax exemption for industrial project to be constructed by Polar Logistics East Urban Renewal Associates, L.L.C 	06-26-2002 
02-082 	Fifteen year tax exemption for a market rate residential rental project to be constructed by 700 Grove Street Urban Renewal LLC 	07-17-2002 
02-086 	Amendment to the ten year tax exemption of 50 Dey Street Urban Renewal LLC 	08-14-2002 
02-087 	Twenty year tax exemption for a market rate residential condominium project to be constructed by Majestic Urban Renewal, LLC 	08-14-2002 
02-105 	Twenty year tax exemption for a market rate residential condominium project to be constructed by TCR Warren Street Urban Renewal LLC 	10-09-2002 
02-106 	Twenty year tax exemption for a market rate residential condominium units/commercial project to be constructed by Liberty Point Urban Renewal LLC 	09-25-2002 
02-107 	Twenty year tax exemption for a market rate residential rental project with one commercial unit to be constructed by Chowanec Urban Renewal, LLC 	10-09-2002 
02-123 	Twenty year tax exemption for a market rate residential and commercial condominium project to be constructed by Wa Urban Renewal Company, LLC 	11-13-2002 
03-023 	Termination of tax exemption for Evergreen West, LLC 	02-26-2003 
03-024 	Amends the tax exemption of 101 Hudson Urban Renewal Associates 	02-26-2003 
03-026 	Twenty-five year tax exemption for a market rate residential retail and office condominium project to be constructed by 140 Bay Street Urban Renewal, LLC 	02-26-2003 
03-027 	Thirty year tax exemption for a mixed use market rate and affordable housing and parking and retail project to be constructed by the 2854 Kennedy, LLC 	02-26-2003 
03-084 	Thirty year tax exemption for an urban renewal affordable housing project to be constructed by Lafayette Family Phase II Urban Renewal Associates, L.P. 	06-11-2003 
03-106 	Twenty year tax exemption for a market rate condominium residential project to be constructed by Greene Street Urban Renewal, LLC 	08-13-2003 
03-107 	Thirty year tax exemption for a moderate income affordable housing project to be constructed by MLK Drive Urban Renewal, LLC 	08-13-2003 
03-110 	Twenty year tax exemption for Plaza X Urban Renewal Associations, LLC 	08-13-2003 
03-120 	Transfer of tax exemption from TCR Warren Street Urban Renewal, LLC, to K Hovnanian at Jersey City V Urban Renewal Company, LLC 	09-10-2003 
03-121 	Amendment to twenty year tax exemption for Plaza X Urban Renewal Associations, LLC 	Withdrawn 
08-13-2003 
03-138 	Amendment to PHM Urban Renewal Associates and ten year extension of the term of the tax exemption 	Withdrawn 
09-24-2003 
03-139 	Forty year tax exemption of moderate income affordable and market rate housing project to be constructed by the Whitlock Mills, L.P. 	10-08-2003 
03-141 	Amendment to the tax exemption of 475 Claremont Avenue Urban Renewal, LLC 	10-08-2003 
03-142 	Five year tax exemption for Jersey City Self Storage, LLC 	10-08-2003 
03-152 	Five year tax exemption for AS27-33 Fisk Street, LLC 	12-10-2003 
03-154 	Amendment to tax exemption of 700 Grove Street Urban Renewal, LLC and transfer of membership interests in 700 Grove Street Urban Renewal, LLC, to the long term tax exemption law 	11-25-2003 
03-155 	Transfer of membership interests in Candlewood Jersey City - Urban Renewal LLC 	11-25-2003 
03-161 	Twenty year tax exemption for a market rate residential and commercial condominium project to be constructed by 95 Van Dam Urban Renewal LLC 	01-14-2004 
04-006 	Twenty year tax exemption for a market rate residential condominium project to be constructed by Montgomery Greene Urban Renewal, LLC 	Defeated 
02-11-2004 
04-009 	Twenty year tax exemption for a market rate residential condominium project to be constructed by Liberty Harbor North Urban Renewal, LLC 	Defeated 
02-11-2004 
04-010 	Twenty year tax exemption for a market rate residential condominium project to be constructed by Erie 10th Urban Renewal, LLC 	Defeated 
02-11-2004 
04-011 	Five year tax exemption for property designated as Block 743, Lot 46 	02-11-2004 
04-013 	Transfer of tax exemption from Fulton's Landing Urban Renewal, LLC to Pulte Urban Renewal, LLC 	02-11-2004 
04-018 	Twenty year tax exemption for a market rate residential and commercial condominium project to be constructed by Liberty Harbor North Urban Renewal, LLC 	Defeated 
03-10-2004 
04-019 	Twenty year tax exemption for a market rate residential and commercial condominium project to be constructed by Erie 10th Urban Renewal, LLC 	03-10-2004 
04-020 	Twenty year tax exemption for a market rate residential condominium project to be constructed by Montgomery Greene Urban Renewal, LLC 	03-10-2004 
04-047 	Amendment to the financial agreement of PHM Urban Renewal Associates and a ten year extension of the term of the tax exemption 	04-28-2004 
04-051 	Twenty year tax exemption for a market rate residential and commercial condominium project to be constructed by 159 Second Street Urban Renewal, LLC 	05-12-2004 
04-052 	Twenty year tax exemption for a market rate residential rental project to be constructed by H.P. Roosevelt Urban Renewal, LLC 	05-12-2004 
04-053 	Twenty year tax exemption for a market rate residential condominium project to be constructed by Toll Cliffs Urban Renewal Company, LLC 	05-12-2004 
04-072 	Twenty year tax exemption for a market rate residential condominium project to be constructed by Liberty Waterfront Urban Renewal Entity, LLC 	07-14-2004 
04-077 	Twenty year tax exemption for a market rate residential rental project to be constructed by Woodrow Wilson Urban Renewal Company 	08-11-2004 
04-078 	Twenty year tax exemption for a market rate residential and commercial condominium project to be constructed by Liberty Harbor North Urban Renewal, LLC 	09-22-2004 
04-079 	Twenty year tax exemption for a market rate residential rental and commercial project to be constructed by Grove Point Urban Renewal LLC 	08-11-2004 
04-080 	Twenty year tax exemption for a market rate residential condominium project to be constructed by Grove Pointe Condominium Urban Renewal LLC 	08-11-2004 
04-081 	Twenty year tax exemption for a market rate residential project to be constructed by Columbus Apts Urban Renewal Entity 	Tabled 
08-11-2004 
04-109 	Approves sale of Portofino Tower Urban Renewal Project; assignment of financial agreement Portofino Tower Urban Renewal Associates, LLC to Portofino Urban Renewal, LLC 	09-22-2004 
04-112 	Twenty year tax exemption for a market rate residential condominium project to be constructed by 475 Claremont Avenue Lofts Urban Renewal, LLC 	10-13-2004 
04-113 	Twenty year tax exemption for a market rate rental/commercial project to be constructed by Riverview I Associates urban Renewal Company, LLC 	10-27-2004 
04-114 	Five year tax exemption for property designated as Block 1842, Lot 20.A, commonly known as 19 Van Wagenen Avenue 	10-27-2004 
04-122 	Amendment to the tax exemption of Henderson Lofts Urban Renewal, LLC 	10-27-2004 
04-126 	Fifteen year tax exemption for a market rate residential condominium project to be constructed by Columbus Towers I Urban Renewal, LLC 	10-27-2004 
04-152 	Bifurcation of financial agreement between 475 Claremont Avenue Urban Renewal, LLC and Jersey City for Block 1775.1, Lots 85, 86, 88, 89, 90, 91, 92 and 95; assignment of phase II of project to Centex Homes Westside Urban Renewal I, LLC 	01-12-2005 
04-153 	Authorizes sale of project and assignment of financial agreement from 475 Claremont Avenue Lofts Urban Renewal, LLC to Centex Homes Westside Urban Renewal II, LLC 	01-12-2005 
05-001 	Twenty year tax exemption for a market rate residential condominium project to be constructed by Washington First Urban Renewal, LLC 	01-26-2005 
05-002 	Twenty year tax exemption for a market rte residential condominium property to be constructed by Jersey Avenue 833 Urban Renewal Company, LLC 	01-26-2005 
05-003 	Five year tax exemption for property designated as Block 1746.5, Lot H.4, a.k.a. 725-775 Route 440 	01-26-2005 
05-008 	Twenty year tax exemption for a market rate residential condominium project to be constructed by 150 Essex Street Urban Renewal, LLC 	02-09-2005 
05-010 	Thirty year tax exemption for a low income rental housing project to be constructed by the Toy Factory Apartment, L.P. 	02-23-2005 
05-012 	Twenty year tax exemption for a market rate residential condominium project to be constructed by Laidlaw Properties Urban Renewal, LLC 	02-23-2005 
05-013 	Twenty year tax exemption for a 212 Market Rate Residential condominium units to be constructed by Shore Club South Urban Renewal Company, LLC 	02-23-2005 
05-015 	Authorizes execution of a ten year lease with Journal Square Plaza Urban Renewal Associates 	02-23-2005 
05-018 	Twenty year tax exemption for a market rate residential condominium project to be completed by Liberty Harbor North Condominium Urban Renewal 4, LLC 	03-09-2005 
05-019 	Twenty year tax exemption for a market rate residential condominium project to be constructed by Liberty Harbor North Condominium Urban Renewal 5.5, LLC 	03-09-2005 
05-020 	Twenty year tax exemption for a market rate residential condominium project to be constructed by Liberty Harbor North Brownstone Condominium Urban Renewal, LLC 	03-09-2005 
05-021 	Twenty year tax exemption for a market rate residential condominium project to be constructed by Jar Holding Urban Renewal, LLC 	03-09-2005 
05-026 	Tax refund of taxes to Church of God located a 124 Monticello Avenue, Block 1927, Lot 39 	03-23-2005 
05-062 	Cancellation of taxes pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:4-6c for property owned by True Vine Church of Jesus and located at 416 Whiton Street on Block 2093, Lot B.1. 	Withdrawn 
05-18-2005 
05-083 	Amendment to the tax exemption of Vector Urban Renewal Associates LLP 	06-22-2005 
05-084 	Twenty year tax exemption for 417 market rate residential condominium units to be constructed by Vector Urban Renewal Associates II, L.P. 	06-22-2005 
05-085 	Approves a replacement financial agreement to all for approximately 50 additional condominium units to the tax exemption of Washington First Urban Renewal LLC 	06-22-2005 
05-087 	Authorizes the cancellation of taxes for property owned by Metropolitan AME Zion Church located at 601 Bergen Avenue, on Block 18-19, Lot B 	06-22-2005 
05-088 	Authorizes cancellation of taxes for property owned by Grace Church Van Vorst located at 39 Erie Street on Block 277, Lot 33 	06-22-2005 
05-089 	Authorizes cancellation of taxes for property owned by True Vine Church of Jesus located at 416 Whiton Street, on Block 2093, Lot B.1 	06-22-2005 
05-092 	Approves a 30 year tax exemption for Rialto-Capitol Urban Renewal Company, LLC 	08-10-2005 
05-093 	Approving a 30 year tax exemption for the Beacon Commerce Urban Renewal Company L.L.C 	08-10-2005 
05-094 	Approving a 30 year tax exemption for the Beacon Parking Urban Renewal Company, L.L.C 	08-10-2005 
05-095 	Approving a 30 year tax exemption for a low income rental housing project to be constructed by A. Harry Moore Phase I Associates, L.P. 	08-10-2005 
05-096 	Approving a 30 year tax exemption for a low income rental housing project to be constructed by the Forrest Senior Apartments, LP 	Withdrawn 
07-13-2005 
05-097 	Approving a 20 year tax exemption for a market rate residential condominium project to be constructed by Washington Commons Urban Renewal Company, LLC 	Defeated 
10-24-2007 
05-100 	Authorizing a termination of financial agreement between the city and Salem Lafayette Urban Renewal Associates, LP 	08-10-2005 
05-120 	Approving a 20 year tax exemption for a market rate housing project to be constructed by the Longstreet Associates, LLC. 	Defeated 
09-28-2005 
05-121 	Approving a 5 year tax exemption for property designated as block 138, Lot T, on the city's tax map and more commonly known by the street address of 50 Columbus Drive, Jersey City, N.J. 	09-28-2005 
05-122 	Approving a 5 year tax exemption for property designated as Block 138, Lot T, on the city's tax map and more commonly known by the street address of 303 Warren Street, Jersey City, N.J. 	09-28-2005 
05-136 	Authorizing and amendment to and assignment of a tax exemption from Town Cove II Jersey City Urban Renewal, Inc. to Pinnacle Tower Urban Renewal, LLC; an amendment to the tax exemption and conversion of the project from rental to condominium by June 1, 2006 	09-28-2005 
05-146 	Approving a 20 year tax exemption for a market rate residential condominium project to be constructed by 126-142 Morgan Street Urban Renewal LLC. 	10-26-2006 
05-147 	Approving a 5 year tax exemption for property designated as Block 387 Lot 11.A on the city's tax map and more commonly know n by the street address of 338 Third Street 	10-26-2005 
05-168 	Approving a 20 year tax exemption for a market rate residential condominium project to be constructed by 203-207 Van Vorst Street Urban Renewal, LLC. 	12-14-2005 
05-169 	Approving a 5 year tax exemption for property designated as Block 2154, Lots 13B and 18D, on the city's tax map and more commonly known by the street address of 97 Burma Road 	12-14-2005 
05-173 	Five-year exemption for property designated as Block 812, Lot 8 and more commonly known as 505 Central Avenue 	01-11-2006 
06-017 	Twenty-year tax exemption for market rate residential condominium project to be constructed by K. Hovnanian at 77 Hudson Urban Renewal Company, LLC 	03-08-2006 
06-018 	Twenty-year tax exemption for market rate residential rental/commercial project to be constructed by EQR-Urban Renewal 77 Hudson Street, LLC 	03-08-2006 
06-023 	Thirty-five-year tax exemption for low income senior citizen affordable housing project to be rehabilitated by Unico Towers, LLC 	02-22-2006 
06-032 	Thirty-year tax exemption for low income senior citizen housing project to be constructed by Forrest Senior Apartments, LP 	03-22-2006 
06-034 	Transfer of tax exemption and assignment of financial agreement from Jar Holdings Urban Renewal, LLC to Jar Holdings Urban Renewal, LLC 	03-22-2006 
06-048 	Thirty-year tax exemption for Urban Renewal affordable housing project to be constructed by Lafayette Family Phase III Urban Renewal Associates, L.P. 	04-13-2006 
06-049 	Thirty-year tax exemption for low income affordable housing project with market rate retail space to be constructed by Genesis Jersey City Partners, LLC 	04-13-2006 
06-051 	Twenty-year tax exemption for market rate residential condominium project to be constructed by Shore Club North Urban Renewal Company, LLC 	04-26-2006 
06-054 	Thirty-year tax exemption for mixed use condominium project to be constructed by ACC Towers 1A Urban Renewal LLC 	04-26-2006 
06-068 	Approving a 20 year tax exemption for a market rate residential condominium project to be constructed by Brass Works Urban Renewal Co., LLC, an Urban Renewal Entity pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. and Rescinding Ordinance 04-053 approving a tax exemption for Toll Cliffs Urban Renewal Company, LI. 	05-24-2006 
06-088 	Amending and restating Ordinance 05-018, approving a 20 year tax exemption for a market rate residential condominium project to be constructed by Liberty Harbor North Condominium Urban Renewal 4, LLC, an urban renewal entity, pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	07-19-2006 
06-093 	Approving a 30 year tax exemption for a low income rental housing project to be constructed by A. Harry Moore Phase II Associates, LLC, a qualified housing sponsor under the New Jersey Mortgage Housing Finance Agency Law N.J.S.A. 55:14-K-1 et seq. 	08-16-2006 
06-102 	Amends Ord. 06-049, thirty year tax exemption for a low income affordable housing project to be constructed by Genesis Jersey City Partners, LLC 	09-13-2006 
06-112 	Amends Ord. 06-032 to approve a 30 year tax exemption for a low income senior citizen housing project to be constructed by the Forrest Senior Apartments, LP 	12-13-2006 
06-119 	Approving a 25 year tax exemption for a market rate condominium project to be constructed by Block 283 South Urban Renewal, LLC, pursuant to the long term tax exemption law N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	10-11-2006 
06-120 	Approving a 25 year tax exemption for a market rate condominium project to be constructed by Block 284 North Urban Renewal, LLC, pursuant to the long term tax exemption law N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	10-11-2006 
06-121 	Authorizing amended and restated financial agreement and approving thirty (30) year tax exemption for a mixed use condominium project Approving a 25 year tax exemption for a market rate condominium project to be constructed by ACC Towers 1A Urban Renewal, LLC, pursuant to the long term tax exemption law N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	10-11-2006 
06-123 	Approving a five (5) year tax exemption pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq., and Section 304-9 of the Municipal Code for property designated as Block 596, Lot 51, on the city's tax map and more commonly known by the street address of 826 Newark Avenue 	10-11-2006 
06-130 	Authorizing the refund of taxes without interest pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:4-3.6c for property owned by BADR Center, Inc and located at 543, 537 Bergen Avenue, 146 and 150 Harrison Avenue, on Block 1810, Lots A, B, C, and D1 	11-08-2006 
06-139 	Approving a 20 year tax exemption for a market rate residential condominium project to be constructed by Second Street Waterfront Urban Renewal, LLC, pursuant to the long term tax exemption law N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	11-21-2006 
06-140 	Approving a 20 year tax exemption for a market rate residential condominium project to be constructed by 100 Water Street Urban Renewal, LLC, pursuant to the long term tax exemption law N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	11-21-2006 
06-141 	Approving a 20 year tax exemption for a market rate residential rental project to be constructed Monaco North Urban Renewal, LLC, pursuant to the long term tax exemption law N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	11-21-2006 
06-142 	Approving a 20 year tax exemption for a market rate residential rental project to be constructed Monaco South Urban Renewal, LLC, pursuant to the long term tax exemption law N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	11-21-2006 
06-143 	Amendment to the Hudson Hospitality Services Urban Renewal Associates, LLC, tax abatement for approval to 1) convert the property into four (4) condominium units and 2) convey three (3) of the units and 3) terminate the tax abatement for the three conveyed units, all pursuant to the long term tax exemption law N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	11-21-2006 
06-156 	Approving a 30 year tax exemption for a market rate residential condominium project to be constructed by the Criterion Urban Renewal Company, L.L.C., pursuant to the long term tax exemption law N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	12-13-2006 
06-157 	Approving a 30 year tax exemption for a market rate residential condominium project to be constructed the Hague Urban Renewal Company, L.L.C., pursuant to the long term tax exemption law N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	12-13-2006 
06-158 	Approving a 30 year tax exemption for a market rate residential condominium project to be constructed by the Mercury Urban Renewal Company, L.L.C., pursuant to the long term tax exemption law N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	12-13-2006 
06-159 	Approving a 30 year tax exemption for a market rate residential condominium project to be constructed by the Orpheum Urban Renewal Company, L.L.C., pursuant to the long term tax exemption law N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	12-13-2006 
06-160 	Approving a 30 year tax exemption for a market rate residential condominium project to be constructed by the Paramount Urban Renewal Company, L.L.C., pursuant to the long term tax exemption law N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	12-13-2006 
06-161 	Approving a 30 year tax exemption for a market rate residential condominium project to be constructed by the Tower Urban Renewal Company, L.L.C., pursuant to the long term tax exemption law N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	12-13-2006 
07-004 	Approving a five (5) year tax exemption pursuant to the Ord. 07-004 provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1, et seq., and Section 304-12 of the Municipal Code for new construction of a commercial structure on property designated as Block 596, Lot 51, on the city's tax map and more commonly known by the street address of 355 West Side Avenue 	01-24-2007 
07-008 	Ordinance approving a 20 year tax exemption for a market rate Ord. 07-008 residential condominium project to be constructed by OTWI-Benson Urban Renewal, LLC, an urban renewal entity, pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	01-24-2007 
07-049 	Approving an amendment to Ordinance 06-093 that approved a 30 year tax exemption for a low income rental housing project to be constructed by A. Harry Moore Phase II Associates, L.L.C., a qualified housing sponsor under the New Jersey Housing Mortgage Finance Agency Law N.J.S.A. 55:14K-1 et seq. 	03-28-2007 
07-052 	Approving a 20 year tax exemption for a market rate residential condominium project to be constructed by 272 Grove Street Urban Renewal, LLC., an urban renewal entity, pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law N.J.S.A. 40A:20-l et seq. 	03-28-2007 
07-058 	(1) Approving a 40 year long term tax exemption for low income senior citizen affordable housing project to be renovated by the Storms Avenue Elderly Apartments, L.P., a qualified housing sponsor under the New Jersey Mortgage Housing Finance Agency Law N.J.S.A. 55:14K-1 et seq., for 111 Storms Avenue; and (2) Terminating the existing tax exemption for the Imperative Housing Partnership 	04-11-2007 
07-059 	Approving a five (5) year tax exemption pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1 et seq. and Section 304-9 of the Municipal Code for property designated as Block 589, Lot 26.C on the city's tax map and more commonly known by the Street Address of 825 Newark Avenue 	04-11-2007 
07-060 	Approving a 25 year tax exemption for a market rate residential condominium project to be constructed by 769 Montgomery Street Urban Renewal, LLC, an urban renewal entity, pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	Withdrawn 
03-28-2007 
07-074 	Approving a 20 year tax exemption for a market rate residential condominium project to be constructed by 769 Montgomery Street Urban Renewal, LLC., an Urban Renewal Entity, pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law N.J.S.A. 40a:20-l et seq. 	04-25-2007 
07-090 	Approving a five (5) year tax exemption for a mixed use rental redevelopment project constructed by Grove Pointe Urban Renewal, LLC., pursuant to the provisions of the Five (5) Year Exemption and Abatement Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:2l-l et seq. and Section 304-12 of the Municipal Code 	05-09-2007 
07-097 	Approving a five (5) year tax exemption pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:2l-1 et seq. and section 304-9 of the Municipal Code for property designated as Block 1978, Lot 60 on the city's tax map and more commonly known by the street address of 427-429 Martin Luther King Drive 	06-13-2007 
07-126 	Approving a Five (5) year tax exemption pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1 et seq., and Section 304-9 of the Municipal Code for property designated as Block 20, Lot 3.15 on the City's Tax Map and more commonly known by the street address of 110 River Drive 	Withdrawn 
06-27-2007 
07-127 	1) Approving a 20 year tax exemption for a market rate commercial project to be constructed by GSJC 50 Hudson Urban Renewal, LLC., an urban renewal entity, pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq., and 2) Rescinding Ordinance 00-043 and termination of the June 21, 2000 Financial Agreement with GSJC 50 Hudson Urban Renewal, LLC 	07-18-2007 
07-137 	Approving a 30 year tax exemption for a low income affordable housing project to be constructed by Fred W Martin Apartments Urban Renewal, LP., an urban renewal entity, pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	08-08-2007 
07-139 	Approving a 10 year tax exemption for a market rate mixed use rental project to be constructed by Aqua Urban Renewal Company, LLC, an urban renewal entity, pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	09-11-2007 
07-147 	Approving a 10 year tax exemption for a market rate mixed use rental project to be constructed by Grand LHN II Urban Renewal, LLC, an urban renewal entity, pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law N.J.S.A. 40A:20-l et seq. (Grand Street & Mann Boulevard) 	08-22-2007 
07-148 	Approving a 10 year tax exemption for a market rate mixed use rental project to be constructed by Grand LHN I Urban Renewal, LLC, an urban renewal entity, pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law N.J.S.A. 40A:20-l et seq. (Morris Boulevard) 	08-22-2007 
07-149 	Approving a 20 year tax exemption for a market rate residential condominium project to be constructed by 106 York Street Urban Renewal Company, LLC, an urban renewal entity, pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	08-22-2007 
07-189 	Approving an amendment to ordinance 07-049 that approved a 30 year tax exemption for a low income rental housing project to be constructed by A. Harry Moore Phase II Associates, LLC., a qualified housing sponsor under the New Jersey Housing Mortgage Finance Agency Law N.J.S.A. 55:14K-1 et seq. 	01-09-2008 
07-190 	Amending long term tax abatement and financial agreement for Liberty Harbor North Brownstone Condominium Urban Renewal, LLC, to add units by reconfiguring the project 	01-09-2008 
08-009 	Amending long term tax abatement and financial agreement for Monaco North Urban Renewal, LLC, to 1) Reconfigure the building to decrease the number of residential units and increase the commercial space; 2) To decrease the percentage of the service charge to 12%; and 3) To reduce the term by 5 years 	Defeated 
01-23-2008 
08-010 	Amending long term tax abatement and financial agreement for Monaco South Urban Renewal, LLC, to 1) Reconfigure the building to increase the number of residential units; 2) To decrease the percentage of the service charge to 12%; and 3) To reduce the term by 5 years. 	Defeated 
01-23-2008 
08-011 	Approving a 20 Year tax exemption for a market rate residential condominium Project to be constructed by the Warren @ York Urban Renewal, LLC 	02-13-2008 
08-014 	Authorizing the cancellation of taxes pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:4-3.6c for property owned by Quan Am Buddhist Temple and located at 85.5 Jordan Avenue, on Block 1894, Lot N 	02-27-2008 
08-027 	Approving a Five (5) year tax exemption pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1 et seq., and section 304-9 of the Municipal Code for property designated as Block 751, Lot G on the City's tax map and more commonly known by the street address of 100 Paterson Plank Road and to be known as Brass Works Urban Renewal Company, LLC 	Withdrawn 
02-27-2008 
08-032 	Amending Ordinance 94-109 to consent to the assignment of the 30 year tax exemption for an affordable housing project from Greenville Steering Committee Non-Profit Urban Renewal Housing Corporation to 45-51 Martin Luther King Urban Renewal Corp. 	03-26-2008 
08-057 	Amending long term tax abatement and financial agreement for Monaco North Urban Renewal, LLC, to 1) Reconfigure the building to decrease the number of residential units and increase the commercial space; 2) Decrease the percentage of the service charge from 14% to 10%; and 3) Reduce the term from 20 years to 10 years 	05-14-2008 
08-058 	Amending long term tax abatement and financial agreement for Monaco South Urban Renewal, LLC, to 1) Reconfigure the building to decrease the number of residential units and parking spaces; 2) Decrease the percentage of the service charge from 14% to 10%; and 3) Reduce the term from 20 years to 10 years 	05-14-2008 
08-062 	Approving a five (5) year tax exemption pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1, et seq., and Section 304-9 of the Municipal Code for property designated as Block 751, Lot G, on the city's tax map and more commonly known by the street address of 100 Paterson Plank Road and to be known as Brass Works Urban Renewal Company, LLC 	05-28-2008 
08-063 	Terminating the financial agreement and prepayment agreement between the City of Jersey City and Brass Works Urban Renewal Company, LLC 	05-28-2008 
08-074 	Approving a 10 year tax exemption for a market rate residential rental project to be constructed by Athena BLDG 110 Urban Renewal, LLC, an urban renewal entity, pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	05-28-2008 
08-089 	Authorizing an amendment to a financial agreement for Aqua Urban Renewal Company, LLC, to 1) Approve the reconfiguration of the units; 2) Revise the affordable housing payment schedule to allow the first and second affordable housing contribution payments to be made upon the signing of the financial agreement; and 3) Increase the affordable housing contribution by $23,415 	06-25-2008 
08-090 	Amending a 30 year long term tax abatement, financial agreement and project employment agreement for ACC Towers 1A Urban Renewal, LLC, to decrease the percentage of the service charge as follows: from 16% to 10% for the first 10 years; from 16% to 12% for the second 10 years; and, from 16% to 14% for the last 10 years 	06-25-2008 
08-095 	Authorizing the cancellation of taxes pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:4-3.6c for property owned by Monte Carmelo Pentecostal Church and located at 14 Graham Street, on Block 812, Lot 14.99 	07-16-2008 
08-106 	Approving a thirty (30) year tax exemption for an urban renewable housing project to be constructed by Lafayette Family Phase IV Urban Renewal Associates, L.P., an urban renewal entity, pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	08-06-2008 
08-118 	Terminating the financial agreement and prepayment agreement between the City of Jersey City and Riverview I Associates Urban Renewal Company, LLC 	08-20-2008 
08-119 	Approving a 30 year tax exemption for an urban renewal affordable housing residential/commercial project to be constructed by Bay Senior Housing Urban Renewal, LP, an urban renewal entity, pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	08-20-2008 
08-133 	Amending Ordinance 08-062 approving a five (5) year tax exemption for property designated as Block 751, Lot G, on the city's tax map and more commonly known by the street address of 100 Paterson Plank Road and to be known as Brass Works Urban Renewal Company, LLC 	09-24-2008 
08-134 	Authorizing an amended financial agreement for the Criterion Urban Renewal Company, LLC, which was approved by Ordinance 06-156, for conversion from a condominium project to a market rate rental project 	Defeated 
09-24-2008 
08-135 	Authorizing an amended and restated financial agreement for the Hague Urban Renewal Company, LLC, which was approved by Ordinance 06-157, for conversion from a condominium project to a market rate residential rental project 	Defeated 
09-24-2008 
08-136 	Authorizing an amended and restated financial agreement for the Tower Urban Renewal Company, LLC, which was approved by Ordinance 06-161, for conversion from a condominium project to a market rate residential rental project 	Defeated 
09-24-2008 
08-137 	Authorizing an amended and restated financial agreement for the Mercury Urban Renewal Company, LLC, which was approved by Ordinance 06-158, for conversion from a condominium project to a market rate residential rental project 	Defeated 
09-24-2008 
08-138 	Authorizing an amended and restated financial agreement for the Orpheum Urban Renewal Company, LLC, which was approved by Ordinance 06-159, for conversion from a condominium project to a market rate residential rental project 	Defeated 
09-24-2008 
08-139 	Authorizing an amended and restated financial agreement for the Paramount Urban Renewal Company, LLC, which was approved by Ordinance 06-160, for conversion from a condominium project to a market rate residential rental project 	Defeated 
09-24-2008 
08-164 	Approving a 30 year tax exemption for a market rate commercial (retail/parking garage) use rental project to be constructed by MEPT Journal Square Urban Renewal, LLC, an urban renewal entity, pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. (Unit 1 or the Commercial Unit) 	11-25-2008 
08-165 	Approving a 30 year tax exemption for a market rate residential use rental project to be constructed by MEPT Journal Square Tower North Urban Renewal, LLC, an urban renewal entity, pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. (Unit 2 or Tower North) 	11-25-2008 
08-166 	Approving a 30 year tax exemption for a market rate residential use rental project to be constructed by MEPT Journal Square Tower South Urban Renewal, LLC, an urban renewal entity, pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. (Unit 3 or Tower South) 	11-25-2008 
09-005 	Ordinance terminating the financial agreement and prepayment agreement between the City of Jersey City and Laidlaw Properties Urban Renewal, LLC, for failure to pay prepayment or satisfy the conditions of Ordinance 05-012 	01-28-2009 
09-018 	Ordinance approving a 30 year tax exemption for a moderate income and market rate housing project to be constructed by the Whiton Street Associates, LLC, a qualified housing sponsor under the New Jersey Mortgage Housing Finance Agency Law N.J.S.A. 55:14K-1 et seq. 	02-25-2009 
09-019 	Ordinance approving a 30 year tax exemption for a commercial project to be constructed by Whiton Street Associates Urban Renewal, LLC, an urban renewal entity, pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	02-25-2009 
09-034 	Ordinance approving a 30 year tax exemption for a mixed affordable and market rate rental housing project to be constructed by AHM Associates, LLC, a qualified housing sponsor under the New Jersey Mortgage Housing Finance Agency Law N.J.S.A. 55:14K-1 et seq. 	04-08-2009 
09-074 	Ordinance approving a 20 year tax exemption for a market rate residential rental project to be constructed by Hudson Palisades Urban Renewal, LLC, an urban renewal entity, pursuant to the long term tax exemption law N.J.S.A. 40a:20-1 et seq. 	06-17-2009 
09-075 	Ordinance amending the long term tax exemption authorized by Ordinance 02-123 of WA Residential Urban Renewal Company, LLC, to terminate the tax abatement as it relates to Block 1497, Portions of Lot 33 and Lot 35, formerly known as portions of Lots 3.M1 and 3.M2, and to be known as Lot 36.1 	06-17-2009 
09-076 	An ordinance approving a five (5) year tax exemption pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40a:21-1, et seq., and Section 304-9 of the Municipal Code for property designated as Block 1497, portions of Lot 33 and Lot 35, formerly known as a portion of Lots 3.M1 and 3.M2, and to be known as Lot 36.1, Unit 1, on the City's tax map and more commonly known by the street address of 100 Caven Point Road (to be known as 1 Liberty Drive) 	06-17-2009 
09-078 	Ordinance approving an amendment to a long term tax exemption for a market rate mixed use condominium project to be constructed by Second Street Waterfront Urban Renewal, LLC, an urban renewal entity, pursuant to the long term tax exemption law N.J.S.A. 40a:20-1 et seq. 	06-17-2009 
09-097 	Bond ordinance providing for the acquisition of PJP/SIEGEL Property located in and by the City of Jersey City, in the County of Hudson, New Jersey, appropriating $8,700,000 therefor and authorizing the issuance of $8,700,000 bonds or notes of the city to finance part of the cost thereof 	10-14-2009 
09-102 	Ordinance approving a thirty-year tax exemption for a very low and low income affordable housing project with three (3) commercial units to be constructed by the RAV Group, LLC, a qualified housing sponsor under the New Jersey Mortgage Housing Finance Agency Law N.J.S.A. 55:14k-1 et seq. 	09-23-2009 
10-020 	Approving a 30-year tax exemption for a mixed affordable and market rate rental housing project to be constructed by AHM Housing Associates IV, LLC 	03-10-2010 
10-021 	Approving a five-year tax exemption for property designated as Block 60.12, Lot 5 on the City's tax map 	03-10-2010 
10-022 	Approving a loan to the City to be guaranteed by the US Department of Housing and Urban Development and reloaning the proceeds to Statue of Liberty Harbor North Redevelopment Urban Renewal, LLC 	04-28-2010 
10-023 	Approving a 30-year tax exemption for a low income affordable and market rate housing project to be constructed by the Summit Avenue Center for Opportunity, LLC 	03-10-2010 
10-065 	Authorizing a 45-year lease of certain property to Liberty Humane Society, Inc. 	05-12-2010 
10-073 	Approving an amendment to a long-term tax exemption with Jones Hall Associates to extend the term for up to 20 years and increase the annual service charge 	06-09-2010 
10-109 	Amending a 30-year tax exemption with Fred W. Martin Apartments Urban Renewal, L.P. to correct property description to specifically limit the tax exemption to the residential unit only and terminate the tax exemption as to the remaining units 	08-25-2010 
10-158 	Consenting to the sale and assignment of tax exemption and financial agreement from Essex Waterfront Urban Renewal Entity, LLC, to Liberty Towers Urban Renewal LLC, pursuant to section 9.1 of the financial agreement and the Long Term Tax Exemption Law N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	12-08-2010 
11-044 	Approving a five-year tax exemption pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1 et seq., and section 304-9 of the Municipal Code 	04-27-2011 
11-048 	Approving a 30-year tax exemption for a low and moderate income affordable housing project to be constructed by Pacific Landing Urban Renewal Co., LLC, a non-profit urban renewal entity, pursuant to the long term tax exemption law N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	05-11-2011 
11-081 	Approving a five-year tax exemption pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1, et seq. and Section 304-9 of the Municipal Code for property designated as Block 1297.5, Lots 66, 67, 68 and 69.A (to be changed and designated as Lot 75), on the city's tax map and more commonly known by the street address of 319 Grant Avenue 	08-10-2011 
11-082 	Rescinding Ordinance 05-002, which approved a long term tax exemption for Jersey Avenue 833 Urban Renewal Company, LLC, and approving a five-year tax exemption pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:2-1, et seq. and section 304-9 of the Municipal Code for property designated as Block 330, Lot 10, on the city's tax map and more commonly known by the street address of 837 Jersey Avenue 	08-10-2011 
11-083 	Approving a 30-year tax exemption for an affordable housing project to be constructed by Glennview Townhouses II Urban Renewal Associates, L.P., an urban renewal entity, pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	08-10-2011 
11-084 	Approving a 30-year tax exemption for an urban renewal senior low and moderate income affordable housing project to be constructed by Montgomery Senior Living Center Urban Renewal Associates, L.P., an urban renewal entity, pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	08-10-2011 
11-086 	Approving a 30-year tax exemption for a senior citizen affordable housing project to be constructed by St. Bridget's Senior Residence Urban Renewal, LLC, an urban renewal entity, pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	08-10-2011 
11-087 	Authorizing the rescission of ordinances 08-011 and 07-149; authorizing the termination of the financial and prepayment agreements between the city and the Warren @ York Urban Renewal, LLC, and 106 York Street Urban Renewal Company, LLC; and approving a five-year tax exemption with the Warren @ York Urban Renewal, LLC, for both properties 	08-10-2011 
11-101 	Approving a 30-year tax exemption for an Urban Renewal Affordable Housing Project to be constructed by Genesis Ocean Associates Urban Renewal Co., LLC, an urban renewal entity, pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	08-31-2011 
11-102 	Approving a 30-year tax exemption for a low income senior citizen and special needs affordable housing project to be constructed by the Ocean Green Senior Apartments, L.P., a qualified housing sponsor under the New Jersey Mortgage Housing Finance Agency Law N.J.S.A. 55:14K-1 et seq. 	08-31-2011 
11-109 	Approving a 30-year tax exemption for a market rate residential condominium project to be constructed by Community Asset Preservation Alliance of Jersey City #2 Urban Renewal, LLC, an urban renewal entity, pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	09-14-2011 
11-110 	Rescinding Ordinance 06-023; and consenting to the sale and assignment the tax exemption financial agreement, as amended, from UNICO-Jersey City Housing, Inc., to 500 Manila Ave., LLC, pursuant to the New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency Law N.J.S.A. 55:14K-1 	09-14-2011 
11-111 	Approving a five-year tax exemption pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1, et seq., and Section 304-9 of the Municipal Code for property designated as Block 2050, Lot 29, on the city's tax map and more commonly known by the street address of 302-306 Communipaw Avenue and 5 Monitor Street 	09-14-2011 
11-128 	Approving a 30-year tax exemption for a low and moderate income housing project to be constructed by Bergen Court, Inc., a qualified housing sponsor under the New Jersey Mortgage Housing Finance Agency Law N.J.S.A. 55:14K-1 et seq. 	11-09-2011 
11-129 	Approving a 20 year tax exemption for a market rate industrial project to be constructed by Goya 75th Urban Renewal Co., LLC, an urban renewal entity, pursuant to the long term tax exemption law N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	11-09-2011 
11-130 	Approving a five (5) year tax exemption pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1, et seq., and Section 304-9 of the Municipal Code for property designated as Block 2101, Lot 18, on the city's tax map and more commonly known by the street address of 61-69 Amity Street, Jersey City 	11-09-2011 
11-131 	Approving a five (5) year tax exemption pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1, et seq. and section 304-9 of the Municipal Code for property designated as Block 2058, Lots 18 & S, on the city's tax map and more commonly known by the street address of 631-645A Grand Street 	11-09-2011 
12-020 	Approving an amendment to the twenty-year tax abatement of Hudson Palisades Urban Renewal, LLC, to 1) convert the project from residential rental units to residential condominium, and 2) reduce the service charge to 10% of the annual gross revenue for the full term, pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	02-22-2012 
12-021 	Consenting to the refinance and approval of an amendment to the affordable housing 40 year tax exemption agreement with Montgomery Gateway Associates, pursuant to the Limited Dividend Non-profit Housing Corporation Law, N.J.S.A. 55:16-1 to 1) increase the annual service charge from 6.28% to 8%; and 2) to establish a 2% administrative fee 	02-22-2012 
12-036 	1) Terminating the financial agreement and project employment agreement authorized by Ordinance 05-008 between the city and 150 Essex Street Urban Renewal, LLC, and 2) authorizing the assignment and clarification of the prepayment agreement from 150 Essex Street Urban Renewal, LLC, to 198 Van Vorst Street, LLC 	03-28-2012 
12-068 
Authorizing the cancellation of taxes pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:4-3.6c for property owned by Continuous Flow Christian Center and located at 168-170 Monticello Avenue, on Block 16803, Lots 74 and 75 (formerly known as Block 1919, Lots E and F) 	05-23-2012 
12-071 
Amending a 10 year tax exemption approved by Ordinance 07-148 for a market rate mixed used rental project to be constructed by Grand LHN I Urban Renewal LLC, an urban renewal entity, pursuant to the long term tax exemption law N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	05-23-2012 
12-091 
Approving amendments to: 1) the settlement consent order among the city, New Gold Equities Corp and BLDG Management Co, Inc and 2) the 10 year tax exemption for market rate residential rental housing with 110 First Street Urban Renewal Associates, LLC, an urban renewal entity, pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	08-01-2012 
12-102 
Approving a five (5) year tax exemption with Nams Developers, Inc., pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1, et seq. and Section 304-9 of the Municipal Code for property designated as Block 17905, Lot 1, on the city's tax map and more commonly known by the street address of 650 Communipaw Avenue 	08-01-2012 
12-103 
Approving a five (5) year tax exemption with Chosen Estates, LLC, pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1, et seq., and Section 304-9 of the Municipal Code for property designated as Block 10601, Lot 10, on the city's tax map and more commonly known by the street address of 300 Magnolia Avenue 	08-01-2012 
12-104 
Approving a five (5) year tax exemption with Saint Paul's, LLC, pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1, et seq. and section 304-9 of the Municipal Code for property designated as Block 6801, Lot 21, on the city's tax map and more commonly known by the street address of 68-76 St. Paul's Av and 70-74 Oakland Av 	08-01-2012 
12-144 
Approving a 10 year tax exemption for a market rate mixed use rental project to be constructed by 148 First Street Urban Renewal, LLC, an urban renewal entity, pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	11-28-2012 
12-145 
Authorizing the assignment nunc pro tunc of the financial agreement from the Criterion Urban Renewal Company, LLC, to BR Criterion Urban Renewal Company, LLC 	11-28-2012 
12-146 
Authorizing the assignment nunc pro tunc of the financial agreement from the Hague Urban Renewal Company, LLC, to BR Hague Urban Renewal Company, LLC 	11-28-2012 
12-149 
Approving a 15 year tax exemption for BR Mercury Urban Renewal Company, LLC, for a market rate residential rental project; and repealing Ordinance 06-158 	11-28-2012 
12-150 
Approving a 15 year tax exemption for BR Orpheum Urban Renewal Company, LLC, for a market rate residential rental project; and repealing Ordinance 06-159 	11-28-2012 
12-151 
Approving a 15 year tax exemption for BR Paramount Urban Renewal Company, LLC, for a market rate residential rental project; and repealing Ordinance 06-160 	11-28-2012 
12-152 
Approving a 15 year tax exemption for BR Tower Urban Renewal Company, LLC, for a market rate residential rental project; and repealing Ordinance 06-161 	11-28-2012 
12-164 
Consenting to the sale and assignment of the tax exemption and financial agreement from Chowanec Urban Renewal, LLC, to 179 Warren Street Urban Renewal Co., LLC, pursuant to section 9.1 of the financial agreement and N.J.S.A. 40A:20-22 of the Long Term Tax Exemption Law 	01-09-2013 
13-002 
Approving a five (5) year tax exemption with Pointe Developers Retail, LLC, pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1, et seq., and Section 304-9 of the Municipal Code for property designated as Block 14301, Lot 8, Unit C000R, on the city's tax map and more commonly known by the street address of 253 Washington Street 	01-23-2013 
13-011 
Approving a five (5) year tax exemption with 109 Christopher Columbus, LLC, pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1, et seq., and Section 304-12 of the Municipal Code for property designated as Block 12901, Lot 6, on the city's tax map and more commonly known by the street address of 109 Christopher Columbus Drive 	02-13-2013 
13-015 
Approving a 10 year tax exemption for a market rate mixed use rental project to be constructed by 70 Columbus Urban Renewal, LLC, an urban renewal entity, pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	02-27-2013 
13-016 
Approving a 10 year tax exemption for a market rate mixed use rental project to be constructed by Marbella Tower Urban Renewal Associates South, LLC, an urban renewal entity, pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	02-27-2013 
13-017 
Amending a 15 year long term tax exemption financial agreement with Marbella Tower Urban Renewal Associates, LLC, to amend its ground lease and financial agreement to reduce land area of the project; reduce the number of parking spaces from 423 to 260 parking spaces; and assign a portion of the project containing 163 parking spaces to Marbella Tower Urban Renewal Associates South, LLC 	02-27-2013 
13-032 
Approving a 12 year tax exemption for a market rate residential rental project to be constructed by Kennedy Lofts Urban Renewal, LLC, an urban renewal entity, pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	03-28-2013 
13-033 
Approving a 10 year tax exemption for a market rate mixed use rental project to be constructed by Harborside Unit A Urban Renewal, LLC, AN urban renewal entity, pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law N.J.S.A. 40A:20-l et seq. 	03-28-2013 
13-034 
Approving a 10 year tax exemption for a market rate mixed use rental project to be constructed by Provost Square I Urban Renewal, LLC, an urban renewal entity, pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	03-28-2013 
13-057 
Approving a 12-year tax exemption for a market rate mixed use rental project to be constructed by Chosen Condominiums Urban Renewal, LLC, and urban renewal entity, pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemtpion Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	05-08-2013 
13-058 
Approving a 12-year tax exemption for a market rate residential rental project to be constructed by Laidlaw Properties Urban Renewal, LLC, and urban renewal entity, pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	05-08-2013 
13-059 
Extending the sunset provisions of Ordinance 11-084 that approved a 30-year tax exemption for a low and moderate income senior citizens affordable housing project to be constructed by the Montogomery Senior Living Center Urban Renewal Associates, L.P.; and amending the financial agreement to increase the percentage of the annual service charge 	05-08-2013 
13-060 
Extending the sunset provisions of Ordinance 11-083 that approved a 30-year tax exemption for a low and moderate income affordable housing project to be constructed by the Glennview Townhouses II Urban Renewal Associates, L.P.; and amending the financial agreement to amend the percentage of the annual service charge 	05-08-2013 
13-061 
Extending the sunset provisions of Ordinance 11-102 that approved a thirty-year tax exemption for a low income senior citizen and special needs affordable housing project to be constructed by the Ocean Green Senior Apartments, L.P., a qualified housing sponsor under the New Jersey Mortgage Housing Finance Agency Law N.J.S.A. 55:14K-1 et seq.; and amending the percentage of the service charge. See Ord. 13-082. 
05-08-2013 
13-065 
Approving a 30-year tax exemption for an urban renewal mixed-income, mixed-use housing project to be constructed by AHM Housing Associates IV, LLC, an urban renewal entity, pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	05-29-2013 
13-082 
Amending Ordinance 13-061 that approved a 30-year tax exemption for a low income senior citizen and special needs affordable housing project for Ocean Green Senior Apartments, L.P., pursuant to the New Jersey Mortgage Housing Finance Agency Law N.J.S.A. 55:14K-1 et seq. to increase the number of "special needs" units from 5 to 11 	08-28-2013 
13-098 
Approving a thirty-year tax exemption for a low income affordable housing project including retail space, to be constructed by Genesis Ocean Urban Renewal Co., LLC, a qualified housing sponsor under the New Jersey Mortgage Housing Finance Agency Law N.J.S.A. 55:14K-1 et seq. See Ord. No. 14-012 . 
09-25-2013 
13-111 
Approving 1) the sale of the project from Salem-Lafayette Community Development Corporation to Salem Lafayette Urban Renewal, L.P.; and 2) a 30-year tax exemption for new improvements to be constructed by Salem Lafayette Urban Renewal, L.P., an urban renewal entity, pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. and 3) rescinding the tax exemption approval by resolution adopted on October 5, 1976 	10-09-2013 
13-112 
Consenting to the sale and assignment of Master Condominium 1 and the assignment in part of a tax exemption and financial agreement from ACC Towers 1A Urban Renewal, LLC to Mana Contemporary Tribeca West Urban Renewal, LCL pursuant to Section 9.1 of the financial agreement and the Long Term Tax Exemption Law N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	10-09-2013 
13-143 
Authorizing 1) approval of a tax exemption for a residential/commercial rental project owned by 272 Grove Street Urban Renewal, LLC and 2) recission of Ordinance 07-052 and termination of the prior financial agreement 	01-15-2014 
14-002 
Approving a five-year tax exemption pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1, et seq. and Section 304-9 of the Municipal Code for property designated as Block 9902, Lot 25.01, on the City's tax map and more commonly known by the street address of 334-336 and 340 Third Street and 292-294 Newark Avenue 	02-11-2014 
14-003 
Approving a five-year tax exemption pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1, et seq. and Section 304-9 of the Municipal Code for property designated as Block 22203, Lot 5, on the City's tax map and more commonly known by the street address of 366 West Side Avenue 	02-11-2014 
14-012 
Amending Ordinance 13-098 to reflect a change in the entity's certificate of formation resulting in a change of the entity's name from Genesis Ocean Urban Renewal Co., LLC to Genesis Ocean Associates, LLC, a qualified housing sponsor under the New Jersey Mortgage Housing Finance Agency Law N.J.S.A. 55:14K-1 et seq. 	02-11-2014 
14-015 
Authorizing the cancellation of taxes pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:4-3.6c for property owned by Saint John's School and located at 3026 Kennedy Blvd, on Block 6501, Lot 1, Qualifier X 	02-26-2014 
14-019 
Approving a five-year tax exemption pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1, et seq. and Section 304-6 of the Municipal Code for property designated as Block 17501, Lot 4, on the City's tax map and more commonly known by the street address of 445 Whiton St 	02-26-2014 
14-020 
Approving a twenty-year tax exemption for a market rate mixed use rental project to be constructed by 360 Ninth Street Urban Renewal, LLC, an urban renewal entity, pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	03-26-2014 
14-033 
Approving a twenty-year tax exemption for a market rate mixed use rental project to be constructed by Senate Place Urban Renewal, LLC, an urban renewal entity, pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	04-09-2014 
14-036 
Approving a five-year tax exemption pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1, et seq. and Section 304-9 of the Municipal Code for property designated as Block 11608, Lot 1, Qualifier C000E, on the City's tax map and more commonly known by the street address of 65 Bay St 	04-09-2014 
14-037 
Approving a five-year tax exemption pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1, et seq. and Section 304-12 of the Municipal Code for property designated as Block 13502, Lot 24, on the City's tax map and more commonly known by the street address of 646 Montgomery Street 	04-09-2014 
14-049 
Approving a twenty-year tax exemption for a market rate residential condominium project to be constructed by 160 First Street Urban Renewal, LLC, an urban renewal entity, pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	05-14-2014 
14-067 
Consenting to 1) the sale of the membership interests of NOC V Urban Renewal Company, LLC to JP Morgan Chase Bank, National Association and 2) the modification of the tax exemption financial agreement with NOC V Urban Renewal Company, LLC, to conform the financial agreement to the 2003 amendments to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	06-25-2014 
14-069 
Approving a twenty-year tax exemption for a commercial hotel project to be constructed by One Exchange JC Urban Renewal, LLC, pursuant to the provisions of the Long Term Tax Exemption Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq., for the property designated as Block 14502, Lot 1 on the City's tax map and more commonly known by the street address as 1 Exchange Place 	06-25-2014 
14-073 
Approving a five-year tax exemption pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1, et seq., and Section 304-12 of the Municipal Code for property designated as Block 11201, Lot 29, on the City's tax map and more commonly known by the street address of 298 Sixth Street 	06-25-2014 
14-074 
Approving a five-year tax exemption pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1, et seq., and Section 304-12 of the Municipal Code for property designated as Block 11402, Lot 23, on the City's tax map and more commonly known by the street address of 222 First Street 	06-25-2014 
14-079 
Approving a five-year tax exemption pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A;21-1, et seq., and Section 304-12 of the Municipal Code for property designated as Block 13605, Lot 11, on the City's tax map and more commonly known by the street address of 550 Grand Street 	07-16-2014 
14-087 
Terminating the financial agreement between the City of Jersey City and Department Store 3 Urban Renewal Corp. 	08-20-2014 
14-088 
Approving a ten-year tax exemption for a market rate residential condominium project to be constructed by Cheesecake Lofts Urban Renewal, LLC, an urban renewal entity, pursuant to the long term tax exemption law, N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	08-20-2014 
14-101 
Approving a ten-year tax exemption for a mixed use market rate residential rental project to be constructed by LHN Owner Urban Renewal, LLC, an urban renewal entity, pursuant to the long term tax exemption law, N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	09-10-2014 
14-102 
Approving a ten-year tax exemption for a Market Rate Residential Condominium Project to be constructed by 68 Erie Street Urban Renewal Co., LLC, an urban renewal entity, pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	09-10-2014 
14-111 
Approving a twenty-year tax exemption for an emerging market residential condominium project to be constructed by Community Asset Preservation Alliance of Jersey City #4 Urban Renewal, LLC, an urban renewal entity, pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	09-23-2014 
14-112 
Approving a five-year tax exemption pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1, et seq., and Section 304-12 of the Municipal Code for property designated as Block 12704, Lot 28.01, on the City's tax map and more commonly known by the street address of 532 Jersey Avenue 	10-08-2014 
14-130 
Approving a twenty-year tax exemption for a commercial hotel project to be constructed by Columbus Hotel Urban Renewal, LLC, pursuant to the provisions of the Long Term Tax Exemption Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. for the property designated as Block 13003, Lot 1, C3.80 on the City's tax map and more commonly known by the street address as 80 Columbus Drive 	10-22-2014 
14-150 
Approving a thirty-year tax exemption for a low income affordable housing project including retail space, to be constructed by Lexington Manor Owner, LP, a qualified housing sponsor under the New Jersey Mortgage Housing Finance Agency Law, N.J.S.A. 55:14K-1 et seq. 	11-25-2014 
14-151 
Approving a five-year tax exemption pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40a:21-1, et seq., and Section 304-12 of the Municipal Code for property designated as Block 11009, Lot 10, on the City's tax map and more commonly known by the street address of 129 Brunswick Street 	11-25-2014 
14-152 
Approving a five-year tax exemption pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1, et seq. and Section 304-12 of the Municipal Code for property designated as Block 16603, Lot 25, on the City's tax map and more commonly known by the street address of 148 Belmont Avenue 	11-25-2014 
14-153 
An ordinance approving a five-year tax exemption pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1, et seq., and Section 304-12 of the Municipal Code for property designated as Block 6901, Lot 3, on the City's tax map and more commonly known by the street address of 78 Palisade Avenue 	11-25-2014 
14-154 
Approving a thirty-year tax exemption for a market rate mixed use rental project to be constructed by 3 Journal Square Urban Renewal, LLC, an urban renewal entity, pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	11-25-2014 
14-161 
Rescinding Ord. No. 14-112 and terminating the five-year tax agreement between the City of Jersey City and Jersey Avenue MM, LLC, at the request of the owner 	12-17-2014 
14-177 
Rescinding Ordinance 14-151 and terminating the five-year tax agreement between the City and 129 Brunswick Avenue LLC for the property designated as Block 11009, Lot 10, on the City's tax map and more commonly known by the street address of 129 Brunswick Street 	01-14-2015 
14-181 
Approving a twenty-year tax exemption for a market rate rental project to be constructed by 234 Suydam Avenue Urban Renewal, LLC, an urban renewal entity, pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. located at 218-240 Suydam Avenue in Jersey City 	01-14-2015 
15-001 
Approving a thirty-five-year tax exemption for a low-income affordable housing project located at 561 Montgomery Street, to be constructed by Montgomery Gardens Family Phase I Urban Renewal Associates, LP, a qualified housing sponsor under the New Jersey Mortgage Housing Finance Agency Law, N.J.S.A. 55:14k-1 et seq. 	01-14-2015 
15-011 
Approving a five-year tax exemption pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1, et seq., and Section 304-12 of the Municipal Code for property designated as Block 19006, Lot 33, on the City's tax map and more commonly known by the street address of 372 Pacific Avenue 	02-10-2015 
15-034 
Approving a five-year tax exemption pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1, et seq., and Section 304-9 of the Municipal Code for property designated as Block 7806, Lot 18.01, on the City's tax map and more commonly known by the street address of 850-852 Newark Avenue, for the entity known as Nivaria Group, LLC 	03-25-2015 
15-035 
Approving a ten-year tax exemption for a market rate mixed use rental project to be constructed by 17-19 Division Street Urban Renewal, LLC, an urban renewal entity, pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq., for the property designated as Block 9806 Lot 6.01 (formerly Lots 6 and 7) on the City's tax map and more commonly known by the street address of 17 Division Street 	03-25-2015 
15-058 
Authorizing an amendment to the financial agreement for a senior citizen rental housing project constructed by Padua Court Urban Renewal, L.P., an urban renewal entity, pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	05-13-2015 
15-059 
Approving a five-year tax exemption pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1, et seq., and § 304-12 of the Municipal Code for property designated as Block 5302, Lot 2, on the City's tax map and more commonly known by the street address of 319 Tonnele Avenue 	05-13-2015 
15-060 
Approving a twenty-year tax exemption for a four-story, forty-six (46) unit market rate residential rental "live/work" project located at Block 17301 Lot 11, and known by the street address of 170 Lafayette Street, to be constructed by 170 Lafayette Urban Renewal, LLC, an urban renewal entity, pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	05-13-2015 
15-070 
Approving a five-year tax exemption pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1, et seq., and § 304-12 of the Municipal Code for property designated as Block 8803, Lot 9.01, on the City's tax map and more commonly known by the street address of 210 Ninth Street 	05-27-2015 
15-076 
Approving a twenty-year tax exemption for a commercial hotel project to be constructed by Ratan Jersey City Urban Renewal, LLC, pursuant to the provisions of the Long Term Tax Exemption Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:20-l et seq. for the property designated as Block 1101, Lot 10 on the City's tax map and more commonly known by the street address as 707 Tonnele Avenue 	06-10-2015 
15-077 
Approving a twenty-year tax exemption for a commercial hotel project to be constructed by SL Hospitality Urban Renewal, LLC, pursuant to the provisions of the Long Term Tax Exemption Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq., for the property designated as Block 7104, Lot 2.01, on the City's tax map and more commonly known by the street address as 180 Fourteenth Street 	06-10-2015 
15-080 
Approving a thirty-year tax exemption for a market rate mixed use residential rental project known as Condominium Unit Two to be constructed by Devi Ma Newkirk Urban Renewal, LLC, an urban renewal entity, pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq., on the City's tax map and more commonly known by the street address of 60-62 Newkirk Street 	06-10-2015 
15-094 
1) Approving a thirty-year tax exemption for an affordable housing project at 441, 443, 445, 447, 449, 451-457 Ocean Avenue and 79-81 Dwight Street, for Genesis Ocean Urban Renewal Associates LLC, pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. and 2) rescinding all prior ordinances (11-101, 13-098 and 14-012 ) that approved or amended tax exemptions for the property 	07-15-2015 
15-097 
Consenting to the sale and assignment of a tax exemption and financial agreement from Brunswick Estates Associates, a limited liability partnership, to Roseville Avenue Redevelopment Urban Renewal, LLC, pursuant to section 11 of the financial agreement and the Limited Dividend Nonprofit Housing Corporations or Association Law, N.J.S.A. 55:16-1 et seq. 	07-15-2015 
15-100 
Approving a five-year tax exemption pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1, et seq., and § 304-12 of the Municipal Code for property designated as Block 19402, Lot 32, on the City's tax map and more commonly known by the street address of 416 Bergen Avenue 	08-19-2015 
15-101 
Approving a five-year tax exemption pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1, et seq., and § 304-12 of the Municipal Code for property designated as Block 19402, Lot 33, on the City's tax map and more commonly known by the street address of 418 Bergen Avenue 	08-19-2015 
15-102 
Approving a five-year tax exemption pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1, et seq., and § 304-12 of the Municipal Code for property designated as Block 11004, Lots 27 and 28, on the City's tax map and more commonly known by the street address of 124-128 Brunswick Street 	08-19-2015 
15-103 
Approving an amendment to the tax exemption for 500 Manila Ave., LLC, to 1) revert to a limited dividend tax exemption; 2) restructure the entity to change the entity's name to 500 Manila Ave. Urban Renewal, LLC; and 3) amend the tax exemption to delete certain property 	08-19-2015 
15-107 
Approving the execution of a financial agreement with GS FC Jersey City PEP I Urban Renewal LLC and other applicable documents related to the authorization and issuance by the City Redevelopment Agency of not to exceed $10,000,000.00 redevelopment area bonds (non-recourse to the full faith and credit of the City) and determining various other matters in connection therewith 	08-19-2015 
15-108 
Approving the execution of a financial agreement with GS FC Jersey City Pep 2 Urban Renewal LLC and other applicable documents related to the authorization and issuance by the Jersey City Redevelopment Agency of not to exceed $10,000,000.00 redevelopment area bonds (non-recourse to the full faith and credit of the City) and determining various other matters in connection therewith 	08-19-2015 
15-118 
Approving a twenty-year tax exemption for a market rate residential condominium project to be constructed by Greenland Realty Urban Renewal Co., LLC, an urban renewal entity, pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq., located at 136 Summit Avenue 	09-09-2015 
15-120 
Approving a twenty-year tax exemption for a market rate rental project that will include 20% or 80 units of on-site moderate income affordable housing to be constructed by KRE Hamilton Urban Renewal, LLC, an urban renewal entity, pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:20-l et seq., located at 431 Luis Marin Boulevard in Jersey City 	09-09-2015 
15-122 
Approving a five-year tax exemption pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1, et seq., and § 304-12 of the Municipal Code for property designated as Block 14301, Lot 13, on the City's tax map and more commonly known by the street address of 102 York Street 	09-24-2015 
15-131 
1) Approving a five-year tax exemption pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A.21-1, et seq., and § 304-12 of the Municipal Code for property designated as Block 10004, Lot 2.01, on the City's tax map and more commonly known by the street address of 5-19 Rt. Rev. Msgr. Leroy McWilliams Place and 141-151 Erie Street; and 2) Rescinding Ord. No. 06-119, which authorized a 30-year tax exemption for the property 	09-24-2015 
15-151 
Approving 1) a tax exemption for Ocean Towers Preservation, LLC; pursuant to the NJ Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency Law N.J.S.A. 55.-14k-1 et seq.; and 2) termination of the existing tax exemption with Ocean Towers Associates, LP/MT. Carmel Guild pursuant to the limited dividend law, N.J.S.A. 55:16-1 et seq., for 425 Ocean Avenue 	12-16-2015 
15-161 
Approving an amendment to the tax exemption for Lafayette Family Phase IV Urban Renewal Associates, L.P., to change the entity's name to Glenview Townhouses Urban Renewal Associates, L.P. 	11-24-2015 
15-169 
Approving a ten-year tax exemption for a market rate rental project to be constructed at 460 Grand Street by 456 Grand Realty Urban Renewal, LLC, an urban renewal entity, pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	12-16-2015 
15-170 
Approving a 15-year tax exemption for an industrial project to be constructed by Hudson Main Urban Renewal, LLC, pursuant to the provisions of the Long Term Tax Exemption Law N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq., for the property designated as Block 27401, Lot 41, on the City's tax map, and more commonly known by the street address of 143 Chapel Avenue 	12-16-2015 
15-173 
Authorizing an amendment to the tax exemptions of 1) 20 River Court West Urban Renewal Company; 2) 30 River Court West Urban Renewal Company; and 3) H.P. Lincoln Urban Renewal Company to implement a settlement and amend the tax exemption under the 2003 Long Term Tax Exemption but only as to the definition of net profit 	01-04-2016 
15-174 
Approving a five-year tax exemption pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1 et seq. and Section 304-9 of the Municipal Code for property designated as Block 13003 Lot 1 Qualifier C 3.90 commonly known by the street address of 90 Columbus Drive 	01-04-2016 
16-011 
Approving a 20-year tax exemption for a market rate mixed-use rental project to be constructed by 305 West Side Urban Renewal, LLC, an urban renewal entity, pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	01-27-2016 
16-020 
Approving a five-year tax exemption pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1 et seq. and Section 304-9 of the Municipal Code for property designated as Block 6301, Lot 1, on the city's tax map and more commonly known by the street address of 271 Van Wagenen 	02-10-2016 
16-021 
Approving a 15-year tax exemption for a mixed-use market-rate condominium project to be constructed by Ninth Street Two Urban Renewal, LLC, an urban renewal entity, pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	08-17-2016 
16-022 
Approving a 20-year tax exemption for a mixed-use, market-rate, residential project to be constructed by Pacific 312 Group Urban Renewal, LLC, an urban renewal entity, pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	02-10-2016 
16-032 
Approving a five-year tax exemption pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1, et seq., and Section 304-9 of the Municipal Code for property designated as Block 10803, Lot 29.01, more commonly known by the street address of 211 Baldwin Avenue 	02-24-2016 
16-033 
Approving a 30-year tax exemption for a mixed-use, market-rate, residential project to be constructed by 720-726 Bergen Avenue Urban Renewal, LLC, an urban renewal entity, pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	02-24-2016 
16-034 
Consenting to the sale and assignment of the tax exemption and financial agreement from RT 70 Hudson Urban Renewal, LLC to 70 Hudson Waterfront Urban Renewal, LLC pursuant to Section 9.1 of the financial agreement and N.J.S.A. 40A:20-22 of the Long Term Tax Exemption Law 	02-24-2016 
16-035 
Consenting to the sale and assignment of the tax exemption and financial agreement from RT 90 Hudson Urban Renewal, LLC to 90 Hudson Waterfront Urban Renewal, LLC pursuant to Section 9.1 of the financial agreement and N.J.S.A. 40A:20-22 of the Long Term Tax Exemption Law 	02-24-2016 
16-042 
Approving a five-year tax exemption pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1 et seq. and Section 304-9 of the Municipal Code for property designated as Block 18704, Lot 16 commonly known by the Street Address of 747 Grand Street 	03-09-2016 
16-043 
Approving a five-year tax exemption pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1 et seq. and Section 304-9 of the Municipal Code for property designated as Block 18901, Lot 19.01 commonly known by the street address of 7 Berry Road 	03-09-2016 
16-045 
Approving a five-year tax exemption pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1 et seq. and Section 304-9 of the Municipal Code for property designated as Block 1505 Lot 55 commonly known by the street address of 54 Graham Street 	03-23-2016 
16-046 
Approving a five-year tax exemption pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1 et seq. and Section 304-9 of the Municipal Code for property designated as Block 6701 Lot 24 commonly known by the street address of 628 Summit Avenue 	03-23-2016 
16-067 
Approving a five-year tax exemption pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1 et seq. and Section 304-9 of the Municipal Code for property designated as Block 9202, Lot 6, commonly known by the street address of 25 Fayette Avenue 	04-27-2016 
16-078 
Approving a five-year tax exemption pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1 et seq. and Section 304-12 of the Municipal Code for property designated as Block 9202, Lot 8, on the City's tax map and more commonly known by the street address of 113 Wales Avenue 	05-11-2016 
16-079 
Approving a five-year tax exemption pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1, et seq. and Section 304-12 of the Municipal Code for property designated as Block 9202, Lot 7, on the city's tax map and more commonly known by the street address of 115 Wales Avenue 	05-11-2016 
16-080 
Approving a 25-year tax exemption for a market rate rental project to be constructed by Journal Square Lofts Urban Renewal, LLC, an urban renewal entity, pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq., located at 2853 Kennedy Boulevard in Jersey City 	05-11-2016 
16-085 
Approving a five-year tax exemption pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1, et seq. and Section 304-12 of the Municipal Code for property designated as Block 11302, Lot 30, on the City's tax map and more commonly known by the street address of 212 Third Street 	05-25-2016 
16-086 
Approving a five-year tax exemption pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1 et seq. and Section 304-12 of the Municipal Code for property designated as Block 9401, Lot 24, on the City's tax map and more commonly known by the street address of 134 Cottage Street 	05-25-2016 
16-087 
Approving a five-year tax exemption pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1, et seq. and Section 304-12 of the Municipal Code for property designated as Block 7903, lot 52, on the City's tax map and more commonly known by the street address of 60 Van Reipen Avenue 	05-25-2016 
16-088 
Approving a ten-year tax exemption for a mixed-use market rate condominium project to be constructed by 380 Newark Realty Urban Renewal, LLC, an urban renewal entity, pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:20-l et seq., for the property designated as Block 9806, Lot 8, on the City's tax map and more commonly known by the street address of 380 Newark Avenue 	05-25-2016 
16-104 
Approving a 30-year tax exemption for a mixed use market rate rental project to be constructed by HC West Campus Urban Renewal I, LLC, an urban renewal entity, pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	07-13-2016 
16-105 
Approving a 30-year tax exemption for a mixed use market rate rental project to be constructed by HC West Campus Urban Renewal II, LLC, an urban renewal entity, pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	07-13-2016 
16-115 
Amending the tax exemption and financial agreement for Bramhall Urban Renewal L.P., an urban renewal company, pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq., to allow the deduction of utilities from annual gross revenue 	08-17-2016 
16-116 
Approving a 25-year tax exemption for a mixed-use, market-rate residential project to be constructed by Vaishno MA Summit Urban Renewal, LLC, an urban renewal entity, pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	08-17-2016 
16-117 
Approving a 25-year tax exemption for a market rate residential project to be constructed by Bergen Academy Urban Renewal, LLC, an urban renewal entity, pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	08-17-2016 
16-137 
Approving a 20-year tax exemption for a market rate residential rental project to be constructed by Ash Urban Renewal Development, LLC, an urban renewal entity, pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. for the property designated as Block 17502, Lots 1—12 on the City's tax map and more commonly known by the street addresses of 2—16 Ash Street and 442—446 Whiton Street 	09-14-2016 
16-145 
Approving a 25-year tax exemption for a market rate mixed use rental project to be constructed by 190 Academy Urban Renewal, LLC, an urban renewal entity, pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	09-28-2016 
16-148 
Approving a five-year tax exemption pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1, et seq., and Section 304-12 of the Municipal Code for property designated as Block 4701, Lots 36, 37, 38 and 39, on the City's tax map and more commonly known by the street address of 3224—3230 Kennedy Blvd. 	09-28-2016 
16-153 
Approving a five-year tax exemption pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1, et seq., and Section 304-12 of the Municipal Code for property designated as Block 10901, Lot 106, on the City's tax map and more commonly known by the street address of 461—469 Newark Avenue 	11-09-2016 
16-154 
Approving a five-year tax exemption pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1, et seq., and Section 304-12 of the Municipal Code for property designated as Block 6304, Lot 21, on the City's tax map and more commonly known by the street address of 276 St. Pauls Avenue 	10-12-2016 
16-155 
Approving a five-year tax exemption pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1, et seq., and Section 304-12 of the Municipal Code for property designated as Block 10801, Lot 8.01, on the City's tax map and more commonly known by the street address of 65 Newkirk Avenue 	10-12-2016 
16-183 
Approving a five-year tax exemption pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1, et seq., and Section 304-12 of the Municipal Code for property designated as Block 17101, Lot 40, on the City's tax map and more commonly known by the street address of 712 Grand Street 	12-14-2016 
16-186 
Approving a 30-year tax exemption for a mixed use market rate rental project to be constructed by KKF Block 1 Urban Renewal, LLC, an urban renewal entity, pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	01-11-2017 
16-187 
Approving a 30-year tax exemption for a mixed use market rate rental project to be constructed by KKF Block 5B Urban Renewal, LLC, an urban renewal entity, pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	 1-11-2017 
16-193 
Approving a five-year tax exemption pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1 et seq. and Section 304-12 of the Municipal Code for property designated as Block 6304, Lot 2.01, on the City's tax map and more commonly known by the street address of 71 Skillman Avenue 	01-11-2017 
17-024 
Approving a twenty-year tax exemption for a mixed-income residential rental project to be constructed by 16 Bennett Street Urban Renewal, LLC, an urban renewal entity, pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq., located on Block 20702, Lot 60.01, and more commonly known by the street address of 16 Bennet Street and 148-152 Clarke Avenue, to be known as 160 Clarke Avenue 	03-08-2017 
17-048 
Approving a five-year tax exemption pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1, et seq., and Section 304-12 of the Municipal Code for property designated as Block 12202, Lot 34, on the City's Tax Map and more commonly known by the street address of 75 Jordan Avenue 	05-10-2017 
17-059 
Approving a five-year tax exemption pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1, et seq., and Section 304-12 of the Municipal Code for property designated as Block 7902, Lot 61, on the City's tax map and more commonly known by the street address of 60-62 Cottage Street 	05-24-2017 
17-067 
Approving a 30-year tax exemption for a multi-site mixed income rental project to be constructed by Ocean MLK Urban Renewal Associates, LP, an urban renewal entity, pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	06-14-2017 
17-068 
Approving a five-year tax exemption pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1, et seq. and Section 304-12 of the Municipal Code for property designated as Block 10901, Lot 127, on the City's tax map and more commonly known by the street address of 361 Newark Avenue 	06-14-2017 
17-095 
Approving a five-year tax exemption pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1, et seq., and section 304-9 of the Municipal Code for property designated as Block 19401, Lot 19.06, on the City's tax map and more commonly known by the street address of 435-437 Bergen Avenue 	07-19-2017 
17-105 
Approving a five-year tax exemption pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1, et seq. and Section 304-12 of the Municipal Code for property designated as Block 15203, Lot 10, on the City's tax map and more commonly known by the street address of 65 Storms Av 	08-16-2017 
17-107 
Approving a 20-year tax exemption for a commercial warehouse project to be constructed by Exeter Thomas McGovern Land Urban Renewal, LLC, pursuant to the provisions of the Long Term Tax Exemption Law N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. for the property designated as Block 21508, Lot 2, on the City's tax map and more commonly known by the street address as 295 Thomas F. McGovern Dr (f/k/a 79 Thomas F. McGovern Dr) 	08-16-2017 
17-113 
Terminating the financial agreement between the City and Whitlock Mills, L.P., for failure to satisfy the conditions of Ordinance 03-139 	09-13-2017 
17-118 
Approving a 30-year tax exemption for a mixed income market rate and affordable housing rental project to be constructed by 160 Lafayette Associates, L.P., a qualified housing sponsor under the New Jersey Mortgage Housing Finance Agency Law N.J.S.A. 55:14k-1 et seq. 	09-13-2017 
17-132 
Approving a five-year tax exemption pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1, et seq., and Section 304-12 of the Municipal Code for property designated as Block 22042, Lot 19, on the City's tax map and more commonly known by the street address of 2124 John F. Kennedy Blvd [f/k/a 170 Grant Av) 	09-27-2017 
17-133 
Approving a five-year tax exemption pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1, et seq. and Section 304-12 of the Municipal Code for property designated as Block 6001, Lot 35, on the City's tax map and more commonly known by the street address of 39 New York Av 	09-27-2017 
17-139 
Approving a five-year tax exemption pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1, et seq. and Section 304-12 of the Municipal Code for property designated as Block 17505, Lot 4.01, on the City's tax map and more commonly known by the street address of 323-325 Pine St 	10-11-2017 
17-145 
Amending Ordinance 17-105 which approved a five-year tax exemption for the entity developing 65 Storms Av in order to include space for vehicular parking and authorizing the City to collect additional monies for the Affordable Housing Trust Fund 	10-25-2017 
17-159 
Extending the time to execute the financial agreement approved pursuant to Ordinance 17-067 , which granted a 30-year tax exemption for a multi-site mixed-income rental project to be constructed by Ocean MLK Urban Renewal Associates, LP, an urban renewal entity, pursuant to the Long Term Tax Exemption Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	11-29-2017 
17-171 
Consenting to (1) the purchase of the senior housing project located at 1065 Summit Avenue by Muhlenberg Senior Housing Urban Renewal LLC, (2) the transfer and assignment of the project's tax exemption from the current owner to the purchaser, and (3) approving an extension of the project's tax exemption for an additional three years pursuant to the Limited-Dividend Nonprofit Housing Corporations or Associations Law, N.J.S.A. 55:16-1 et seq. 	12-13-2017 
18-007 
Approving a five-year tax exemption pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1, et seq., and Section 304-12 of the Municipal Code for the property designated as Block 17504, Lot 2.01 on the City's tax map and more commonly known by the street address of 121 Garabrant Street 	02-14-2018 
18-014 
Ratifying the approval of: 1) the sale of the affordable housing project located at 413-419 Arlington Avenue; 750-766 Grand Street; and 64-66 Harmon Street to Emanual Realty, LLC pursuant to the limited-dividend nonprofit housing corporations or associations law, N.J.S.A. 55:16-1 et seq.; and (2) the transfer and assignment of the project's tax exemption 	02-28-2018 
18-049 
Consenting to (1) the partial assignment of the tax exemption from 110 First Street Urban Renewal Associates, LLC to the One Urban Renewal Associates, LLC & LKD Urban Renewal Associates, LLC, and (2) the assumption of the tax exemption by the One Urban Renewal Associates, LLC & LKD Urban Renewal Associates, LLC, pursuant to Section 9.1 of the financial agreement and the long term tax exemption law N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq. 	05-23-2018 
18-105 
Correcting Ordinance 16-088 which approved a ten-year tax exemption for a mixed-use market-rate condominium project constructed by 380 Newark Realty Urban Renewal, LLC on the property designated as Block 9806, Lot 8 on the City's tax map and more commonly known by the street address of 380 Newark Avenue, and correcting the financial agreement authorized by ordinance 16-088 
09-26-2018 
18-119 
(1) Acknowledging the transfer of the ownership interest in Exeter Thomas McGovern Land Urban Renewal, LLC; (2) amending the financial agreement authorized by Ordinance 17-107 that approved a 20-year exemption for a project to be constructed on the property designated as Block 21508, Lot 2, on the City's tax map and more commonly known by the street address of 295 McGovern Drive; and (3) acknowledging the amended construction schedule of the commercial warehouse project to be constructed by Exeter Thomas McGovern Land Urban Renewal, LLC 	10-10-2018 
18-149 
Rescinding ordinance 16-021 and terminating the tax exemption and financial agreement with Ninth Street Two Urban Renewal, LLC 	01-09-2019 
 
TABLE 7. DESIGNATIONS AND DEDICATIONS OF STREETS AND PUBLIC PLACES 
Ordinance 	Name 	Title/Description 	Date of Adoption 
	Liberty Av 	Formerly Germania Av 	07/19/1918 
	Bayside Pl 	Formerly DeMott Pl 	12/17/1918 
	Walnut St 	Formerly Terry Alley 	07/02/1925 
	Journal Square 	Formerly Bergen Av and Sip Av 	03/09/1926 
	Journal Square 		07/09/1926 
	Journal Square 	Formerly Veteran's Square 	12/02/1941 
K-1305 	Journal Square 		09/19/1950 
J-681 	Martin Luther King Dr 	formerly Jackson Av 	01/06/1976 
S-29 	Corelius R. Parker Park 	Formerly Madison Av Park 	10/04/1977 
S-79 	Mortorano Way 	Unnamed street (Same as S-532) 	04/18/1978 
S-105 	Sal-Laf-Court 	Formerly Atlantic St between Martin Luther King Dr and Ocean Av 	08/22/1978 
S-148 	Mercy Dr 	Formerly unnamed street 	11/08/1978 
S-203 	Thomas F. McGovern Park 	Formerly City Park from Sycamore Rd to Bayonne City Line 	04/17/1979 
S-218 	Muhammed Ali Park 	Formerly City Park on Van Nostrand Av between Rutgers Av and Ocean Av 	06/05/1979 
S-235 	Morris Pesin Dr 	Formerly Wolfe Dr 	07/17/1979 
S-236 	Thomas F. McGovern Dr 	Formerly Hammil Dr 	07/17/1979 
S-259 	Danny Bufano Baseball Field 	Formerly larger of 2 baseball fields at Pershing Field 	07/31/1979 
S-257 	Theodore Conrad Dr 	Formerly Liberty Dr 	08/14/1979 
S-258 	Roberto Clemente Athletic Field 	Formerly Little League at 6th St and Grove St 	08/14/1979 
S-261 	Christopher Columbus Dr 	Formerly Railroad Av 	08/14/1979 
S-280 	Audrey Zapp Dr 	Formerly Johnston Av, east of the Turnpike 	09/04/1979 
S-308 	Central Av and the Thomas E. Maresca Plaza 	Extending from South St northerly to Congress St, formerly Central Av 	11/09/1979 
S-326 	Manila Av 	Formerly a portion of Grove St from Boyles Plaza southerly to First St 	12/18/1979 
S-327 	C.F.A.C Plaza 
Congress of Filipino American Citizens 	Block 251, all lots except S3 between Erie St and Grove St on Pavonia Av to Ninth St northeast corner of Grove St, Thence west to the northwest corner on Pavonia Av at Erie St up and to but not including the Rafael J. DeCordero School, thence north on Erie St to the southeast corner on Ninth St easterly to the northwest corner of Grove St and Ninth St, to be known as No.1 C.F.A.C.A Plaza, formerly a portion of Pavonia Av 	01/02/1980 
S-357 	Thomas E. Maresca Skating Rink 	Located in Pershing Field 	03/11/1980 
S-419 	Ralph Taylor Park 	Formerly City Park, located at Cator Av and Ludlow St 	07/08/1980 
S-423 	Ed Franco Sports Complex 	Formerly Sports Complex located in Block 418, 419 and 450, Plot A, comprised of 4.4 acres, located on Brunswick St between Eighth St and Ninth St 	07/08/1980 
S-431 	Brother Stan Dr 	Mercy Dr (Same as 532) 	08/12/1980 
S-532 	Audrey Zapp Dr 	Johnston Av east of New Jersey Turnpike 	12/09/1980 
S-532 	Thomas E. Maresca Plaza 	Central Av between South St and Congress St 	12/09/1980 
S-532 	Christopher Columbus Dr 	Railroad Av 	12/09/1980 
S-532 	Manila Av 	Grove St between Boyle Plaza and First St 	12/09/1980 
S-532 	Martin Luther King Dr 	Jackson Av (south of Bramhall Av and the new street connecting the old Jackson Av at Bramhall Av with Monticello Av at Communipaw Av) 	12/09/1980 
S-532 	Brother Stan Dr 	Mercy Dr (same as 431) 	12/09/1980 
S-532 	Morris Pesin Dr 	Wolf Dr 	12/09/1980 
S-532 	Mortorano Way 	Unnamed street (same as S-79) 	12/09/1980 
S-532 	Salem Lafayette Court 	Atlantic St between Ocean Av and Martin Luther King Dr 	12/09/1980 
S-532 	Theodore Conrad Dr 	Statue of Liberty Dr 	12/09/1980 
S-532 	Thomas F. McGovern Dr 	James Hamill Dr 	12/09/1980 
MC-165 	Ristaino Dr 	Redesignating Fremont St located between Montgomery St and Wayne St as Ristaino Dr 	04/22/1982 
MC-166 	Chopin Court 	Formerly an unamed street between Montgomery St and Wayne St west of Merseles St 	04/22/1982 
MC-255 	Luis Munoz Marin Blvd 	Formerly Henderson St 	10/14/1982 
MC-289 	Nardone Pl 	Redesignating Underwood Pl as Nardone Pl 	12/09/1982 
MC-284 	One Manischewitz Pl 	Formerly a portion of Marin Blvd (formerly Henderson St) between First St and Steuben St 	12/27/1982 
MC-502 	Pershing Plaza 	Formerly unamed street between Central Av and Summit Av south of Pershing Field and north of the reservoir 	11/10/1983 
MC-555 	Journal Square Plaza 	Formerly Kennedy Blvd between Cottage St and the Conrail Penn Central Railroad 	02/23/1984 
MC-539 	Monmouth St 	Accepting dedication of portions of Monmouth St in the Village Redevelopment Project Area 	03/08/1984 
MC-760 	Harborside Financial Center 	Designating the street abutting the Harborside Corporation as the Harborside Financial Center 	12/27/1984 
MC-10 	Gregory Park Plaza 	Designating that portion of Marin Blvd located between Christopher Columbus Dr and Montgomery St as Gregory Park Plaza 	02/28/1985 
MC-794 	Gregory Park Plaza 	Formerly Marin Blvd, between Christopher Columbus Dr and Montgomery St 	02/28/1985 
Resolution C-2358 	Dick Seay Memorial Field 	renaming Gateway Field to "Dick Seay Memorial Field" in honor of the memory of Dick Seay who was considered the best defensive second baseman to ever grace a field in black baseball 	09/10/1987 
Exec. Order 1988-C-221 	Verga Pl 	Designating southwest corner Summit & Newark Avs closest to 591 Summit Av as Verga Pl 	6/13/1988 Cucci 
C-922 	Siperstein's Plaza 	Montgomery St between Center & Colgate St, Colgate St between Montgomery & York St, York St between Colgate & Center St, Center St between York St & Montgomery St 	03/23/1989 
McC-13 	Brooks Pl 	Amending chapter 26 designating Brooks Pl as Huron Av and designating Van Winkile Av between Kennedy Blvd and Huron Av as Brooks Pl 	09/13/1989 
McC-205 	Joseph Ferraro Lane 	Amending chapter 26 designating the lane off Stuyvesant Av between Corbin Av and Van Wagenen Av as Joseph Ferraro Ln 	09/19/1990 
McC-260 	Joseph R. Duffy Dr 	Amending chapter 26 designating Grand St from Greene St to the Hudson River as Joseph R. Duffy Dr 	01/09/1991 
McC-356 	Mohammed Ali Jinnah Loop 	Amending chapter 26 providing that the street presently known as Mercer Loop also be known as Mohammed Ali Jinnah Loop 	9/9/1991 
Deleted 
McC-391 	St. Jude Lane 	See McC-412 amending chapter 26 providing that the street presently known as 16th St also be known as St. Jude Lane 	11/06/1991 
McC-412 	St. Jude Lane 	Amending Chapter 26 - 16th St inadvertently named in Ordinance McC-391 incorrectly stated St between Erie and Grove Sts is 16th St; 15th St between Erie and Grove Sts to be renamed St. Jude Lane 	02/11/1992 
Resolution 
92-749 	Philippine Plaza 	to name the corner of Second St and Manila Av as Philippine Plaza 	09/01/1992 
Resolution 
92-753 	Rev. Dr. Alfred C. Maxwell Plaza 	Honoring Rev. Dr. Alfred C. Maxwell of the Central Baptist Church by adding his name to a portion of Pavonia Av between Coles and Monmouth Sts and dedicating it as Rev. Dr. Alfred C. Maxwell Plaza 	09/16/1992 
Resolution 
92-791 	Riverview Fisk Park 	Renaming Clinton Fisk Park to Riverview Fisk Park 	09/30/1992 
Resolution 
93-049 	William J. Thornton Park 	Renaming Arlington Av Park in honor of William J. Thornton 	01/13/1993 
Resolution 
93-170 	Arthur Ashe Tennis Court 	Renaming the Bayside Park Tennis Courts in memory of Arthur Ashe 	02/24/1993 
93-039 	Dr. B.R. Ambedkar Av 	Amending Chapter 26 ordaining the portion of Tonnele Av between Kennedy Blvd and Newark Av to be known as Dr. B.R. Ambedkar Av 	4/14/1993 
Withdrawn 
93-086 	Mohammed Ali Jinnah Loop 	Amending Chapter 26 providing that the street presently known as Mercer Loop also be known as Mohammed Ali Jinnah Loop 	09/08/1993 
93-085 	Dr. B.R. Ambedkar Av 	Amending Chapter 26 ordaining the portion of Tonnele Av between Kennedy Blvd and Newark Av to be known as Dr. B.R. Ambedkar Av 	09/08/1993 
93-145 	Thomas Gangemi Dr 	Redesignating Sixth St from Marin Blvd to Washington St as Thomas Gangemi Dr 	12/22/1993 
94-103 	Rev. Dr. John W. Wright Pl 	Chapter 26, redesignation of street authorizing name of Mercer St between Varick and Monmouth Sts also be known as Rev. Dr. John W. Wright Pl 	10/26/1994 
Resolution 
94-886 	William Mercado Garden 	Dedicating the Pocket-Park at the Intersection of Jersey Av & Newark Av as William Mercado Garden 	12/28/1994 
95-009 	Rev. Ercel F. Webb Park 	Designation - indicating that Lafayette Park will also be known as the Rev. Ercel F. Webb Park 	02/22/1995 
Resolution 
95-253 	Anthony J. Fiola Plaza 	Designating that Newark Av at Five Corners shall also be known as Anthony J. Fiola Plaza 	04/26/1995 
Resolution 
95-294 	Angel Luis Ramos Playground 	Rededicating the playground on Wayne St between Barrow and Jersey Av as the "Angel Luis Ramos Playground" 	05/10/1995 
95-084 	Grieco Dr 	Newly accepted roadway within the Franklin Park Subdivision 	09/27/1995 
95-084 	Msgr. Wojtycha Dr 	Newly accepted roadway within the Franklin Park Subdivision 	09/27/1995 
95-087 	Janet Moore Park 	Naming the park located on the southwest corner of Ogden Av and Cuneo Pl as Janet Moore Park 	09/27/1995 
95-096 	Terry Dehere Park 	Naming the park located on Garfield Av as Terry Dehere Park 	10/11/1995 
96-028 	Lt. Anna Donato Riggi Playground 	Naming the playground located in Pershing Field in memory of Lt. Anna Donato Riggi Playground 	04/10/1996 
96-071 	Jack Dempsey Plaza 	Designating southeast corner of Montgomery St and Florence St to also be known as Jack Dempsey Plaza (see also Res. 96-554: Resolution of the Municipal Council proclaiming June 30, 1996 as Jack Dempsey Day - Adopted 6/26/1996) 	06/26/1996 
96-083 	Jersey City Blvd 	Designating Communipaw Av east of Wilson St at the New Jersey Turnpike to be known as Jersey City Blvd 	08/14/1996 
Resolution 
96-840 	The Irving Heir Circle 	Resolution renaming the Culver Av Traffic Loop "The Irving Heir Circle" 	09/25/1996 
97-049 	Vernater Watson Park 	Naming the park located on the corner of Stevens Av and Martin Luther King Dr as Vernater Watson Park 	08/13/1997 
Resolution 
97-668 	Theodore Brunson Plaza 	Urging the County of Hudson to permit the intersection of Stevens Av and John F. Kennedy Blvd to also be known as "Theodore Brunson Plaza" 	09/24/1997 
97-080 	James N. Williams Plaza 	Designating that Oxford Av between Bergen Av and Sackett St also be known as James N. Williams Plaza 	11/12/1997 
97-084 	Wilkinson Av Park 	Redesignation of park known as Wilkinson Av Park located at Wilkinson Av between Ocean Av and Dr. Martin Luther King Dr to Dr. Edith Bland Phillips Park 	11/25/1997 
98-035 	Bishop John L. Knight Plaza 	Designating the corner of Warner Av and Martin Luther King Dr to also be known as Bishop John L. Knight Plaza 	04/08/1998 
Resolution 
98-383 	Gladys Canon Nunery 	Resolution honoring the memory of Gladys Canon Nunery on the occasion of the renaming of Public School No. 29 in her honor 	06/10/1998 
98-084 	Terrace Av Park 	Renaming park known as Terrace Av Park to Edward Crincoli, R.A. Park 	07/22/1998 
98-085 	Izeetter Hill McDuffy Park 	Renaming Bramhall Park to Izeetter Hill McDuffy Park 	07/22/1998 
99-014 	William "Billy" M. Gallager Park 	Naming the park located at Linden and Woodland Avs as William "Billy" M. Gallager Park 	02/10/1999 
99-018 	Thomas J. Stanton Plaza 	Dedicating a Portion of Exchange Pl to also be known as Thomas J. Stanton Plaza 	02/10/1999 
99-027 	Flip Wilson Way 	Designating that Kearney Av from Martin Luther King Blvd to Bergen Av also be known as Flip Wilson Way 	02/10/1999 
99-100 	Joseph W. Sullivan Plaza 	Dedicating that the intersection of Summit and Hopkins Avs also be known as Joseph W. Sullivan Plaza 	08/18/1999 
99-148 	Father James O'Brien Bridge 	Renaming the Arlington Av Bridge as the Father James O'Brien Bridge 	09/22/1999 
99-149 	Rev. Dr. Ralph E. Brower Dr 	Dedicating that Virginia Av between Ocean Av and Martin Luther King Dr also be known as Rev. Dr. Ralph E. Brower Dr 	09/22/1999 
00-003 	Mrs. Diane LaBruno Playground 	Naming the playground located at Merseles St and Third St in Mary Benson Park in memory of Diane LaBruno 	01/26/2000 
00-015 	Fr. Fitzgerald Way 	Designating Ninth St between Jersey Av and Erie St to also be known as Fr. Fitzgerald Way 	03/22/2000 
00-020 	Bishop Charles Cotton Square 	Dedicating that the intersection of Boyd and Bergen Avs also be known as Bishop Charles Cotton Square 	03/22/2000 
00-052 	Mono Sen Plaza 	Designating Liberty Av between Newark Av and Van Winkle Av also be known as Mono Sen Plaza 	05/10/2000 
00-061 	The Roberto Clemente Sports Complex 	Naming the recreational facilities that include Enos Jones and Franco Field as The Roberto Clemente Sports Complex 	06/14/2000 
Resolution 
00-633 	The Carmine Conti Club House 	Naming the club house in the Roberto Clemente Sports Complex The Carmine Conti Club House 	09/13/2000 
00-148 	Henry Norford Pl 	Designating Mercer St between Mill Road & Baldwin Av to also be known as Henry Norford Pl 	10/25/2000 
00-149 	Reverend Dr. Ercel Webb Plaza 	Designating the corner of Van Horne St and Lafayette St to also be known as Reverend Dr. Ercel Webb Plaza 	10/25/2000 
00-165 	Father Gabriel Av 	Designating Clarke Av between Westside Av and Mallory Av also be known as Father Gabriel Av 	11/21/2000 
00-167 	Rev. Eugene Hayward Plaza 	Dedicating that the intersection of Wegman Parkway and Bergen Av also be known as Rev. Eugene Hayward Plaza 	12/13/2000 
01-007 	Anthony M. Artificio, Sr. Plaza 	Dedicating that the northwest corner of Laidlaw Av and Baldwin Av also be known as Anthony M. Artificio, Sr. Plaza 	01/24/2001 
01-034 	William E. Martin Way 	Authorizing Vroom Ct which intersects Vroom St between Van Reipen St and Bergen Av be also known as William E. Martin Way 	03/28/2001 
01-048 	Vernater Watson Lane 	Dedicating that Wade St between Kennedy Blvd and Martin Luther King Dr also be known as Vernater Watson Lane 	04/25/2001 
01-072 	Rev. Henry Bezek Percy Dr 	Dedicating that Atlantic St between Bergen Av and Sackett St also be known as Rev. Henry Bezek Percy Dr 	06/13/2001 
01-074 	Gloria Esposito Plaza 
Gloria Esposito Way 	Authorizing the plaza located on the westerly side of 1-18 Journal Square be also known as Gloria Esposito Plaza and authorizing Journal Square Concourse west, the alleyway leading to 50 Journal Square and 52 Journal Square be also known as Gloria Esposito Way 	06/27/2001 
01-076 	Rev. Eugene Hayward Way 
Elder Eugene Hayward Plaza 	Dedicating that the intersection of Wegman Parkway and Bergen Av also be known as (Rev. Eugene Hayward Way) Elder Eugene Hayward Plaza 	06/27/2001 
01-093 	Domenick J. Infantes, Jr. Memorial Hockey Rink 	Dedicating that the hockey rink in the Roberto Clemente Sports Complex be named the Domenick J. Infantes, Jr. Memorial Hockey Rink 	08/15/2001 
01-098 	Douglas & Arthur Skinner Memorial Dr 	Dedicating that Jersey Av from Grand St to the southern terminus be named Douglas & Arthur Skinner Memorial Dr 	09/12/2001 
01-099 	Reverend Dr. Charles T. Epps Sr. Plaza 	Designating the southwest corner of Ocean Av and Bramhall Av to also be known as Reverend Dr. Charles T. Epps Sr. Plaza 	09/12/2001 
01-100 	Domenick J. Infantes, Jr. Memorial Gazebo 	Dedicating that the gazebo in Hamilton Park be named the Domenick J. Infantes, Jr. Memorial Gazebo 	09/12/2001 
01-102 	Sokkon Yun Plaza 	Designating the intersection of Central Av and Bowers St to be also known as Sokkon Yun Plaza 	09/12/2001 
01-111 	Hubby's Corner 	Authorizing the designation of the intersection of Union St and Bergen Av as Hubby's Corner 	09/26/2001 
Resolution 
01-843 	LaPointe Park 	Honoring the LaPointe family on the occasion of the rededication of LaPointe Park 	11/28/2001 
01-136 	Addison McLeon Plaza 	Designating Martin Luther King Dr between Virginia Av and Ege Av also be known as Addison McLeon Plaza 	01/09/2002 
02-014 	Henrietta Robinson Booker Dr 	Authorizing the designation of Madison Av between Bramhall and Communipaw Avs also known as Henrietta Robinson Booker Dr 	02/27/2002 
02-018 	Reverend Dr. Ercel F. Webb Park 	Indicating that Lafayette Park will be known as the Reverend Dr. Ercel F. Webb Park 	02/27/2002 
02-039 	Frank Sclafani Corner 	Dedicating that the corner of Zabriskie St and John F. Kennedy Blvd be also known as Frank Sclafani Corner 	03/27/2002 
02-051 	Juan Pablo Duarte Dr 	Designating that Johnston Av between Grand St and Audrey Zapp Dr be known as Juan Pablo Duarte Dr 	04/24/2002 
02-063 	Johnston Av 	Designating that Johnston Av between Pacific Av and Audrey Zapp Dr be known as Juan Pablo Duarte Dr and designating that it also be known as Johnston Av 	5/8/2002 
Defeated 
02-062 	Sam Manzo Plaza 	Dedicating that Monticello Av between Jewett Av and Gardner Av also be known as Sam Manzo Plaza 	05/22/2002 
02-117 	Edward B. Pulver Way 	Dedicating that Washington St from Dudley St to the southern terminus of Washington St at the Morris Canal also be known as Edward B. Pulver Way 	10/23/2002 
02-129 	Herbert A. Jackson Plaza 	Designating that Communipaw Av between Van Horne and Halladay Sts also be known as Herbert A. Jackson Plaza 	11/26/2002 
02-148 	Pope John Paul II Plaza 	Dedicating that Warren St between York St and Grand St also be known as Pope John Paul II Plaza 	01/08/2003 
03-021 	Joseph Lovero Way 	Dedicating that Bay St at the intersection of Newark Av and Erie St also be known as Joseph Lovero Way 	02/26/2003 
03-022 	Mary McLeod Bethune Life Center 	Dedicates the Community Education Center on Martin Luther King Dr be named to Mary McLeod Bethune Life Center 	02/26/2003 
03-041 	St. Anne's Way 	Dedicating that Congress St between Nelson Av and J.F. Kennedy Blvd also be known as St. Anne's Way 	03/26/2003 
03-044 	Frances Jackson Corner 	Dedicating that southeast corner of Grant Av and Martin Luther King Dr be known as Frances Jackson Corner 	03/26/2003 
03-046 	Irene Carson Court 	Accepting from the Jersey City Housing Authority a dedication of certain sidewalks, roadways and utilities within the Lafayette Village subdivision and naming a roadway within the subdivision Irene Carson Court 	03/26/2003 
03-047 	Ken Musico Plaza 	Dedicating that Monticello Av from Storms Av to Bergen Av, also be known as Ken Musico Plaza 	03/26/2003 
03-049 	Carmine Conti Corner 	Dedicating that the corner of Seventh and Brunswick Sts also be known as Carmine Conti Corner 	04/09/2003 
03-063 	Edna Allen St Paul Way 	Dedicating that Crescent Av between Harrison Av and Brinkerhoff Av also be known as Edna Allen St Paul Way 	05/14/2003 
03-081 	Adilio Gonzalez Plaza 	Dedicating that the southwest corner of Bay St and Manila Av to also be known as Adilio Gonzalez Plaza 	06/11/2003 
03-085 	James F. Morley Sr. Plaza 	Dedicating that the intersection of Mina Dr and Route 440 also be known as James F. Morley Sr. Plaza 	06/11/2003 
03-108 	Sam C. DiFeo Dr 	Dedicating that Communipaw Av between Mallory and Marcy Avs also be known as Sam C. DiFeo Dr 	08/13/2003 
03-109 	Efrem Zimbalist Steward Way 	Dedicating that the Corner of Gifford Av and Bergen Av to also be known as Efrem Zimbalist Steward Way 	08/13/2003 
03-118 	Celia Cruz Dr 	Dedicating that Grove St between Christopher Columbus Dr and Canal St also be known as Celia Cruz Dr 	09/10/2003 
03-147 	Private John J. Spinarelli Way 	Dedicating that the corner of Scott St and Greenville Av also be known as Private John J. Spinarelli Way 	10/22/2003 
03-153 	Bishop Paul Moore, Jr. Pl 	Dedicating that Second St and Erie St also be known as Bishop Paul Moore, Jr. Pl 	01/14/2004 
03-162 	John "Buster" McLaughlin Plaza 	Dedicating that the intersection of Baldwin and Pavonia Avs also be known as John "Buster" McLaughlin Plaza 	01/14/2004 
04-014 	Derek Lorenzo Ingram Dr 	Dedicating that the corner of Lexington Av and Bergen Av also be known as Derek Lorenzo Ingram Dr 	02/11/2004 
04-023 	Matthew Dublin Av 	Designating that a portion of Storms Av between Monticello Av & Summit Av also be known as Matthew Dublin Av 	03/10/2004 
04-028 	Janet E. Haynes Dr 	Dedicating that Randolph Av between Bramhall Av & Union St also be known as Janet E. Haynes Dr 	03/26/2004 
04-065 	Glenn D. Cunningham Way 	Dedicating that Montgomery St between Exchange Pl and West Side Av also be as known as Glenn D. Cunningham Way 	06/23/2004 
04-076 	Reginald Keith Taylor Dr 	Designating that a portion of Bidwell Av between Garfield Av and Ocean Av also be known as Reginald Keith Taylor Dr 	08/11/2004 
04-082A 	Glenn D. Cunningham Pl 	Dedicating that Orient Av between Martin Luther King Dr and Bergen Av also be known as Glenn D. Cunningham Pl 	09/08/2004 
04-131 	The Judge Lewis S. McRae Justice Center 	Renaming the Jersey City Municipal Justice Complex the Judge Lewis S. McRae Justice Center 	11/10/2004 
04-138 	Warren H. Curtis Corner 	Designating that the intersection of Bond St and Garrison Av also be known as Warren H. Curtis Corner 	11/10/2004 
05-005 	Anthony J. Nicodemo Pl 	Designating that the intersection of Sixth St and Brunswick St also be known as Anthony J. Nicodemo Pl 	01/26/2005 
05-035 	Michael James Taylor Dr 	Dedicating that Wilkinson Av between Martin Luther King Dr and Ocean Av also be known as Michael James Taylor Dr 	04/13/2005 
05-055 	Joseph T. Connors Senior Center 	Renaming the Paterson St Senior Center the Joseph T. Connors Senior Center 	05/18/2005 
05-057 	Dr. George E. Cannon Dr 	Dedicating that Road A between Whiton and Pine Sts be known as Dr. George E. Cannon Dr 	05/18/2005 
05-065 	Fausto "Vale" Valentin Garcia Plaza 	Dedicating that the Northeast corner of Communipaw Av & Whiton St also be known as Fausto "Vale" Valentin Garcia Plaza 	06/08/2005 
05-067 	Louis Marin Boulevard 	Dedicating city-owned property known as Block 60, Lot 28.F as part of the public right-of-way known as Louis Marin Boulevard in the Liberty Harbor North Redevelopment Area 	06-08-2005 
05-072 	Our Lady of Mount Carmel Plaza 	Dedicating that Broadway from Giles Av to Wales Av also be known as Our Lady of Mount Carmel Plaza 	06/22/2005 
05-114 	Daniel Strulowitz Way 	Dedicating that Nardone Pl be renamed Daniel Strulowitz Way 	09/14/2005 
05-131 	Town Square Pl 	Amending Chapter 26 of the Jersey City Code designating Pavonia Av between Washington Blvd and Town Square Ring Rd and Town Square Ring Rd as Town Square Pl 	9/14/2005 
Withdrawn 
05-132 	River Dr 	Amending Chapter 26 designating River Dr South between Newport Parkway and Town Square Ring Rd as River Dr 	9/14/2005 
Withdrawn 
05-167 	Father Isaac A. Persaud Way 	Dedicating that Storms Av between Monticello and Fairmount Avs also be known as Father Isaac A. Persaud Way 	11/22/2005 
06-012 	Reverend John H. McReynolds Way 	Dedicating that McDougall St between Arlington Av and Randolph Av to also be known as Reverend John H. McReynolds Way 	02/08/2006 
06-055 	Bishop Robert L. Blount Dr 	Designating that Kearny Av between Ocean Av and Martin Luther King Dr also be known as Bishop Robert L. Blount Dr 	04/26/2006 
06-062 	James "Pop" Curry Dr 	Naming a new St between Woodward St and Van Horne St Extension in the Revitalized Lafayette Gardens Site to be known as James "Pop" Curry Dr 	05/10/2006 
06-063 	Walter Mays Dr 	Naming a new St between Woodward St and Van Horne St Extension in the Revitalized Lafayette Gardens Site to be known as Walter Mays Dr 	05/10/2006 
06-069 	Mario Costa Plaza 	Dedicating that Manhattan Av between Western Av and Tonnele Av to be also known as Mario Costa Plaza 	05/24/2006 
06-104 	Willie Wolfe Pl 	Dedicating that Sherman Pl between Summit Av and Sanford Pl be also known as Willie Wolfe Pl 	09/13/2006 
06-126 	Oviedo Way 	Designating that Mercer St between Grove St and Marin Blvd be also know as Oviedo Way 	10/11/2006 
07-061 	Gromek Way 	Dedicating that Everett St between Williams Av and Clendenny Av also be known as Gromek Way 	04/11/2007 
07-117 	Bishop Henry D. Mays, Sr. Way 	Dedicating that Prescott St between Grand St also be known as Bishop Henry D. Mays, Sr. Way 	06/27/2007 
07-118 	Alexander Hotovitsky Way 	Dedicating that Grand St between Van Vorst St and Washington St also be known as Alexander Hotovitsky Way 	06/27/2007 
07-140 	Gimbert's Way 	Dedicating that the corner of Le beck Av and Romar Av also be known as Gimbert's Way 	08/22/2007 
07-152 	Independent Beauty Supply Way 	Dedicating that Monticello Av between Harrison and Brinkerhoff St also be known as Independent Beauty Supply Way 	08/22/2007 
07-171 	Eduardo E. Pena Jr. Way 	Dedicating that Sherman Pl from Central Av to Summit Av also be known as Eduardo E. Pena Jr. Way 	10/24/2007 
07-186 	Dr. Henry Cannon, Jr. Way 	Dedicating that the corner of 4th and Monmouth Sts be also known as Dr. Henry Cannon, Jr. Way 	01/09/2008 
07-187 	Maria Skupien Way 	Designated that Hamilton Pl and Pavonia Av also be known as "Maria Skupien Way" 	01/09/2008 
08-016 	Pastor Norlee Green Plaza 	Dedicating that the Northeast corner of Pearsall and Ocean Avs also be known as Pastor Norlee Green Plaza 	02/27/2008 
08-041 	Howie Fink Way 	Renaming Pershing Plaza between Central Av and Summit Av as Howie Fink Way 	04/09/2008 
08-049 	Dominick Cinelli Way 	Dedicating the corner of Claremont and Ocean Avs to also be known as Dominick Cinelli Way 	04/23/2008 
08-052 	Irene Wise Way 	Dedicating the corner of Delaware Av and Gautier Av to also be known as Irene Wise Way 	04/23/2008 
08-087 	Swaminarayan Way 	Dedicating that Hoboken Av between Central Av and Newark Av also be known as Swaminarayan Way 	06/25/2008 
08-127 	Don Samuel Cintron Barbershop Way 	Dedicating that the Northeast corner of Barrow St and Christopher Columbus Dr also be known as Don Samuel Cintron Barbershop Way 	09/10/2008 
08-147 	Michael Pane Way 	Honoring the memory of Michael Pane by dedicating that the Northeast corner of Wallis Av and Broadway also be known as Michael Pane Way 	10/22/2008 
09-008 	Frank Roman Way 	Dedicating the South West corner of Academy and Baldwin Avs to also be known as Frank Roman Way 	01/28/2009 
09-023 	Huels' Way 	Designating that the intersection of Montrose Av and Lake St be also known as Huels' Way 	03/11/2009 
09-037 	Deacon Joseph J. Del Monte Way 	Dedicating that Pine St between Communipaw Av and the NJ Transit Hudson-Bergen Light Rail also be known as Deacon Joseph J. Del Monte Way 	04/08/2009 
09-042 	Church of Nazarene Way 	Designating that the intersection of Grove St and York St also be known as Church of Nazarene Way 	04/08/2009 
Resolution 
09-265 	Olga Rodriguez Senior Support Center 	Naming the senior support center at Monmouth and Montgomery Sts the Olga Rodriguez Senior Support Center 	04/08/2009 
09-077 	Reverend john Dupree, Sr. Dr 	Dedicating that Randolph Av between Carteret Av and Claremont Av also be known as Reverend John Dupree, Sr. Dr 	06/17/2009 
09-081 	Ethel Mae Haynes Way 	Dedicating that the intersection of Van Horne St and Bramhall Av also be known as Ethel Mae Haynes Way 	06/17/2009 
09-082 	Terry Monaghan Way 	Dedicating that the intersection of Hutton St and Sanford Pl also be known as Terry Monaghan Way 	06/17/2009 
09-086 	Bishop Clyde L. Harris Way 	Dedicating that the southeast corner of Martin Luther King Dr and Armstrong Av also be known as Bishop Clyde L. Harris Way 	07/29/2009 
09-100 	Miles Alexander Johnson Way 	Dedicating the northeast corner of Van Cleef St and Armstrong Av also be known as Miles Alexander Johnson Way 	09/23/2009 
09-106 	Susan Stavar's Corner 	Dedicating that the intersection of Grand St and Luis Marin Blvd also be known Susan Stavar's Corner 	10/28/2009 
Resolution 
09-899 	Charles E. Trefurt Jr. 	Honoring Charles E. Trefurt Jr. on the occasion of the naming of P.S. No. Eight in his honor 	10/28/2009 
10-071 	Charlie Straub Way 	Naming the path between the Babe Ruth Field and Cal Ripken Field at Pershing Field Charlie Straub Way 	06/09/2010 
10-086 	Moishe's Way 	Dedicating that Coles St between 10th St and 13th St also be known as Moishe's Way 	07/14/2010 
10-088 	Pastor Erwin Lanier, Sr. Dr 	Dedicating that Dales Av between Logan Av and Broadway also be known as Pastor Erwin Lanier, Sr. Dr 	07/14/2010 
10-099 	Bobby L. Jackson Way 	Dedicating that Jewett Av Parkway between Bergen Av and Monticello Av also be known as Bobby L. Jackson Way 	08/04/2010 
10-111 	Dante Alighieri Way 	Dedicating that Summit Av between Pavonia Av and Newark Av also be known as Dante Alighieri Way 	08/25/2010 
10-112 	Bob Hurley Sr. Way 	Dedicating that Eighth St between Manila Av and Marin Blvd be also known as Bob Hurley Sr. Way 	09/15/2010 
10-120 	Our Lady of Czestochowa Roman Catholic Parish Way 	Dedicating that Sussex St between Washington St and Warren St be also known as "Our Lady of Czestochowa Roman Catholic Parish Way" 	10/13/2010 
10-138 	Bishop George M. Cutler Way 	Dedicating that Bergen Av between Fairmount Av and Jewett Av also be known as Bishop George M. Cutler Way 	11/10/2010 
10-159 	Christ the King Church Way 	Dedicating that Ocean Av between Forest St and Oak St be also known as Christ the King Church Way 	12/15/2010 
11-009 	Louis Calamito Way 	Dedicating that the intersection of Monmouth and Fifth Sts also be known as Louis Calamito Way 	01/26/2011 
11-047 	Rosemary Gallagher Way 	Dedicating that the northeast corner of John F. Kennedy Blvd and Fowler Av also be known as Rosemary Gallagher Way 	05/11/2011 
11-059 	Domenick J. Infantes, Jr. Way 	Dedicating that the northwest corner of Jewett Av and John F. Kennedy Blvd also be known as Domenick J. Infantes, Jr. Way 	05/25/2011 
11-069 	Monsignor Kelly Way 	Dedicating that the northeast corner of Montgomery St and Brunswick St be also known as Monsignor Kelly Way 	06/15/2011 
11-100 	Principal Marvin A. Strynar Dr 	Dedicating that Erie St from Ninth St to Pavonia Av also be known as Principal Marvin A. Strynar Dr 	08/31/2011 
11-105 	Spc. Marlon P. Jackson & Spc. Rafael A. Nieves, Jr. Walkway 	Dedicating that the waterfront walkway at York St be known as Spc. Marlon P. Jackson & Spc. Rafael A. Nieves, Jr. Walkway 	08/31/2011 
11-113 	Bishop Tommie Howell Jr. Way 	Dedicating the Southwest Corner of Ocean Av and Stevens Av as Bishop Tommie Howell Jr. Way 	09/27/2011 
11-114 	Philip "Philly" Piparo Way 	Dedicating that the Northeast corner of Beacon Av and Central Av be also known as Philip "Philly" Piparo Way 	09/27/2011 
11-132 	Robert G. Sacks Way 	Dedicating that the intersection of St Pauls Av and Huron Av also be known as Robert G. Sacks Way 	11/09/2011 
11-133 	Michael Malloy Jr. Way 	Dedicating that the intersection of Summit Av and Laidlaw Av also be known as Michael Malloy Jr. Way 	11/09/2011 
11-141 	Willie L. Flood Way 	Dedicating that Forrest St between Bergen Av and Martin Luther King Dr also be known as Willie L. Flood Way 	11/09/2011 
12-005 	Joseph A. Webb Pl 	Dedicating that the intersection of Maple St and Halladay St also be known as Joseph A. Webb Pl 	01/25/2012 
12-006 	Allen Nile Dunbar, Sr. Way 	Dedicating that Van Horne St between Maple St and Johnston Av also be known as Allen Nile Dunbar, Sr. Way 	01/25/2012 
12-014 	Reverend Fernando L. Colon Jr. Way 	Dedicating that the southwest Corner of Wayne St and Baldwin Av to also be known as Reverend Fernando L. Colon Jr. Way 	02/22/2012 
12-022 	Judge Shirley Tolentino Av 	Dedicating that the south side of Newark Av from Baldwin Av to Central Av also be known as Judge Shirley Tolentino Av 	02/22/2012 
12-029 	Dr. Eliu Rivera Way 	Dedicating that the intersection of Manila Av and Second St also be known as Dr. Eliu Rivera Way 	03/28/2012 
12-046 
Michael Muchioki Way 	Dedicating that Randolph Av between Union St and Bramhall Av also be known as Michael Muchioki Way 	04/11/2012 
12-049 
Pope Shenouda III Way 	Dedicating that the intersection of Bergen Av and Vroom St also be known as Pope Shenouda III Way 	04/25/2012 
12-055 
Jaime Vazquez Way 	Dedicating that Monmouth St from York St to Montgomery St also be known as Jaime Vazquez Way 	04/25/2012 
12-063 
Michael Muchioki Way 	Rescinding Ordinance 12-046 and dedicating that Union St between Randolph Av and Arlington Av also be known as "Michael Muchioki Way" 	05/09/2012 
12-064 
Bishop Scotland B. Bailey Way 	Dedicating that Martin Luther King Dr between Stegman St and Wegman Parkway also be known as Bishop Scotland B. Bailey Way 	05/23/2012 
12-065 
Bishop Wayman Wright, Sr. Way 	Dedicating that the northeast corner of Stevens Av and Rutgers Av to also be known as Bishop Wayman Wright, Sr. Way 	05/23/2012 
12-067 
Rev. Donavon W. Shoemaker Way 	Dedicating that Woodlawn Av between Bergen Av and Martin Luther King Dr also be known as Rev. Donavon W. Shoemaker Way 	05/23/2012 
12-074 
Elliot "Skip" Adams Fieldhouse 	naming the fieldhouse at Courtney Fricchione Memorial Field Elliot "Skip" Adams Fieldhouse 	05/23/2012 
12-079 
Harvey George Way 	Dedicating that the northeast corner of Dwight St and Martin Luther King Dr to also be known as Harvey George Way 	06/27/2012 
12-080 
Apple Tree House Lane 	Dedicating that the portion of Academy St between Van Reypen St and Bergen Av to also be known as Apple Tree House Lane 	06/27/2012 
12-088 
Carlos Negron Pl 	Dedicating that the corner of Hutton St and Palisade Av also be known as Carlos Negron Pl 	07/18/2012 
12-109 
Raymond F. Skop Way 	Dedicating that the intersection of Sip Av and Hawthorne Av also be known as Raymond F. Skop Way 	09/12/2012 
12-113 
Maureen Walliser Way 	Dedicating that the southeast corner of Vroom St and Tuers Av also be known as Maureen Walliser Way 	09/12/2012 
12-135 
James "Zimp" Smith Way 	Dedicating that the southeast corner of Dwight St and Ocean Av to also be known as James "Zimp" Smith Way 	10-24-2012 
13-012 
Deacon Carlbert Heard, Sr. Drive 	Dedicating that Astor Place between Crescent Avenue and Summit Avenue to also be known as Deacon Carlbert Heard, Sr. Drive 	02-27-2013 
13-026 
John "Jack" Tarantula Way 	Dedicating that the northwest corner of Summit Avenue and Thorne Street to also be known as John "Jack" Tarantula Way 	02-27-2013 
13-048 
Bishop Cainan W. Johnson Way 	Dedicating that the intersection of Woodward Street and Communipaw Avenue also be known as Bishop Cainan W. Johnson Way 	04-24-2013 
13-049 
Edgar Sanchez Sr. Way 	Dedicating that the intersection of 5th St and Manila Av also be known as Edgar Sanchez Sr. Way 	05-08-2013 
13-066 
Ethel Pesin Liberty Footbridge 	Naming the new footbridge connecting Jersey Av and Liberty State Park the Ethel Pesin Liberty Footbridge 	06-19-2013 
13-068 
Apple Tree House Lane 	Dedicating that the portion of Academy St between Van Reypen St and Bergen Av also be known as Apple Tree House Lane 	06-19-2013 
13-079 
Saint John's Episcopal Church and Rectory 	Designating Saint John's Episcopal Church and Rectory as a municipal landmark 	06-19-2013 
13-086 
Bishop Richard J. Green Way 	Dedicating that the intersection of Wilkinson Av and Clerk St also be known as Bishop Richard J. Green Way 	09-11-2013 
14-038 
Pickett Family Corner 	Designating the intersection of Grant Av and Ocean Av to be also known as the Pickett Family Corner 	04-09-2014 
14-082 
Milad Plaza 	Providing the west corner of Florence Street and Montgomery Street with the commemorative designation "Milad Plaza" 	07-16-2014 
14-093 
Detective Melvin Vincent Santiago Police Facility 	Renaming the new West District Police Facility the "Detective Melvin Vincent Santiago Police Facility 	09-10-2014 
14-164 
	Adopting the list of prospective street names recommended by the Municipal Council Street Name Subcommittee 	12-17-2014 
15-002 
Bill Gaughan Way 	Honoring former Ward D Councilman William "Bill" Gaughan by naming the one hundred (100) steps connecting the Jersey City Heights with Franklin Street "Bill Gaughan Way" 	01-28-2015 
15-038 
Anna and Anthony R. Cucci Memorial Council Chambers 	Rededicating the Municipal Council Chambers as the Anna and Anthony R. Cucci Memorial Council Chambers 	03-25-2015 
15-129 
Frank Brazicki Way 	Dedicating that Spruce Street to the dead end along Liberty Avenue also be known as Frank Brazicki Way 	09-24-2015 
16-060 
Kool & the Gang Way 	Providing Maple Street from Pacific Avenue east to Whiton Street with the commemorative designation "Kool & the Gang Way" 	05-11-2016 
16-161 
Park View Avenue 	Amending Chapter 332, Vehicles and Traffic, to re-name Park Avenue "Park View Avenue" 	10-26-2016 
17-110 
The Maria Tuzzo Pavilion 	Naming the newly re-constructed gazebo in Riverview Park "the Maria Tuzzo Pavilion" 	09-13-2017 
17-111 
Nicholas Arcuri Way 	Providing the section of 5th St from Monmouth St west to Brunswick St with the commemorative designation "Nicholas Arcuri Way" 	09-13-2017 
17-112 
Dan Waddleton Way 	Providing the section of 16th St from Marin Blvd west to Jersey Av with the commemorative designation "Dan Waddleton Way" 	09-13-2017 
17-129 
Aynon Street 	Applying the name "Aynon Street" to the public thoroughfare planned to run east and west through the site of the former Montgomery Gardens Housing Complex and which will run parallel to Montgomery St 	09-27-2017 
17-130 
Jonathan C. Gibbs, Jr. Boulevard 	Applying the name "Jonathan C. Gibbs, Jr. Boulevard" to the public thoroughfare planned to run north and south through the site of the former Montgomery Gardens Housing Complex 	09-27-2017 
17-131 
Ward Street 	Applying the name "Ward Street" to the public thoroughfare planned to run east and west through the site of the former Montgomery Gardens Housing Complex and which will run parallel to Bright St 	09-27-2017 
17-158 
Hasan M. Chaudhry Way 	Providing the entire length of Ristaino Drive, from Montgomery Street north to Way Street, with the commemorative designation Hasan M. Chaudhry Way 	11-29-2017 
17-166 
Boys & Girls Club Way 	Providing the entire length of Morris Boulevard from Park View Avenue to Marin Boulevard with the commemorative designation Boys & Girls Club Way 	12-13-2017 
17-167 
Peter J. Zampella, Sr. Way 	Providing the portion of Newark Avenue from 2nd Street to Monmouth Street with the commemorative designation Peter J. Zampella, Sr. Way 	12-13-2017 
17-168 
Frank J. Caso Way 	Providing a portion of Danforth Avenue from Princeton Avenue west to John F. Kennedy Boulevard with the commemorative designation Frank J. Caso Way 	12-13-2017 
18-042 
Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., City Hall Annex Building and Melissa Holloway Municipal Building 	(1) Naming the first building in the HUB Municipal Complex, which was recently completed, after Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., and (2) naming the second municipal building in the HUB Municipal Complex, yet to be built, after former Ward F Councilwoman Melissa Holloway 	05-09-2018 
18-081 
Earl Morgan Branch Library 	Renaming the Greenville Branch, of the Jersey City Free Public Library to the Earl Morgan Branch Library 	08-15-2018 
18-092 
Elnora M. Watson Plaza 	Renaming Martin Luther King Jr. Drive, between Wilkinson and Bostwick Avenues, to Elnora M. Watson Plaza 	08-15-2018 
18-093 
Pvt. Nick Arcuri Way 	Rescinding Ordinance 17-111 providing the section of 5 th Street from Monmouth Street west to Brunswick Street with the commemorative designation "Nicholas Arcuri Way" and approving an ordinance providing the section of 5 th Street from Monmouth Street west to Brunswick Street with the commemorative designation "Pvt. Nick Arcuri Way" 	09-12-2018 
19-053 
Rev. J.V. Pagnotta Way 	Providing the section of Baldwin Avenue from Pavonia Avenue south to Magnolia Avenue with the commemorative designation "Rev. J.V. Pagnotta Way" 	06-12-2019 
 
