Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 12-5-1972 by Ord. No. 34-72 (Ch. 1, Art. I, of the 1972
Code)]
§ 1-1. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the Township of Jackson of a
general and permanent nature, adopted by the Committee of the Township
of Jackson, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters and sections
by General Code Publishers Corp. and consisting of Chapters 1 through
111,1 together with an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained
and enacted as the "Code of the Township of Jackson," hereinafter known
and referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code, except
such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or
continued in force.
§ 1-3. When effective.
All provisions of this ordinance and the Code shall be in full force and effect
on and after November 21, 1972.
§ 1-4. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
Township Clerk and shall remain there for the use and examination by the
public until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if this ordinance
shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Clerk of the Township
of Jackson by impressing thereon the seal of the Township, as provided by
law, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Clerk of
the Township, to be made available to persons desiring to examine the same
during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-5. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the governing
body to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into
such Code so that reference to the Code of the Township of Jackson shall
be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments.
Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall
be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
1. Editor's Note: See Art. III, Adoption of 2012 Renumbering of Code.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-5
1:3
inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code, as amendments and
supplements thereto.
§ 1-6. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the Township of Jackson, pursuant to law, shall cause to be
published, in the manner required, a copy of this adopting ordinance in
a newspaper of general circulation in the Township. Sufficient copies of
the Code shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk for inspection by
the public at all times during regular office hours. The enactment and
publication of this adopting ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of
the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered
to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk, or someone authorized and directed by
him, to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the Code
required to be filed in his office for the use of the public. All changes in said
Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective date of this
codification, which shall be adopted specifically as part of the Code, shall,
when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until such changes
or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code book at which
time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-8. Sale of Code book. [Amended 8-24-1981 by Ord. No. 40-81;
9-10-2001 by Ord. No. 43-01]
The Township Committee of the Township of Jackson hereby authorizes the
sale of the Code of the Township of Jackson to the general public. Fees
for the purchase of the Code book and supplements thereto are hereby
established as follows:
§ 1-9. Altering or tampering with Code; violations and penalties.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code, or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of the Township of
Jackson to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this
ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to a fine of not more than $500
or imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both, in the discretion of the
Judge imposing the same.
A. Copies of the Code Book may be purchased from the Township Clerk
upon presentation of a fee of $135 for Volume I and $145 for Volume II.
B. Upon receipt of a Code book, the purchaser may arrange with the
Township Clerk for the receipt of periodic supplements to the Code
book. These supplements will be provided upon the payment in advance
of a fee of $30 per year.
§ 1-5 JACKSON CODE § 1-10
1:4
§ 1-10. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code, and every part of each section, is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part
thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not
be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other section or
parts thereof.
§ 1-11. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-12. Repeal of ordinances.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature,
adopted and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance and not
contained in the Code, are hereby repealed as of the effective date of this
adopting ordinance, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-13. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-12 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to May 2, 1972.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance, or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision, or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending,
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing grade, changing name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place, or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
§ 1-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:5
§ 1-14. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
issuance and delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of
indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property, or any lawful contract or obligation.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges.
J. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plots.
K. Ordinances establishing the amount and manner of payment of salaries
or compensation of officers and employees; establishing workdays and
working hours of certain employees; and providing for holidays and
vacations for employees and keeping of employment records.
L. Any ordinance making any change or revision in the Zoning Map.
M. Any ordinance regulating traffic or parking.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as
part of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, certain grammatical
changes and other minor changes were made in one or more of said
ordinances. It is the intention of the Committee that all such changes be
adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so changed had been
previously formally amended to read as such.
B. The following changes, in form of deletions, revisions, or additions to
the original ordinances, have been made in the preparation of this
revision and codification (section number references are to the
ordinances as they have been renumbered and appear in the Code).2
2. Editor's Note: All changes to the Code pursuant to Subsection B are cited throughout the
Code as having been amended by the ordinance adopting this article. A detailed listing of
these changes is on file and available in the office of the Township Clerk.
§ 1-13 JACKSON CODE § 1-14
1:6
ARTICLE II
Adoption of Administrative Code
[Adopted 12-26-2006 by Ord. No. 32-06 (Ch. 1, Art. III, of the 1972
Code)]
§ 1-15. Declaration of purpose; short title.
§ 1-16. Definitions.
For the purposes of Part I of the Code and in the interpretation and
application of all other ordinances and resolutions heretofore adopted by
the Township, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
CHARTER — Mayor-Council Plan of the Optional Municipal Charter Law,
N.J.S.A. 40:69A-1 to 40:69A-210, as amended and supplemented, and any
and all general laws as therein defined which are or may be applicable to
the Township.
DEPARTMENT — An organizational unit of the municipal government so
designated by this Code.
DIRECTOR — The head of a department appointed by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the Council.
PERSON — Includes individuals, corporations, firms, organizations,
companies, associations or any group acting as an individual or as a unit.
The masculine shall include the feminine gender.
TOWNSHIP or MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Jackson, Ocean County,
New Jersey.
YEAR — A calendar year, unless otherwise specifically provided.
§ 1-17. Word usage; interpretation.
For the purposes of this Code and any other ordinances heretofore or
hereafter adopted, except as the context may otherwise require:
A. The Municipal Council adopts this part as an Administrative Code for
the organization and administration of the government of the Township,
pursuant to the Mayor-Council Plan of the Optional Municipal Charter
Law, N.J.S.A. 40:69A-1 to 40:69A-210, as it may be amended and
supplemented.
B. This Part I, entitled "Administration of Government" shall be known and
may be cited as the "Administrative Code of Jackson Township."
A. The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future,
the present.
B. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
C. A singular number includes the plural, and the plural, the singular.
D. "Shall" is mandatory, and "may" is permissive.
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-17
1:7
E. The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by
excluding the first and including the last day, and if the last day be a
Sunday, a legal holiday, or a day on which the Township is closed, then it
shall be excluded.
F. "Writing" and "written" shall include writing and any other mode of
communication using paper or similar material which is in general use,
as well as legible handwriting.
G. Whenever a specific time is used in this Code, it shall mean the
prevailing and established time in effect in the State of New Jersey
during any day or any year.
§ 1-17 JACKSON CODE § 1-17
1:8
ARTICLE III
Adoption of 2012 Renumbering of Code
[Adopted 5-8-2012 by Ord. No. 14-12]
§ 1-18. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
The ordinances of the Township of Jackson of a general and permanent
nature adopted by the Township Council of the Township of Jackson, as
revised, codified and consolidated into chapters and sections by General
Code, as set forth in the Derivation Table included at the end of the Code,
and as renumbered to consist of Chapters 1 through 443, together with
an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as the
"Code of the Township of Jackson," hereafter known and referred to as the
"Code."
§ 1-19. Nonsubstantive changes in previously adopted legislation.
In compiling and preparing the ordinances and 1972 Code for publication
as the 2012 Code of the Township of Jackson, no changes in the meaning
or intent of such legislation have been made. Certain grammatical changes
and other minor nonsubstantive changes were made in one or more of said
pieces of legislation. Chapters, articles and sections have been renumbered
pursuant to the Derivation Table included at the end of the Code, including
all internal references and cross-references. It is the intention of the
Township Council of the Township of Jackson that all such changes be
adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances had been previously
formally amended to read as such.
§ 1-20. Continuation of provisions.
A. The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same
as those of ordinances and the 1972 Code in force immediately prior to
the enactment of this Code by this ordinance, are intended as a
continuation of such ordinances and not as new enactments, and the
effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption of
the prior ordinance. All such provisions are hereby continued in full
force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption by the
Township Council of the Township of Jackson, and it is the intention of
said Township Council that each such provision contained within the
Code is hereby reaffirmed as it appears in said Code.
B. For purposes of transition from the 1972 Code to this Code, any
reference to a chapter or section number from the 1972 Code on or in
any form, license, permit, ticket or other Township document shall be
deemed to refer to the corresponding chapter or section in this Code
until such form, license, permit, ticket or other Township document is
revised or reprinted to refer to the numbering in this Code.
§ 1-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-21
1:9
§ 1-21. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
§ 1-21 JACKSON CODE § 1-21
1:10
Chapter 3
ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Ethics — See Ch. 26.
Personnel policies and procedures — See Ch.
50.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 62.
§ 1-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-21
1:11

ARTICLE I
Township Council
§ 3-1. Legislative power.
The legislative power of the municipality shall be exercised by the Township
Council (Council) pursuant to the authority vested in N.J.S.A. 40:69A-36 and
general law.
§ 3-2. Powers and duties.
The Township Council, in addition to such other powers and duties as may
be conferred upon it by N.J.S.A. 40:69A-31 to 40:69A-48, or otherwise by
general law, may:
§ 3-3. Budget and control.
§ 3-4. Independent annual audit.
The Council shall cause to be made an annual audit of its books, accounts
and financial transactions to be made and completed in accordance with
A. Require any municipal officer, in its discretion, to prepare and submit
sworn statements regarding his or her official duties in the
performance thereof, and otherwise investigate the conduct of any
department, office or agency of the municipal government.
B. Remove, by at least two-thirds vote of the whole number of the
Township Council, any municipal officer, other than the Mayor or a
member of Council, for cause, upon notice and an opportunity to be
heard.
A. Upon the submission of the budget to the Township Council by the
Mayor, the Council may reduce any item or items in the Mayor's budget
by a vote of a majority of the Council, but an increase in any item or
items therein shall become effective only upon an affirmative vote of 2/3
of the members of the Council.
B. The Council shall, where practicable, provide for the maintenance of a
system of work programs and quarterly allotments for operation of the
budget. It shall be the duty of the officer or department administering
any such program to develop or report appropriate unit cost of
budgeted expenditures.
C. The Council shall provide by ordinance for the exercise of a control
function in the management of the finances of the municipality by some
officer other than the Business Administrator. The control function shall
include provision for any encumbrance system of budget operation, for
expenditures only upon written requisition, for the preaudit of all
claims and demands against the municipality prior to payment, and for
the control of all payments out of any public funds by individual
warrants for each payment to the official having custody thereof.
§ 3-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-4
1:13
Local Fiscal Affairs Law.3 The Council shall employ a registered municipal
accountant of New Jersey to prepare its annual audit.
§ 3-5. President of Council.
Pursuant to the Charter, at its organization meeting, the Council shall
elect a President of the Council from among the members thereof, and the
President shall preside at its meetings and perform such other duties as the
Council may prescribe. At said organization meeting, the Council shall elect
a temporary presiding officer, who shall be the Council Vice President, to
preside in the absence of the Council President.
§ 3-6. Duties of President.
§ 3-7. Clerk of Council.
The Municipal Clerk shall serve as Clerk of the Council, keep its minutes
and records of its proceedings, maintain and compile its ordinances and
resolutions as the Optional Municipal Charter Act4 requires, and perform
such functions as may be required by law.
§ 3-8. Meetings of Council.
A. The President of the Council shall preside at its meeting.
B. He or she shall preserve order and decorum at all meetings of the
Council.
C. He or she shall state every question coming before the Council.
D. He or she shall announce the decisions of the Council.
E. He or she shall decide all questions of order.
F. He or she shall appoint all special committees of the Council.
G. He or she may sign all ordinances and resolutions adopted by the
Council during his or her presence.
H. He or she shall sign the minutes of each meeting, along with the
Municipal Clerk.
I. He or she shall sign the bills list.
A. Regular meetings. The Council shall meet annually for organization on
the first day of January at 12:00 noon or at some other hour on any day
during the first week of January. The Council shall designate by
resolution the time of the holding of regular meetings, which shall be at
least monthly. [Amended 12-11-2012 by Ord. No. 23-12]
3. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:5-1 et seq.
4. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:69A-1 et seq.
§ 3-4 JACKSON CODE § 3-8
1:14
§ 3-9. Agenda.
§ 3-10. Conduct of meetings.
B. Special meetings. The Mayor may, and upon written request of three
Council persons, shall, call a special meeting of the Council. In the call,
he or she shall designate the purpose of the special meeting and no
other business shall be considered.
C. Open to the public. All regular and special meetings of the Council shall
be open to the public.
D. Quorum. A majority of the whole number of members of the Council
shall constitute a quorum, but no ordinance shall be adopted by the
Council without the affirmative vote of a majority of all of the members
of the Council.
A. The agenda for each regular and special meeting of the Council shall be
prepared by the Clerk. The agenda must be approved prior to the
meeting by either the Council President or by three members of the
Township Council. Except for emergency matters which may be added
to the agenda at any time with the approval of the Council President or
three members of the Township Council, the agenda for each regular
meeting of the Council shall include only such matters of Council
business as have been presented or delivered to the Clerk by Council
persons no later than the Thursday proceeding the meeting at 12:00
noon. As soon as the agenda for each meeting has been prepared, the
Clerk shall provide a copy thereof to the office of each Council person,
the Mayor, and the Business Administrator.
B. Consent agenda. Items listed on the agenda which are considered
routine by the Council shall be placed under a subheading entitled
"Consent Agenda." Prior to voting upon any item on the consent
agenda, the President or presiding officer shall open the meeting to the
public and the Council to entertain requests for removal from the
consent agenda. There shall be no separate discussion of items on the
consent agenda unless a Council person so requests, in which event the
item shall be removed from the consent agenda and considered in its
normal sequence on the agenda. Those items which appear on the
consent agenda are not required to be read at the public meeting in
their entirety but may be read by description only. Those items so
approved under the consent agenda shall appear in the Council minutes
in their complete and proper form.
A. General procedure. Except as otherwise provided herein, meetings of
the Council shall generally be conducted in accordance with Robert's
Rules of Order except as modified by Township Council.
B. Mayor's participation. The Mayor may attend meetings of Council and
may take part in discussions of Council to the extent authorized under
N.J.S.A. 40:69A-41, but shall have no vote except in the case of a tie on
§ 3-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-10
1:15
§ 3-11. Addressing Council.
No member of the public may address the Township Council except during
the portion of the meeting set aside for public comment pursuant to N.J.S.A.
10:4-12 and during the opportunity to be heard upon second reading of an
ordinance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-2. Any person desiring to address the
Council shall first seek to be recognized by the Council President. Upon
recognition of said person, remarks during the public comment portion of
the meeting shall be within the time limits set by Council by resolution in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 10:4-12, for public comment on any governmental
issue that a member of the public feels may be of concern to the residents
of the municipality.
§ 3-12. Decorum.
§ 3-13. Ordinances and resolutions.
the question of filling a vacancy in the Council, in which case he or she
may cast the deciding vote.
C. Presiding officer. The President or presiding officer shall not be
deprived of any of the rights and privileges of being a Council person by
reason of his or her acting as the presiding officer or President. The
President or presiding officer shall have the privilege of closing debate.
A. Each member of the Council shall cooperate with the Chair in
preserving order and decorum, and no member shall, by conversation
or otherwise, delay or interrupt the proceedings of the Council nor
disturb any member while speaking nor fail to abide by the orders of the
Council or its President, except as specifically permitted by these rules.
B. Any person who shall disturb the peace of the Council, make abusive or
slanderous remarks, or conduct himself or herself in an uncivil,
disruptive or threatening manner during a Township Council meeting
shall be asked by the presiding officer to submit to proper order. If the
person continues the manner of behavior and/or speech delineated
above, the presiding officer may ask said person to either submit to
proper order or voluntarily leave the proceedings. If the person still
continues the manner of disruptive behavior or speech during the
course of the meeting, the presiding officer may ask that the person be
removed from the Township Council meeting by a sworn officer of the
Township Police Department. This section shall apply to the public
comment section of the Township meeting, as well as to the balance of
the proceedings. Persons in attendance at Council meetings are also
subject to N.J.S.A. 2C:33-8. [Amended 5-10-2011 by Ord. No. 18-11]
A. Legislative powers shall be exercised by ordinance, except for the
exercise of those powers that, under the Mayor-Council Plan of
government or by general law, do not require action by the Mayor as a
condition of approval for the exercise thereof, and may, therefore, be
§ 3-10 JACKSON CODE § 3-13
1:16
exercised by resolution. Those actions which may be exercised by
resolution shall include, but not be limited to:
(1) The override of a veto of the Mayor.
(2) The exercise of advice and consent to actions of the Mayor.
(3) The conduct of a legislative inquiry or investigation.
(4) The expression of disapproval of the removal by the Mayor of
officers or employees.
(5) The removal of any municipal officer for cause in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40:69A-37.
(6) The adoption of rules for the Council.
(7) Establishment of times and places for Council meetings.
(8) The establishment of the Council as a committee of the whole and
the delegation of any number of its members as an ad hoc
committee.
(9) The election, appointment, setting of salaries and removal of
officers and employees of Council, subject to any pertinent civil
service requirements and any pertinent contractual obligations,
and within the general limits of the municipal budget.
(10) The declaration of emergencies respecting the passage of
ordinances.
(11) Designation of the official newspapers.
(12) Approval of contracts presented by the Mayor.
(13) Actions specified as resolutions in the Local Budget Law and the
Local Fiscal Affairs Law.5
(14) The expression of Council policies or opinions which require no
formal action by the Mayor.
B. Drafting. Ordinances and resolutions shall be drafted by the Township
Law Department, any member of Council, Special Counsel or any
person designated by Council.
C. Procedure for introduction of ordinances. Ordinances may be
introduced and read on first reading by reading the title only. After
publication and notice of hearing and upon the opening of the hearing,
the ordinance shall be given a second reading which may be by title,
and thereafter it may be passed with or without amendments, or
rejected. Prior to the second reading, a copy of the ordinance shall be
posted on the bulletin board or other public place upon which public
5. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:4-1 et seq. and N.J.S.A. 40A:5-1 et seq., respectively.
§ 3-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-13
1:17
§ 3-14. Delivery of ordinances to Mayor; override of Mayoral veto.
§ 3-15. Filing of reports and resolutions.
Reports are to be read into the record at any Council meeting and all
resolutions shall be filed with the Township Clerk and entered into the
minutes of the Council.
§ 3-16. Control of administrative employees.
Council shall deal with employees of the Department of Administration
and other administrative departments solely through the Mayor or his
or her designee. All contact with the employees, and all actions and
communications concerning the administration of the government and the
provision of municipal service shall be through the Mayor or his or her
designee, except as otherwise provided by law and Township Code § 3-17
below.
§ 3-17. Additional powers of Council.
Council may require any municipal officer to prepare and submit sworn
statements regarding his or her official duties in the performance thereof,
and otherwise investigate the conduct of any department, office or agency
of the Township government. Nothing within § 3-17 herein shall be
notices are customarily posted in the municipal building, and copies of
the ordinance shall be made available to members of the general public
of the Township who shall request such copies.
D. Procedure for adoption of ordinances. An ordinance may be adopted by
the Council only by the affirmative vote of at least a majority of all
members of the Council. Each ordinance shall be published by the
Clerk, considered and adopted by the Council, and become effective
according to the procedure prescribed by the Charter.
E. Voting. The vote of the Council upon every ordinance and resolution
shall be taken by the Clerk by roll call.
A. All ordinances shall be introduced, read, heard and enacted in the
manner provided by general law. Each ordinance adopted by Council
shall be promptly delivered by the Clerk to the Mayor. Each ordinance
shall be returned by the Mayor to the Clerk after the Mayor has affixed
his or her signature thereto or after the expiration of 10 days from the
date of its delivery to the Mayor in any event.
B. No ordinance or any item or part thereof shall take effect without the
Mayor's approval, unless the Mayor fails to return an ordinance to the
Council within 10 days after it has been presented to him, or unless
Council, upon reconsideration thereof on or after the third day
following its return by the Mayor, shall by a vote of 2/3 of the members
resolve to override the Mayor's veto.
§ 3-13 JACKSON CODE § 3-17
1:18
construed as to prohibit the Council's inquiry into any act or problem of
the administration of the Township or as to deprive any member of Council
of his or her rights as a citizen of the Township. Any Council person may,
at any time, require a report on any aspect of the government of the
Township by making a written request to the Mayor. Council may, by a
majority vote of the whole of its members, require the Mayor or his or
her designee to appear before the Council sitting as a committee to the
whole, and to bring before the Council those records and reports, and
officials and employees of the Township as the Council may determine
necessary to ensure clarification of the matter under study. Council may
further, by a majority of its members, consult with the Mayor or his or
her designee to study any matter and to report to Council thereon. Council
President may submit to Council a list of proposed subcommittees to consist
of up to two members of Council on each subcommittee for the purpose so
designated by Council. A Council member may be appointed to more than
one subcommittee. Upon approval of the assignments to the subcommittees
by the majority of Council, said subcommittees shall inquire into,
investigate and/or report on those matters within their designated subject
matter to the Council as a whole.
§ 3-18. Exercise of advice and consent.
A. Where required by law or in any part of this chapter, Council is to
exercise its powers of advice and consent.
B. Time for submission of nominees.
(1) The Mayor shall submit department head names within 60 days of
adoption of this chapter.
(2) In the case of a vacancy in any office or position to which the advice
and consent of the Council is required as to the appointment, the
Mayor shall submit a nominee for the position to the Council within
60 days after the vacancy occurs.
(3) If Council denies consent to the appointment of any nominee, either
expressly or by Subsection C below, the Mayor shall be required to
submit the name of another nominee for the office or position
within 30 days from the date of the denial. The date of the denial
shall be either the date the denial was formally acted upon by
Council or 30 days after the submittal of the name by the Mayor, as
applicable. The Mayor shall not resubmit the name of any nominee
for which consent to the appointment was denied by Council. In the
event this nominee is denied approval by Council, the procedure
herein shall be repeated until an appointment is approved.
C. Time for consent of nominees. If Council fails to grant consent to a
proposed nominee within 30 days after the submittal of the name by the
Mayor, consent shall be deemed denied.
§ 3-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-18
1:19
§ 3-19. Removal of employees.
If the Mayor, in his or her discretion, intends to remove a department head
or any other municipal executive officer who is not a subordinate officer or
employee, including any tenured employee other than the Municipal Clerk
or an employee of whom Council is the appointing authority, the Mayor
must provide notice and opportunity to be heard. The Mayor must file
written notice of his or her intention to remove with Council by filing such
notice with the Municipal Clerk. The Municipal Clerk shall stamp the notice
with the date received and immediately forward copies to all members
of Council. Council may disapprove the removal by adopting a resolution
affirmatively voted by no less than four Council members prior to the 20th
day after the filing of notice by the Mayor. The 20 days shall run from
the date the notice is stamped received by the Municipal Clerk. If Council
adopts such a resolution disapproving the removal, the person shall retain
their terms and conditions of employment as existed prior to the time the
Mayor expressed his or her intent to remove. If Council does not adopt such
resolution prior to the 20th day after the filing of the notice with Council,
the removal shall become effective.
§ 3-20. Compensation.
Each Council person shall receive a salary within the range provided in the
current Salary Ordinance6 and as set by resolution in accordance with the
authority delineated within N.J.S.A. 40:69A-180.
D. In the event a position or office remains vacant for more than 60 days,
an acting department head must be appointed by the Mayor with advice
and consent of Council from within the existing employees of the
Township. The appointment of an acting department head shall be for a
term of 60 days or until a permanent department head is approved
pursuant to Subsection B above, whichever is sooner. This procedure
for appointment of acting department head as delineated herein may be
repeated at the expiration of the sixty-day term, if necessary. The Mayor
shall not resubmit the name of any nominee for which consent to the
appointment was denied by Council. If any position or office requires
special licensing or certifications, and no current employee of the
Township holds such qualifications, the position shall remain vacant
until consent is granted by Council.
6. Editor's Note: See Ch. 62, Salaries and Compensation.
§ 3-18 JACKSON CODE § 3-20
1:20
ARTICLE II
Office of Mayor
§ 3-21. Executive power.
The executive power of the Township shall be exercised by the Mayor,
subject to the procedures set forth in the Charter.
§ 3-22. Duties of Mayor.
The Mayor shall:
A. Enforce the Charter and all ordinances of the Township adopted by the
Council and all general laws applicable thereto.
B. Report annually on a calendar basis to the Council and to the public on
the state of the Township and the work of the previous year; he or she
shall also recommend to the Council whatever action or programs he or
she deems necessary for the improvement of the Township and the
welfare of its residents. He or she may from time to time recommend
any action or programs he or she deems necessary or desirable for the
Township to undertake.
C. Supervise, direct and control all departments of the Township and shall
require each department to make an annual report in January of each
calendar year, and shall require such other reports on its work as he or
she may deem desirable.
D. Require such reports and examine such accounts, records and
operations of any board, commission or other agency of the Township,
as he or she deems necessary.
E. Prepare and submit to Council for its consideration and adoption an
annual operating budget and a capital budget, establish the schedules
and procedures to be followed by all Township departments, offices and
agencies in connection therewith, and supervise and administer all
phases of the budgetary process.
F. Supervise the care and custody of all Township property, institutions
and agencies, and make recommendations concerning the nature and
location of municipal improvements and execute improvements
determined by Council.
G. Sign all contracts, bonds and other instruments requiring the consent
of the Township, after approval by Council.
H. Review, analyze and forecast trends of municipal services and finances
and programs of all boards, commissions, agencies and other municipal
bodies, and report and recommend thereon to Council.
I. Supervise the development, installation and maintenance of centralized
budgeting, personnel and purchasing procedures as may be authorized
by ordinance.
§ 3-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-22
1:21
§ 3-23. Meetings.
The Mayor may attend meetings of Council and may take part in discussions
of Council to the extent authorized under N.J.S.A. 40:69A-41, but shall have
no vote except in the case of a tie on the question of filling a vacancy in the
Council, in which case he or she may cast the deciding vote.
§ 3-24. Veto power.
§ 3-25. Designation of Acting Mayor.
The Mayor shall designate the Business Administrator, any other
department head or the Municipal Clerk to act as Mayor whenever the
Mayor shall be prevented by absence from the municipality, disability or
other cause from attending to the duties of his or her office. Such
designation shall be made in writing and filed with the Municipal Clerk.
During such time, the person so designated by the Mayor shall possess all
rights, powers, duties of his or her office. Whenever the Mayor shall have
been unable to attend to the duties of his or her office for a period of 60
consecutive days for any of the above-stated reasons, an Acting Mayor shall
be appointed by Council, who shall succeed to all the rights, powers and
duties of the Mayor or the then Acting Mayor.
§ 3-26. Appointment, removal and term of Directors.
J. Negotiate contracts for the municipality subject to Council approval.
K. Assure that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the
municipality or its inhabitants in any statute, franchise or other
contract are faithfully kept and performed.
L. Serve as an ex officio nonvoting member of all appointive bodies in
municipal government of which he or she is not an official voting
member.
A. Each ordinance adopted by Council shall be promptly delivered by the
Clerk to the Mayor. Each ordinance shall be returned by the Mayor to
the Clerk after the Mayor has affixed his or her signature thereto or
after the expiration of 10 days from the date of its delivery to the Mayor
in any event.
B. No ordinance or any item or part thereof shall take effect without the
Mayor's approval, unless the Mayor fails to return an ordinance to the
Council within 10 days after it has been presented to him or her, or
unless Council upon reconsideration thereof on or after the third day
following its return by the Mayor shall by a vote of 2/3 of the members
resolve to override the Mayor's veto.
A. Appointment. The Mayor shall appoint, with the advice and consent of
the Council, a director to head each department. Each director shall
serve during the term of the office of the Mayor appointing him, and
§ 3-22 JACKSON CODE § 3-26
1:22
§ 3-27. Removal of subordinate officers and employees.
Directors may remove subordinate officers and employees appointed by him
or her within his or her respective department with the approval of the
Mayor, subject to the provisions of New Jersey statutes, other general law
and any applicable contractual obligations.
§ 3-28. Budget preparation.
until the appointment and qualification of his or her successor. The
term "director" and "department head" shall have the same meaning
as used throughout this chapter and may be used interchangeably.
Salaries of department heads may be recommended by the Mayor, and
subject to approval of the Township Council, in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:69A-43a and N.J.S.A. 40:69A-180.
B. Removal. If the Mayor, in his or her discretion, intends to remove a
department head or any other municipal executive officer who is not a
subordinate officer or employee, including any tenured employee other
than the Municipal Clerk or an employee of whom Council is the
appointing authority, the Mayor must provide notice and opportunity to
be heard. The Mayor must file written notice of his or her intention to
remove with Council by filing such notice with the Municipal Clerk. The
Municipal Clerk shall stamp the notice with the date received and
immediately forward copies to all members of Council. Council may
disapprove the removal by adopting a resolution affirmatively voted by
no less than four Council members prior to the 20th day after the filing
of notice by the Mayor. The 20 days shall run from the date the notice is
stamped "received" by the Municipal Clerk. If Council adopts such a
resolution disapproving the removal, the person shall retain his or her
terms and conditions of employment as existed prior to the time the
Mayor expressed his or her intent to remove. If Council does not adopt
such resolution prior to the 20th day after the filing of the notice with
Council, the removal shall become effective.
C. The salaries of administrative employees, officers and directors of each
department shall be fixed in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:69A-43a.
A. The Mayor shall prepare the municipal budget with the assistance of
the Business Administrator. During the month of November, the Mayor
shall require all department heads to submit requests for
appropriations for the ensuing budget year and to appear before the
Mayor or the Business Administrator at public hearings, which shall be
held during that month, on the various requests.
B. The Mayor shall submit to Council his or her recommended budget,
together with such explanatory comment or statement as he or she may
deem desirable. The budget shall be in such form as is required by law
for municipal budgets and shall, in addition, have appended thereto a
detailed analysis of the various items of expenditure and revenue.
Council may reduce any item or items in the Mayor's budget by a vote of
§ 3-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-28
1:23
§ 3-29. Compensation.
The Mayor shall receive a salary within the range provided in the current
Salary Ordinance7 and as set by resolution in accordance with the authority
delineated within N.J.S.A. 40:69A-180.
a majority of the Council, but an increase in any item or items therein
shall become effective only upon an affirmative vote of 2/3 of the
members of Council. The annual budget shall be introduced no later
than February 10 of the calendar fiscal year or on such other date as
directed by the Department of Community Affairs. Introduction of the
budget shall constitute a first reading which may be by title.
7. Editor's Note: See Ch. 62, Salaries and Compensation.
§ 3-28 JACKSON CODE § 3-29
1:24
ARTICLE III
Office of Municipal Clerk
§ 3-30. Appointment; qualifications.
There shall be an office of the Municipal Clerk, the head of which shall be
the Municipal Clerk. The Municipal Clerk, and all subordinate personnel
and officers, shall be appointed by Council and shall, prior to appointment,
be qualified by training or experience to perform the duties of the office as
required under N.J.S.A. 40A:9-133 et seq., applicable general law and this
chapter.
§ 3-31. Duties and responsibilities.
The Municipal Clerk shall:
§ 3-32. Custodian of records.
The Municipal Clerk shall act as custodian of records for all official books,
papers and documents of the municipality for which no other repository is
provided by Charter or Township ordinance, and keep same safely.
A. Keep the minutes and records of the proceedings of the Council and of
the proceedings of any Council committee upon the request of Council
President.
B. Serve as the Clerk of the Council and attend all meetings of the Council
and such committees when required by the Council President.
C. Preserve and compile all ordinances and resolutions, and at the close of
the year, with the advice and assistance of the Municipal Attorney, the
Clerk shall compile, codify and bind all the ordinances then in effect and
shall properly index such compilation or codification and provide for its
publication.
D. Publish or cause to be published ordinances as required by law in such
official newspaper or newspapers as may be designated by Council.
E. Receive and transmit all communications to or on behalf of Council.
F. Receive and keep in safe custody the surety bonds covering the fidelity
and faithful performance of each and every municipal official required
to furnish such bond, except that the Clerk's surety bond shall be filed
with the Chief Financial Officer.8
G. Perform such other duties as the Council or the Council President may,
from time to time, require.
8. Editor's Note: See § 3-59 of this chapter.
§ 3-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-33
1:25
§ 3-33. Custodian of Seal.
The Municipal Clerk shall act as custodian of the Township Seal and cause
it to be affixed to instruments and writings when specifically authorized by
law or when necessary to exemplify and document or record of his or her
office or to certify any paper.
§ 3-34. Clerk of Elections.
The Municipal Clerk shall act as Clerk of Elections, performing all functions
required by the general law under Title 19 of the Revised Statutes of New
Jersey to be performed by the Municipal Clerk and, in this function, receive
for municipal use the fees prescribed therefor.
§ 3-35. Subordinate officers and employees.
A. Deputy Municipal Clerk. The office of Deputy Municipal Clerk is hereby
created. The Deputy Municipal Clerk shall be appointed by Council,
which shall set compensation in accordance with the current Salary
Ordinance.9 The term of the Deputy Municipal Clerk shall be for two
years. During the absence or disability of the Municipal Clerk, the
Deputy Municipal Clerk shall have all the powers of the Municipal Clerk
and shall perform the functions and duties of such office.
B. Other clerical staff. Any other employees of the office of the Municipal
Clerk shall be employees appointed by Council. Such positions shall
perform clerical and administrative duties as may from time to time be
assigned by the Municipal Clerk or the Deputy Municipal Clerk.
C. Registrar. The office of the local Registrar is hereby created. All the
duties of the local Registrar pursuant to Title 26 shall be performed by
the local Registrar. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 26:8-17, a Deputy
Registrar, who shall be the an employee of the office of the Municipal
Clerk, shall be appointed to assist in the normal, day-to-day operation of
the office and whose duty shall be to act in the local Registrar's stead in
case of absence, disability or death of the Registrar.
(1) Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:8-25, the following fee schedule is hereby
established for certified copies of any registrar documents: [Added
9-13-2011 by Ord. No. 27-11; amended 5-14-2013 by Ord. No.
08-13]
Certificate Fee
Certification of birth, marriage, and
death
$5
Certified copy of birth, marriage and
death
$10
Burial permits $5
9. Editor's Note: See Ch. 62, Salaries and Compensation.
§ 3-33 JACKSON CODE § 3-35
1:26
Certificate Fee
Legal name change $2
§ 3-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-35
1:27

ARTICLE IV
Office of Tax Assessor
§ 3-36. Office established; appointment.
§ 3-37. Deputy Tax Assessor.
A. There shall be an office of Tax Assessor, the head of which shall be the
Tax Assessor. The Tax Assessor shall be appointed by the Mayor, with
the advice and consent of Council. The office of Tax Assessor shall be
subject to such general administrative procedures and requirements as
are the other departments of the Township, including, but not limited
to, the preparation and submission of an annual budget and of such
periodic budget reports as are generally required of departments, and
such accounting controls, central purchasing practices, personnel
procedures and regulations and central data processing services are as
generally required of departments.
B. Appointment and term of office. The Tax Assessor shall be appointed by
the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Township Council, for a
term of four years commencing on January 1 next following
appointment. [Amended 12-11-2012 by Ord. No. 23-12]
C. Qualifications. To be appointed to the office of Tax Assessor for the
Township of Jackson, a person must hold a certified Tax Assessor's
certificate from the State of New Jersey.
D. Duties. The duties of the Tax Assessor shall be as prescribed by law.
A. Position created. There is hereby created the position of Deputy Tax
Assessor for the Township of Jackson.
B. Appointment and term of office. The Deputy Tax Assessor shall be
appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Township
Council, for a term of four years commencing on January 1 next
following appointment. [Amended 12-11-2012 by Ord. No. 23-12]
C. Qualifications. To be appointed to the position of Deputy Tax Assessor
for the Township of Jackson, an individual must hold a certified Tax
Assessor's certificate from the State of New Jersey.
D. Duties. The duties of the Deputy Tax Assessor are to assist the Tax
Assessor of the Township in assessing the real properties in the
Township of Jackson in accordance with the appropriate state statutes
and regulations in regard thereto. The Deputy Tax Assessor shall do all
work as is required of him or her by the Township Tax Assessor in
regard to the assessing of real properties and all various other work as
is required from time to time by the Tax Assessor.
§ 3-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-37
1:29

ARTICLE V
Administrative Organization
§ 3-38. General plan. [Amended 6-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-11;
11-24-2009 by Ord. No. 37-09; 12-22-2015 by Ord. No. 33-15;
4-25-2017 by Ord. No. 07-17]
A. Departments:
(1) Department of Administration.
(2) Department of Law.
(3) Department of Public Safety.
(4) Department of Public Works.
B. Offices:
(1) Office of the Municipal Clerk.
(2) Office of the Tax Assessor.
(3) Municipal Court.
C. Statutory boards and commissions:
(1) Board of Adjustment.
(2) Environmental Commission.
(3) Historic Preservation Commission.
(4) Municipal Utilities Authority.
(5) Planning Board.
(6) Shade Tree Commission.
D. Advisory boards and commissions:
(1) Americans with Disabilities Advisory Board.
(2) Commission for the Disabled.
(3) Economic Development Advisory Committee.
(4) Information Technology and Telecommunications Advisory Board.
(5) Pathfinders.
(6) Private Residential Communities Advisory Board.
(7) Safety Committee.
(8) Senior Citizen Advisory Board.
§ 3-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-38
1:31
§ 3-39. Department heads. [Amended 4-14-2015 by Ord. No. 09-15]
§ 3-40. Terms of department heads; compensation.
The term of a department head shall be for the term of the office of the
Mayor appointing him or her, and until the appointment and qualification of
his or her successor. Compensation paid to department heads shall be fixed
by Township Council in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:69A-43a and N.J.S.A.
40:69A-180.
§ 3-41. Subordinate officers and employees.
Department heads shall appoint subordinate officers and employees within
their respective departments and may, with approval of the Mayor, remove
such officers and employees subject to the provisions of Title 11 of the New
Jersey statutes or other general law.
§ 3-42. Full-time employees; outside employment.
All department heads shall be full-time employees. A full-time employee
shall be defined as an employee who regularly works a minimum of 35 hours
per week. Department heads shall be exempt employees for purposes of
the Federal Labor Standards Act. A department head shall not be employed
outside of the Township, or in addition to the position(s) the employee holds
with the Township without prior written permission of the Mayor.
§ 3-43. Contractual relationship with Township prohibited.
No department head shall have any interest in any partnership, sole
proprietorship, company, corporation or any other form of business
organization, which has a current contractual relationship with the
Township. A department head shall not enter into any contract individually
with the Township. A violation of this section shall be deemed sufficient
cause to seek removal under N.J.S.A. 40:69A-37.
§ 3-44. Internal organization.
The internal operation of each department shall be determined by the
director of the department subject to the applicable provisions of this
chapter. Whenever an activity or functional duty shall, by ordinance, be
(9) Veterans' Commission.
(10) Youth Advisory Council.
(11) Ethics Information Committee.
A. Each department shall be headed by a director, who shall be appointed
by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council.
B. Each of those departments and heads of those departments provided
for in this chapter shall report to the Business Administrator.
§ 3-38 JACKSON CODE § 3-44
1:32
transferred from one department to another department of the Township,
all the functions, powers and duties thereof shall be and are transferred as
of the effective date of the ordinance.
§ 3-45. Vacancies in office of department head.
Vacancies in the office of any department head due to resignation, removal,
death or otherwise shall be filled in accordance with the procedures
delineated within § 3-18 of this chapter.
§ 3-46. Preference to residents of Jackson Township.
In the appointing of any employee, officer or department head, preference
may be given to residents of the Township of Jackson.
§ 3-47. Prospective application of qualifications for offices and
positions.
Any additional or amended qualifications for offices or positions, including
department heads, shall be prospective only as applied to filling vacancies
after the effective date of this chapter.
§ 3-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-47
1:33

ARTICLE VI
Department of Administration
§ 3-48. Department established. [Amended 12-28-2010 by Ord. No.
46-10]
There shall be a Department of Administration, the head of which shall be
the Business Administrator. The Business Administrator shall be appointed
by the Mayor with the advice and consent of Council. The Business
Administrator shall be chosen solely on the basis of his or her executive
and administrative qualifications with special reference to his or her actual
experience in, or his or her knowledge of, accepted practice in respect to
the duties of his or her office. The Business Administrator shall either have
a bachelor's degree from a recognized, accredited college or university,
or commensurate relevant experience. In addition to these requirements,
the Business Administrator shall have at least five years of responsible
experience in an executive or administrative position.
§ 3-49. Duties and responsibilities of Business Administrator.
The Business Administrator, under the direction and supervision of the
Mayor, shall:
§ 3-50. Term and compensation of Business Administrator.
The term of the Business Administrator shall be for the term of the Mayor
appointing him or her, and until the appointment and qualification of his
or her successor. His or her annual compensation shall be fixed by Council
in accordance with the current Salary Ordinance,10 as determined by
resolution. The Business Administrator may enter into an employment
agreement with the Township to be negotiated by the Mayor and approved
by the Township Council.
§ 3-51. Supervisory powers of Business Administrator.
The Business Administrator shall, subject to the direction of the Mayor,
supervise the administration of each of the departments created and
established in this chapter. For this purpose, he or she shall have power to
investigate the organization and operation of any and all departments, to
prescribe standards and rules of administrative practice and procedure, and
A. Assist in the preparation of the budget.
B. Administer a centralized purchasing system.
C. Be responsible for the development and administration of a sound
personnel system.
D. Perform such other duties as Council may prescribe as delineated by
ordinance.
10.Editor's Note: See Ch. 62, Salaries and Compensation.
§ 3-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-51
1:35
to consult with the heads of the departments under his or her jurisdiction,
provided that with respect to any department of law or department of
audit, accounts or control, the authority of the business administrator under
this section shall extend only to matters of budgeting, personnel and
purchasing.
§ 3-52. Division of Purchasing; Purchasing Agent.
A. There is hereby established the Division of Purchasing, the head of
which shall be the Purchasing Agent. The Purchasing Agent shall meet
the qualifications necessary for qualified purchasing agent pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40A:11-9. The Business Administrator shall supervise the
centralized purchasing system as established within the Division of
Purchasing.
B. The Purchasing Agent shall:
(1) Prepare and enforce specifications for the purchase of materials
and supplies. For purchases which require public bidding, or
solicitation of quotations for amounts more than 50% of the current
statutory bid threshold, specifications must be approved by
resolution prior to the issuance, publication or release of said
specifications and prior to the request for receipt of bids.
(2) Advertise for bids and seek quotations on prices for the purchase of
materials and supplies.
(3) Receive bids and quotations and make appropriate
recommendations to the Township Council.
(4) Prepare contractual and related documentation for the approval of
the Township Council and supervise the execution of the same.
(5) Administer the performance of all municipal contracts.
(6) Inspect or supervise the inspection of all materials and supplies,
the rendition of contractual services and determine their quality,
quantity and conformity with specifications.
(7) Manage any central storeroom or storerooms or warehouse or
warehouses that exist or may be established by the Township.
(8) Purchase, store and distribute all materials and supplies and
contract for all services required by any Township department,
office or agency.
(9) Arrange and supervise the sale of Township personal property or
property in the possession of the Township, pursuant to law.
(10) Supervise and administer all joint purchasing agreements between
the Township and other contracting units of the State of New
Jersey.
§ 3-51 JACKSON CODE § 3-52
1:36
§ 3-53. Purchase controls.
All purchases made and contracts awarded through the Division of
Purchasing for any supplies or materials or contractual services shall be
pursuant to a requisition from the Director of the Township department,
office or agency whose appropriation will be charged. No purchase shall
be made nor obligation incurred unless the Chief Financial Officer certifies
that a sufficient unencumbered balance or appropriation is available to pay
therefor. Purchase order requisitions shall be established and prepared by
the Division of Purchasing in accordance with purchasing procedures and
policies manual as adopted by resolution, no later than 90 days after the
effective date of the adoption of this chapter.
§ 3-54. Conformance with statute.
§ 3-55. Public bidding procedure.
(11) Prepare prebidder specifications, regulations and standard
questionnaires for bidders, subject to the approval of the Township
Council.
(12) Use the fair and open process approved by the governing body
according to N.J.S.A. 19:44A-1 et seq., to recommend the award of a
contract for any purchase over $17,500 and up to the bid threshold.
(13) Perform such other duties as directed by the Business
Administrator.
C. Nothing contained herein shall require the Division of Purchasing or
the Purchasing Agent to prepare specifications and contractual
documentation or supervise the execution and performance of
contracts for public works or improvements under the jurisdiction of
the Municipal Engineer.
D. There is hereby created the position of Assistant Purchasing Agent. The
Assistant Purchasing Agent shall assist the Purchasing Agent in
fulfilling the functions enumerated herein.
A. All purchases made by the Purchasing Agent shall conform to the
requirements of the N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq., and all specifications shall
be drafted in a manner to encourage free, open and competitive
bidding.
B. Whenever practicable, materials and contractual services shall be
procured through the Division of Purchase and Central Services under
state contract procedures.
A. The Purchasing Agent is authorized to advertise for and receive bids in
connection with all purchases, contracts or agreements, in accordance
with the provisions of the Local Public Contracts Law.11 The Township
11.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.
§ 3-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-55
1:37
§ 3-56. Division of Information Technology Services.
There is hereby created within the Department of Administration the
Division of Information Technology Services.
§ 3-57. Powers and duties of Division of Information Technology
Services.
The Division of Information Technology Services shall:
Council shall be the contracting agent and shall award such contracts
and purchases as may be recommended by the Purchasing Agent.
B. The Purchasing Agent shall determine the method of presenting bids,
except that such method shall be confined to either personal
presentation at bid opening or by registered mail. In either case, the
method shall be stated in the public advertisement and, if by registered
mail, proper safeguards shall be provided to ensure the security of bids.
Bids received after the time stated in the advertisement shall be
considered as nonresponsive and shall be returned unopened to the
sender.
C. All bids will be opened by the Purchasing Agent in public in accordance
with the bid specifications and applicable law. A record shall be kept of
the bid openings, and the same shall be available to the public.
D. Following review and evaluation of the bids, the Purchasing Agent shall
recommend the lowest qualified bidder to the Township Council, which
shall award the contract or take such other action as it deems proper.
A. Operate the centralized data processing services for all departments
and offices of the Township, including the operation of the Township
payroll system, as well as manage and administer LAN's (local area
networks) and WAN's (wide area networks) for all Township
departments and offices, including the Department of Public Safety, as
may be applicable.
B. Maintain all Township disbursement and budget records, such as
budget summaries, bill lists and vendor analyses, and administer and
manage all computerized systems to include financial, accounting and
tax collection systems, engineering systems, building systems, public
words systems, law enforcement, recreation, human resources, GIS,
mobile and wireless, web commerce, voice and data communications,
as may be applicable.
C. Maintain all Township computer hardware, software, and servers,
including recommending any upgrades of the Township computer
system.
D. Maintain the official Township of Jackson website.
§ 3-55 JACKSON CODE § 3-57
1:38
§ 3-58. Establishment of Division of Finance.
There is hereby created a Division of Finance within the Department of
Administration, the head of which shall be the Chief Financial Officer. His
or her compensation shall be set in accordance with the current Salary
Ordinance.12
§ 3-59. Qualifications of Chief Financial Officer; duties.
§ 3-60. Assistant Municipal Treasurer; duties.
There is hereby created the position of Assistant Municipal Treasurer. The
Assistant Municipal Treasurer shall, under the direction and supervision of
the Chief Financial Officer, perform the following duties:
E. Create programming and systems in-house or advise as to the need for
purchases of systems from third-party vendors.
F. Review departmental requests for software and hardware and make
recommendations.
G. Perform such other duties as directed by the Business Administrator.
A. No person shall be appointed or reappointed as a Chief Financial
Officer unless he or she holds a municipal finance officer's certificate
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.2 or he or she has been previously
granted tenure in the position pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.13.
Appointment to the position of Chief Financial Officer shall be pursuant
to the terms of N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.10.
B. The Chief Financial Officer shall be appointed for a term of four years,
effective as of the first day of January of the year of appointment. The
Chief Financial Officer shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice
and consent of the Township Council.
C. Duties. The Chief Financial Officer shall perform such duties as
delineated within the applicable statutes, administrative regulations
and rules and procedures as established by the Department of
Community Affairs, Local Finance Board.
A. Prepare written answers to routine correspondence and
memorandums.
B. Automated payroll coordination.
C. Cash reconciliations and proof verification.
D. Prepare bill lists for review by the Chief Financial Officer.
E. Assist the Chief Financial Officer in preparing reports and cost analysis
of Township operations.
12.Editor's Note: See Ch. 62, Salaries and Compensation.
§ 3-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-60
1:39
§ 3-61. Duties of Division of Finance.
F. Prepare budget variance reports for the purpose of monitoring
departmental expenditures in comparison to departmental budget
resources.
G. Monitor and verify all inventories, with fixed asset inventories
conducted in accordance with the Technical Accounting Directives
issued by the Local Finance Board.
H. Assist the Chief Financial Officer in preparing statistical information for
the investment of Township funds on a daily basis.
I. Maintain an inventory of all property owned by the Township and have
custody of all municipal personal property.
J. Any other duties as may be assigned by the Chief Financial Officer and
the Business Administrator.
A. Under the direction and supervision of the Chief Financial Officer, the
Division of Finance shall:
(1) Assist the Mayor and Business Administrator in the preparation of
and supervision of the administration of the municipal operating
and capital budget for submission to Township Council.
(2) Establish and uniformly enforce a system of accounts and controls
for municipal financial operations of the Township.
(3) Using statistical, demographic and economic data, prepare longrange
financial projections of expenditures, need for capital
projects and facilities, need for particular services and other longrange
financial and service needs projections for the information of
the Township Council, Mayor and Business Administrator.
(4) Prepare and prescribe uniform forms and procedures for the
budget preparation and payment processes for all departments and
other appropriate spending agencies of the Township.
(5) Have custody of all Township funds and maintain all records of
disbursements of the Township.
(6) Prepare all documents and make recommendations to the
Township Council as to all transfer and emergency appropriations
and prepare all necessary capital budget appropriation documents
under the supervision of Township bond counsel.
(7) May serve on the Township negotiation team as fiscal advisor.
(8) Establish and supervise a program of contract cost administration
for the purchase of goods and services.
(9) Develop and install records and procedures to enable each
department to prepare workload and performance reports,
§ 3-60 JACKSON CODE § 3-61
1:40
§ 3-62. Division of Revenue Collections; Tax Collector.
expressed in appropriate work units, to be used for budgeting
purposes.
(10) Evaluate and make recommendations, from a budgetary viewpoint,
of various municipal programs and administer budgetary controls
as to all financial assistance received by the Township.
(11) Maintain and enforce a system of budget control and cost analysis
for budgetary items and, in this regard, conduct inquiries on behalf
of the Township and report to the Township Council as to fiscal
irregularities.
(12) Conduct a continuing performance audit for municipal operations
for determining quality of work and devising improvements in
efficiency and economy.
(13) Invest all available Township of Jackson funds in order to obtain the
highest possible return thereon.
(14) Perform such other duties as directed by the Business
Administrator.
A. Division of Revenue Collections. There is hereby created, within the
Department of Administration, the Division of Revenue Collections, the
head of which shall be the Tax Collector. The Division of Collection shall
be responsible for:
(1) Charging and collecting payments as well as any penalties for
delinquent payments for real estate taxes, pursuant to law.
(2) Enforcing all municipal liens and charges, including the
undertaking of any in rem foreclosure and tax sale proceedings.
(3) Certifying searches for taxes and other liens on real property as
may be authorized by law.
(4) Perform such other duties as directed by the Business
Administrator.
B. Tax Collector. There is hereby created the office of Tax Collector of the
Township of Jackson pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-142.
(1) Appointment and term of office. The Tax Collector shall be
appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the
Township Council, and shall serve a term of office of four years
commencing on January 1 of the year of appointment and ending on
December 31 of the fourth year, or until a successor shall be
appointed and qualified. A vacancy in the office of Tax Collector,
other than due to expiration of term, shall be filled by appointment
for the unexpired term. The Tax Collector shall possess a Tax
Collector certificate pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-145.7.
§ 3-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-62
1:41
§ 3-63. Division of Personnel.
There is hereby created within the Department of Administration, the
Division of Personnel, the head of which shall be the Personnel Officer.
§ 3-64. Duties and responsibilities of Division of Personnel.
The Division of Personnel shall be responsible for:
(2) Duties. The duties of the Tax Collector shall be as prescribed by
law. The Tax Collector shall perform such other duties which are
related to his or her work as are prescribed by the Mayor and
Township Council, and shall be a full-time employee.
C. Assistant Municipal Tax Collector. There is hereby created the position
of Assistant Municipal Tax Collector of the Township of Jackson, whom
shall be the Collector of Arrears of Taxes pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40A:9-143.
(1) Appointment and term of office. The Assistant Municipal Tax
Collector shall be appointed in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:9-143
and shall serve a term of office of four years, commencing on
January 1 of the year of appointment and ending on December 31 of
the fourth year, or until a successor shall be appointed and
qualified.
(2) Duties. The Assistant Municipal Tax Collector shall work in
conjunction with and under the direction of the Tax Collector. The
Assistant Municipal Tax Collector shall perform all duties and
functions as directed by the Tax Collector and, in the absence of the
Tax Collector, shall perform all of the duties of the office of Tax
Collector.
A. Develop and administer the Township's personnel program, including
up-to-date job classifications and pay plans, active recruitment of
needed personnel and in-service training programs.
B. Design, install and maintain personnel records for each Township
officer and employee, including a job description and qualifications
required, the education, training and experience of the employee, any
professional or trade licenses held, all personnel actions taken with
respect to the employee, compensation, pension status, the Merit
System Board and any other such information deemed pertinent at the
discretion of the Personnel Officer.
C. Develop, install and administer an orderly procedure for the
consideration, review and adjustment of employee grievances subject
to any requirements in collective bargaining agreements.
D. Coordinate the processes of appointment and removal of municipal
employees within the various departments with department heads, the
§ 3-62 JACKSON CODE § 3-64
1:42
§ 3-65. Municipal Insurance Representative.
There is hereby created the position of Municipal Insurance Representative
within the Department of Administration.
§ 3-66. Powers and duties of Municipal Insurance Representative;
compensation.
The Municipal Insurance Representative shall advise the Mayor and
Township Council on insurance matters. The Municipal Insurance
Representative shall serve at a yearly compensation of $1, with no other
compensation or benefits. In the event the Commissioners vote to
compensate the representatives in an amount over $1, the amount over
$1 shall be reimbursed to the Township. The Municipal Insurance
Representative shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and
consent of Council, in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:10-37 to serve as a
Commissioner of the Joint Municipal Insurance Fund.
§ 3-67. Term of Municipal Insurance Representative; vacancy.
If the Municipal Insurance Representative is a member of the governing
body, he or she shall hold office for two years or for the remainder of his
or her term of office as a member of the Township Council, whichever shall
be less, and until his or her successor shall have been duly appointed and
Business Administrator and the Mayor and, to this end, review and
recommend proposed procedures.
E. Maintain a continuing review and analysis of budget operations, work
programs and costs of municipal services.
F. As directed by the Mayor or Business Administrator, assign and transfer
employees temporarily, from one department to another as efficient
administration may require.
G. Develop, prescribe and enforce rules and regulations for the efficient
management of the Township government, so as to avoid any
duplication or overlapping of effort among the departments or among
units within a department, and for the improvement of methods and
procedures of administration.
H. May conduct entrance and exit interviews of employees.
I. Attend meetings and conferences at the request of Council.
J. Monitor labor relations and negotiations and regularly advise the
Municipal Attorney of any labor issues.
K. Monitor and administer employee fringe benefit programs, as
applicable.
L. May conduct a desk audit of all positions to determine whether duties
and responsibilities correspond to job classifications and salary grade.
§ 3-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-67
1:43
qualified. If the Municipal Insurance Representative is an employee of the
Township of Jackson, he or she shall hold office at the pleasure of the Mayor
and Township Council. In the event of a vacancy caused by any reason other
than expiration of the term as a member of the Township Council, the office
shall be filled by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of Council.
§ 3-68. Municipal Housing Liaison. [Added 11-8-2007 by Ord. No.
36-07]
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to create the administrative
mechanisms needed for the execution of the Township of Jackson's
responsibility to assist in the provision of affordable housing pursuant
to the Fair Housing Act of 1985.13
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — The entity responsible for administering
the affordability controls of some or all units in the affordable housing
program for the Township of Jackson to ensure that the restricted units
under administration are affirmatively marketed and sold or rented, as
applicable, only to low- and moderate-income households.
MUNICIPAL HOUSING LIAISON — The employee charged by the
governing body with the responsibility for oversight and administration
of the affordable housing program for the Township of Jackson.
C. Establishment of position and compensation; powers and duties.
(1) Establishment of position of Municipal Housing Liaison. There is
hereby established the position of Municipal Housing Liaison for
the Township of Jackson.
(2) Subject to the approval of the Council on Affordable Housing
(COAH) and/or the Superior Court of New Jersey, Ocean County,
the Municipal Housing Liaison shall be appointed by the governing
body and may be a full- or part-time municipal employee.
(3) The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be responsible for oversight
and administration of the affordable housing program for the
Township of Jackson, including the following responsibilities which
may not be contracted out, exclusive of Subsection C(3)(f) which
may be contracted out:
(a) Serving as the Township of Jackson's primary point of contact
of all inquiries from the state, affordable housing providers,
administrative agents, and interested households;
(b) Monitoring the status of all restricted units in the Township of
Jackson's fair share plan;
13.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq.
§ 3-67 JACKSON CODE § 3-68
1:44
(c) Compiling, verifying, and submitting annual reports as
required by COAH;
(d) Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers and
administrative agents, as applicable;
(e) Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability
controls, compliance monitoring, and affirmative marketing as
offered or approved by COAH;
(f) If applicable, serving as the administrative agent for some or
all of the restricted units in the Township of Jackson as
described in Subsection C(6) below.
(4) Subject to approval by COAH, the Township of Jackson may
contract with or authorize a consultant, authority, government or
any agency charged by the governing body, which entity shall have
the responsibility of administering the affordable housing program
of the Township of Jackson, except for those responsibilities which
may not be contracted out pursuant to Subsection C(3) above. If
the Township of Jackson contracts with another entity to administer
all or any part of the affordable housing program, including the
affordability controls and affirmative marketing plan, the Municipal
Housing Liaison shall supervise the contracting administrative
agent.
(5) Compensation. Compensation shall be fixed by the governing body
at the time of the appointment of the Municipal Housing Liaison.
(6) Administrative powers and duties assigned to the Municipal
Housing Liaison. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall perform the
duties set forth in Subsection C(3) above and shall also oversee the
duties of the Affordable Housing Administrator as set forth as
follows:
(a) Affirmative marketing.
[1] Conducting an outreach process to insure affirmative
marketing of affordable housing units in accordance with
the affirmative marketing plan of the Township of Jackson
and the provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15; and
[2] Providing counseling or contracting to provide counseling
services to low- and moderate-income applicants on
subjects such as budgeting, credit issues, mortgage
qualification, rental lease requirements, and landlord/
tenant law.
(b) Household certification.
[1] Soliciting, scheduling, conducting and following up on
interviews with interested households;
§ 3-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-68
1:45
[2] Conducting interviews and obtaining sufficient
documentation of gross income and assets upon which to
base a determination of income eligibility for a low- or
moderate-income unit;
[3] Providing written notification to each applicant as to the
determination of eligibility or noneligibility;
[4] Requiring that all certified applicants for restricted units
execute a certificate substantially in the form, as
applicable, of either the ownership or rental certificates
set forth in Appendixes J and K of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et
seq.;
[5] Creating and maintaining a referral list of eligible
applicant households living in the housing region and
eligible applicant households with members working in the
housing region where the units are located; and
[6] Employing the random selection process as provided in the
affirmative marketing plan of the Township of Jackson
when referring households for certification to affordable
units.
(c) Affordability controls.
[1] Furnishing to attorneys or closing agents forms of deed
restrictions and mortgages for recording at the time of
conveyance of title of each restricted unit;
[2] Creating and maintaining a file on each restricted unit for
its control period, including the recorded deed with
restrictions, recorded mortgage and note, as appropriate;
[3] Ensuring that the removal of the deed restrictions and
cancellation of the mortgage note are effectuated and
properly filed with the appropriate county's register of
deeds or county Clerk's office after the termination of the
affordability controls for each restricted unit;
[4] Communicating with lenders regarding foreclosures; and
[5] Ensuring the issuance of continuing certificates of
occupancy or certifications pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.10.
(d) Resale and rental.
[1] Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information between owners and the
administrative agent regarding the availability of
restricted units for resale or rental; and
§ 3-68 JACKSON CODE § 3-68
1:46
[2] Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information to low- and moderate-income
households regarding the availability of restricted units for
resale or re-rental.
(e) Processing request from unit owners.
[1] Reviewing and approving requests from owners of
restricted units who wish to take out home equity loans or
refinance during the term of their ownership;
[2] Reviewing and approving requests to increase sales prices
from owners of restricted units who wish to make capital
improvements to the units that would affect the selling
price, such authorizations to be limited to those
improvements resulting in additional bedrooms or
bathrooms and the cost of central air-conditioning
systems; and
[3] Processing requests and making determinations on
requests by owners of restricted units for hardship
waivers.
(f) Enforcement.
[1] Securing annually lists of all affordable housing units for
which tax bills are mailed to absentee owners and
notifying all such owners that they must either move back
to their unit or sell it;
[2] Securing from all developers and sponsors of restricted
units, at the earliest point of contact in the processing of
the project or development, written acknowledgement of
the requirement that no restricted unit can be offered, or
in any other way committed, to any person, other than a
household duly certified to the unit by the administrative
agent;
[3] The posting annually in all rental properties, including
two-family homes, of a notice as to the maximum
permitted rent together with the telephone number of the
administrative agent where complaints of excess rent can
be made;
[4] Sending annual mailings to all owners of affordable
dwelling units, reminding them of the notices and
requirements outlined in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.18(d)4;
[5] Establishing a program for diverting unlawful rent
payments to the municipality's affordable housing trust
fund or other appropriate municipal fund approved by the
DCA;
§ 3-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-68
1:47
§ 3-69. Division of Code Compliance. [Added 12-22-2015 by Ord.
No. 33-15]
[6] Creating and publishing a written operating manual, as
approved by COAH, setting forth procedures for
administering such affordability controls; and
[7] Providing annual reports to COAH as required.
(g) The administrative agent shall have authority to take all
actions necessary and appropriate to carry out its
responsibilities hereunder as supervised by the Municipal
Housing Liaison.
A. Establishment. There is hereby created a Division of Code Compliance
consisting of Code Enforcement, Housing and Animal Control, the head
of which shall be the Code Compliance Supervisor.
B. Duties of the Division. The Division of Code Compliance shall:
(1) Conduct field inspections and special investigations to ensure
compliance with various municipal ordinances.
(2) Initiate and enforce rules and regulations in relation to
enforcement of ordinances.
(3) Enforcing the provisions of the Township animal control ordinances
and the state statutes, including, but not limited to, the taking into
custody, impounding, and adoption of animals, as well as licensing.
(4) Perform any other such function as necessary to administer the
purpose of this Department.
(5) Act as liaison for the Rent Leveling Board.
C. Creation of position. There is hereby established within the Township of
Jackson the position of Code Compliance Supervisor. Said position shall
be the division head for the Division of Code Compliance.
D. Appointment. The Division of Code Compliance Supervisor shall be
appointed by the Mayor. The Supervisor shall report directly to the
Township Business Administrator.
E. Duties of Code Compliance Supervisor. The Code Compliance
Supervisor:
(1) Plans, coordinates, staffs, prioritizes, monitors, directs, evaluates
and participates in the Township's code enforcement activities,
involving zoning ordinances, housing codes, public nuisances,
property maintenance, abandoned vehicles, animal control, license
regulations and other issues relating to health, safety and welfare
of the community; ensures safe work practices, work quality and
accuracy.
§ 3-68 JACKSON CODE § 3-69
1:48
(2) Assures that assigned areas of responsibility are consistent with
local, state and federal regulations; stays current on related
policies, regulations and trends.
(3) Participates in the development of policies and procedures;
develops and recommends programs and projects.
(4) Participates in the selection and training of personnel; assumes
responsibility for motivating and evaluating assigned personnel;
provides necessary training; initiates discipline procedures as is
appropriate.
(5) Develops schedules and methods for performing assigned duties;
assigns work to staff; monitors work activities to ensure safe work
practices, work quality and accuracy; ensures compliance with
applicable rules, policies and procedures; maintains appropriate
work records and documents which may include time sheets and
work orders; prepares statistical and/or analytical reports on
operations as necessary.
(6) Participates in the development of assigned budget; administers
and monitors the approved budget; maintains supply inventories
and supply and budgetary records.
(7) Addresses and responds to service questions, inquiries and
complaints; establishes and maintains a customer orientation with
assigned division.
(8) Establishes positive working relationships with representatives of
community organizations, state/local agencies and associations,
Township management, staff, and the public.
(9) Performs related duties and responsibilities as assigned.
F. Qualifications. The qualifications necessary for a person to be
appointed to the position of Code Compliance Supervisor shall be as
follows:
(1) Education:
(a) Graduation from an accredited college or university with a
bachelor's degree.
(b) Applicants who do not meet the educational requirement may
substitute additional work experience as described below, on
the basis of one year of such experience being equal to 30
semester hour credits.
(2) Experience:
(a) Two years of experience in zoning involving the issuance of
permits and enforcement of zoning ordinances and
regulations.
§ 3-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-69
1:49
(b) Possession of a master's degree in business administration
from an accredited college or university may be substituted for
one year of the above-required work experience.
G. Creation of position. There is hereby established within the Township of
Jackson the position of Code Enforcement Officer within the Division of
Code Compliance.
H. Duties of the Code Enforcement Officer. The Code Enforcement Officer
shall have the following duties:
(1) Responsible for enforcing the municipal ordinances and codes of
the Township.
(2) Responsible for reviewing the municipal ordinances of the
Township on a continuing basis and to making periodic reports to
the Division head or director, not less than once every six months,
advising the Division head or director as to recommendations for
new ordinances or regulations or the amendment of existing
ordinances or regulations of the Township of Jackson.
(3) To attend all meetings of the Planning Board, Board of Adjustment
and other meetings as required by the Code Compliance
Supervisor.
(4) To submit monthly reports to the Code Compliance Supervisor
detailing work performance.
(5) To make investigations, serve violation notices, make and process
complaints for code violations and make court appearances as
necessary in connection therewith.
(6) To maintain files of all papers and records pertinent to work
performance.
(7) To perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the
Department of Personnel.
I. Creation of position. There is hereby established within the Township of
Jackson the position of Animal Control Officer within the Division of
Code Compliance.
J. Duties of the Animal Control Officer. There shall be an Animal Control
Officer within the Division of Code Compliance. The duties of the
Animal Control Officer shall include but not be limited to the following:
(1) Enforcing the provisions of the Township animal control ordinances
and the state statutes, including, but not limited to, the taking into
custody, impounding, adoption of animals.
(2) Overseeing the administration of the animal control, including but
not limited to the keeping of needed records and files.
§ 3-69 JACKSON CODE § 3-69
1:50
§ 3-70. Division of Zoning. [Added 12-22-2015 by Ord. No. 33-15]
(3) Reporting weekly to the Code Enforcement Officer as to the
operations of animal control.
(4) Licensing dogs, kennels, pet shops, shelters and pounds.
(5) Performing such other duties as may be prescribed by the
Department of Personnel.
A. Establishment. There is hereby created a Division of Zoning, the head of
which shall be the Zoning Officer, who shall be appointed by the Mayor
and report directly to the Township Administrator.
B. Duties of the Division. The Division of Zoning shall:
(1) Conduct field inspections and special investigations to ensure
compliance with various municipal ordinances.
(2) Initiate and enforce rules and regulations in relation to
enforcement of ordinances.
(3) Perform any other such function as necessary to administer the
purpose of this Department.
(4) Act as liaison to the Planning Board.
(5) Act as liaison to the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
(6) Coordinate and advise the Township as to zoning issues.
(7) For purposes of administration, the Planning Board Secretary,
Zoning Board Secretary and other clerical support staff to each
Board shall be under the auspices of the Division of Zoning.
C. Creation of position. There is hereby established within the Township of
Jackson the position of Zoning Officer within the Division of Zoning.
D. Duties of the Zoning Officer.
(1) To enforce the zoning ordinances of the Township of Jackson.
(2) To issue zoning permits.
(3) To issue flood hazard letters in writing when requested.
(4) To answer all inquiries with regard to zoning.
(5) To keep a record of all applications for permits and of all permits
and certificates issued, with a notation of all special conditions
involved.
(6) To file and safely keep copies of all plans submitted.
(7) To collect and record fees for zoning permits and flood letters.
§ 3-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-70
1:51
§ 3-71. Division of Engineering. [Added 12-22-2015 by Ord. No.
33-15]
(8) To prepare a monthly report for the Mayor and Township Council
summarizing all activity of the previous months concerning the
duties of the Zoning Officer.
(9) The Zoning Officer shall conduct field inspections and special
investigations to ensure compliance with various municipal
ordinances, initiate and enforce rules and regulations in relation to
enforcement of ordinances, initiate necessary legal action against
violators of various municipal ordinances, prepare needed reports,
establish and maintain the records and files and may assist in the
promulgation of municipal ordinances.
E. Creation of position. There is hereby established within the Township of
Jackson the position of Assistant Zoning Officer within the Division of
Zoning.
F. Duties of the Assistant Zoning Officer.
(1) To assist the Zoning Officer to enforce the zoning ordinances of the
Township of Jackson.
(2) To perform all of the duties of the Zoning Officer at his or her
direction or in his or her absence.
(3) To perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the
Department of Personnel.
A. Establishment. There shall be a Division of Engineering, the head of
which shall be the Township Engineer.
B. Creation of position. There is hereby established with the Township of
Jackson the position of Township Engineer.
C. Appointment. The Township Engineer shall be appointed by the Mayor.
The Township Engineer shall report directly to the Township Business
Administrator. Should the office become vacant during any term, it shall
be filled by a similar appointment, but for the unexpired term only.
D. Responsibilities; duties. The Engineer shall perform the duties
prescribed by general law and ordinance. He/she shall:
(1) Prepare or cause to be prepared plans, designs, specifications,
reports, investigations and cost estimates for all public works
improvements undertaken by the Township.
(2) Provide and maintain surveys, maps, plans, specifications and
control records with respect to all public works facilities owned and
operated by the Township.
§ 3-70 JACKSON CODE § 3-71
1:52
(3) Provide technical and engineering advice and assistance to other
Township departments as needed.
(4) Recommend to Administration the undertaking of needed capital
projects within the Township.
(5) Assist in the formation and implementation of the Township capital
budget.
(6) Assign, with the approval of the Mayor or Business Administrator,
projects to the special consulting engineers that have been
previously appointed by the governing body, and supervise the
same.
(7) Direct and supervise all personnel with the division.
(8) He or she shall render to the Administrator Council such reports,
recommendations, or other documents as may be required, at
regular stated intervals or on special request therefor. He or she
shall hold himself or herself available for consultation and advice to
all municipal officials and municipal boards or commissions and
shall prepare and present to the Administration short- and longrange
recommendations for the improvement of the Township in
the areas within the functions and duties of his or her Department.
E. Qualifications. The qualifications necessary for a person to be
appointed to the position of Township Engineer shall be as follow:
(1) Education:
(a) Graduation from an accredited college or university with a
bachelor's degree.
(b) Duly licensed as a professional engineer in the State of New
Jersey for at least five years.
(2) Experience:
(a) At least five years' experience in state, county, regional or
municipal engineering activities.
F. Surrender of Township property on termination of service. All papers,
documents, memoranda, reports and other materials relating to the
administration of engineering duties of the Engineer shall be and
remain the property of the Township. Upon termination of his or her
services with the Township, the Engineer shall forthwith surrender to
any successor all such property.
G. Special consulting engineers. Whenever, in the opinion of the Municipal
Engineer, special consulting engineers should be appointed for a
specific or particular project or matter, the Municipal Engineer shall
provide a recommendation in writing to the Mayor and Township
§ 3-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-71
1:53
§ 3-72. Division of Conservation and Natural Resources. [Added
12-22-2015 by Ord. No. 33-15]
There is hereby created a Division of Conservation and Natural Resources,
the head of which shall be the Forester, who shall report directly to the
Township Administrator. The Forester shall act as a liaison to the
Environmental Commission, Historic Preservation Commission and the
Shade Tree Commission, and shall have such duties as prescribed by the
Code Compliance Supervisor and as delineated elsewhere throughout this
chapter. The Forester need not be a full-time employee and shall be subject
to such fees as shall be approved by the Council.
§ 3-73. Division of Economic Development. [Added 12-22-2015 by
Ord. No. 33-15]
There is hereby created a Division of Economic Development within the
Department of Administration. The Division shall actively seek out and
advise the Mayor and Council of grants, funds and loans available for
various projects and programs in the Township, including but not limited
to, Community Development and Enforcement Block Grant Program
administered by the Office of Housing and Urban Development. The
Division shall also be responsible for developing strategies to attract
commercial ratables and for making recommendations to Mayor and
Council regarding such ratables.
§ 3-74. Division of Construction. [Added 12-22-2015 by Ord. No.
33-15]
Council. A special engineer may only be appointed by appointment of
the Mayor and resolution of the Township Council.
A. Establishment. There is hereby created a Division of Construction, the
head of which shall be the Construction Code Official, who shall report
directly to the Township Administrator.
B. Creation of position. There is hereby established within the Township of
Jackson the position of Construction Code Official.
C. Appointment. The Construction Code official shall be appointed by the
Mayor. The Construction Code Official shall report directly to the
Township Business Administrator. Should the office become vacant
during any term, it shall be filled by a similar appointment, but for the
unexpired term only.
D. Responsibilities; duties. The duties and responsibilities are listed, and
the Construction Code Official shall:
(1) Undertake enforcement proceedings for all building-related codes,
issuing and administering permits issued thereby and reviewing all
site and construction plans as specified by state statute.
§ 3-71 JACKSON CODE § 3-74
1:54
(2) Have, perform, and discharge all of the functions, powers, and
duties prescribed by law for a construction official.
(3) Inspect real property and improvements thereon under the
applicable code provisions, supervising the demolition of
condemned buildings and performing such further duties
prescribed by state statute.
(4) Administer the provisions of N.J.S.A. 52-27D-119 et seq., the State
Uniform Construction Act, and N.J.A.C. 5:23-1 et seq., the
regulations for the State Uniform Construction Code and the
various subcodes provided therein, including but not limited to
building subcode, plumbing subcode, and electrical subcode.
(5) Act as enforcing agent for the State Uniform Construction Code.
(6) Direct and supervise all personnel within the department.
(7) He or she shall render to the Administration such reports,
recommendations, or other documents as may be required, at
regular stated intervals or on special request therefor. He or she
shall hold himself or herself available for consultation and advice to
all municipal officials and municipal boards or commissions and
shall prepare and present to the Administration short- and longrange
recommendations for the improvement of the Township in
the areas within the functions and duties of his or her Department.
E. Qualifications. The qualifications necessary for a person to be
appointed to the position of Construction Code Official shall be as
follows:
(1) License: must hold New Jersey Construction Code Official license.
(2) Experience: must have three years of municipal construction
official experience.
F. Subcode officials. Within the Division of Construction, under the
direction of the Construction Code Official there shall be subcode
officials. Subcode officials shall enforce the provisions of those
subcodes for which they are responsible in accordance with Part II and
qualified in accordance with Part IV of the State Uniform Construction
Code and for which they have been appointed. Each subcode official
shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of the
appropriate subcode, subject to the procedures of the enforcing agency
as administered by the Construction Official. However, each subcode
official shall have exclusive decisionmaking authority with respect to
the technical provisions of the subcode for which he or she has been
appointed the official. The subcode official shall enforce the State
Uniform Construction Code and all applicable municipal ordinances
and shall:
§ 3-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-74
1:55
(1) Review those aspects of the application, plans and specifications
appropriate to his or her subcode for approval and release to the
Construction Official for issuance of the permit.
(2) Receive and review directly from the applicant applications for
minor or emergency work for approval and release to the
Construction Official for issuance of the permit.
(3) Comply with the time limitations for review as determined by the
Construction Official.
(4) Review requests for variations as necessary.
(5) Perform all required inspections within three business days of the
time for which inspection has been requested.
(6) Issue in the name of the enforcing agency notices of violation and
notify the Construction Official of the same. The subcode official
may issue verbal orders at the job site and shall record such orders
in his or her inspection report.
(7) Complete reports of all inspections performed.
(8) Issue stop-work orders in the name of the enforcing agency and
notify the Construction Official of the same.
(9) Perform final inspections and notify the Construction Official of
approval in order that the Construction Official may issue a
certificate of occupancy.
(10) Make inspection, review submitted date and notify the
Construction Official of approval in the case of a change of use or a
request for a certificate of continued occupancy.
(11) Assist the Construction Official in the preparation of all reports
required by the State Construction Code.
(12) Attend meetings and hearings as required by the state regulations.
(13) Issue documentation and certification, such as cut-in cards, to
utilities and/or public agencies if required by state regulations.
(14) Carry out such other functions as are necessary and appropriate to
the position of subcode official.
G. Procedure for collection of fines. Whenever the Construction Official, or
appropriate subcode official, issues a notice of violation of the Uniform
Construction Code, the following procedural steps shall be followed. It
is intended that these internal procedures supplement and be used in
conjunction with state regulations and not supersede said regulations.
(1) Unless public health and safety demands otherwise, a notice of
violation shall allow 30 days for compliance. This compliance
§ 3-74 JACKSON CODE § 3-74
1:56
§ 3-75. Division of Recreation and Senior Services. [Added
4-25-2017 by Ord. No. 07-17]
The Division of Recreation and Senior Services shall:
period may be extended by the Construction Official if the violator
makes a good faith effort to effectuate compliance.
(2) Unless state regulations require the immediate issuance of a
penalty, upon the failure to correct the violation prior to the
expiration of the compliance period provided in Subsection G(1), a
fine shall be assessed in the manner provided in state regulations.
(3) The amount of the fine assessed shall be in accordance with state
regulations.
(4) If the fine is not paid within 30 days of assessment, the
Construction Code Official shall refer the matter to the Township
Council to authorize collection pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:58-10 et
seq., through the Township Attorney.
(5) The Clerk shall keep a list of violators upon whom fines have been
reduced to judgment. Prior to the execution of any purchase order,
the Chief Financial Officer shall check the list of outstanding
judgments. If the person or entity due monies under the purchase
order has an outstanding judgment, then the Chief Financial
Officer shall refer the matter, with appropriate documentation, to
the Township Attorney for institution of necessary action to collect
upon the outstanding judgment.
A. Administer the work of the Division, and administer and operate
playgrounds, facilities for indoor and outdoor sports, athletic, cultural
and recreational programs and activities for children, youth and adults
of the Township, including celebration of events, holiday activities and
summer camps; and where authorized by law and by ordinance of the
Township Council, charge and collect on behalf of the Township a
reasonable fee for each person for admission to or use of facilities,
programs and activities provided for under this provision.
B. Use public school property by agreement with the Board of Education.
C. Plan and develop additional public recreational areas and facilities.
D. Cooperate with other municipal departments, service clubs and
organizations in furthering recreational and cultural interests in the
Township.
E. Adopt reasonable rules, regulations and bylaws, subject to approval of
the Council, for the conduct of persons participating in programs and
activities or utilizing recreation facilities or equipment sponsored by
the Division.
§ 3-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-75
1:57
§ 3-76. Recreation Advisory Board. [Added 4-25-2017 by Ord. No.
07-17]
F. Study, investigate, develop and recommend recreation programs in
conjunction with the Recreation Committee.
G. Conduct studies of the present and future recreational needs of the
Township and develop immediate and long-range plans in consultation
with the Recreation Committee for recommendation to the Mayor and
the Township Council.
H. Maintain such records as may be required to control Division receipts,
property and personnel, and provide information to the Mayor for
budgeting and financing of recreational programs. Such records shall
include time cards, or the equivalent Township-approved time-tracking
device, for part-time and seasonal personnel.
I. Be responsible to the Township Council for the proper custody and
preservation of the books, records and property under the Division's
control, and the faithful performance of the duties of the Division.
J. Submit to the Mayor and Business Administrator monthly reports
concerning the conduct and progress of the Division, including receipts
and monies.
K. Administer the expenditure of funds in accordance with the annual
budget.
L. Hire part-time and seasonal staff as needed, with the approval of the
Mayor, to carry out the functions of the Division.
A. Organization. There is hereby established within the Division of
Recreation and Senior Services a Recreation Advisory Board, which
shall consist of a number of representatives from various recreational
organizations located within the Township as set forth below.
B. Membership. The Recreation Advisory Board shall consist of one
representative, appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of
the Township Council, from each organization substantially utilizing
Township facilities. Those organizations shall include, but are not
limited to, Jackson Little League, Jackson Soccer, Jackson Lacrosse,
Jackson Roller Hockey, Holbrook Little League, American Youth
Football and Recreation Softball.
C. Term. All members of the Recreation Advisory Board shall serve for the
balance of the calendar year in the year of their initial appointment.
Thereafter, all appointments to the Board shall be for a term of one
year, expiring on December 31 of the year of appointment. All members
shall be appointed by resolution. The Council liaisons to the Recreation
Committee shall also serve as members of the Recreation Advisory
Board.
§ 3-75 JACKSON CODE § 3-76
1:58
D. Alternate members. The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the
Township Council, may, by resolution, appoint one alternate member
from each organization represented in the Recreation Advisory Board.
Alternate members shall take the place of a member from the same
organization unable to attend a meeting. The length of the terms of the
alternate members shall be the same as the length of the terms of the
regular members of the Board.
E. Compensation. The members of the Board shall serve without
compensation.
F. Meetings; designation of Chairperson. The Recreation Advisory Board
shall meet no less than twice per year to carry out the functions stated
in Subsection G of this section. At the first meeting of the year, the
members of the Board shall hold an election to designate a
Chairperson. The Chairperson shall preside over all meetings, be
responsible for establishing the meeting agenda and act as the liaison
between the Board and the Township Council and Assistant Recreation
Supervisor. The agenda shall, at a minimum, provide each organization
represented in the Board the opportunity to discuss their condition,
needs, goals and objectives. If additional meetings during any given
year are needed, a date and time shall be agreed upon by a majority
vote at least 30 days prior to the additional meeting. At the conclusion
of the meeting, the Board may engage in an open discussion as needed.
G. Functions and duties. The Board is purely advisory in nature. All
decisions with respect to recreation programs and projects are the
responsibility of the governing body. The Recreation Advisory Board
shall:
(1) Formulate recommendations to the Mayor and Township Council
concerning the development of recreation programs for residents
of all ages;
(2) Act in an advisory capacity to the Mayor and Township Council in
all matters pertaining to the recreation programs and the
utilization of recreational areas, including, but not limited to, the
scheduling, maintenance and utilization of such recreation areas
and the need for equipment, services and building space for
recreation;
(3) Make such individual studies and reports as may be requested by
the Mayor, Township Council or Assistant Recreation Supervisor;
(4) Refer all maintenance concerns to the Assistant Recreation
Supervisor; and
(5) Recommend fees for participation in Township-organized
recreation activities and leagues.
H. Vacancies. A vacancy occurring other than by expiration of a term shall
be filled for the unexpired term only, and the new appointee shall be
§ 3-76 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-76
1:59
§ 3-77. Recreation/Special Events Coordinator. [Added 4-25-2017 by
Ord. No. 07-17]
§ 3-78. Senior Services Program; Recreation Program
Administrator. [Added 4-25-2017 by Ord. No. 07-17]
There is hereby created within the Division of Recreation and Senior
Services the Senior Services Program, the head of which shall be the
Recreation Program Administrator. The Recreation Program Administrator
shall be appointed on the basis of education, background and experience
in the field of senior citizen program administration, which shall include
graduation from a four-year course at an accredited college or university,
and three years' experience in planning, developing and supervising
recreational programs designed especially for the elderly. The Recreation
Program Administrator shall coordinate and develop senior citizens
programs and activities in the Township.
§ 3-79. Powers and duties of Senior Services Program. [Added
4-25-2017 by Ord. No. 07-17]
Under the direction and supervision of the Recreation Program
Administrator, the Senior Services Program shall:
appointed from amongst the members of the organization which the
prior appointee had represented on the Board.
A. There may be a Recreation/Special Events Coordinator, who shall assist
Administration in the administration and operation of the programs and
activities of the Division. The Recreation/Special Events Coordinator
shall be appointed by the Business Administrator, with the approval of
the Mayor. The Recreation/Special Events Coordinator shall possess a
bachelor's degree in recreation, or a closely related field, and have
three years of experience in managing and operating recreational
programs and activities. Additional experience may be substituted for
the education requirement on a year-for-year basis, with 30 semesterhour
credits being equal to one year of experience.
B. The Recreation/Special Events Coordinator shall carry out such duties
as specifically designated by Administration.
A. Develop programs and coordinate projects directed to the development
of needed senior services in the Township.
B. Act as liaison between the Mayor and Township Council and various
senior service agencies and programs, both public and private, on the
local, state and federal levels.
C. Actively seek out and advise of grants, funds and loans which may be
available for senior services and related programs.
D. Develop an understanding of the problems of senior citizens.
§ 3-76 JACKSON CODE § 3-79
1:60
E. Establish a central location where senior citizens facing the problems of
aging can turn for assistance through information on community
resources.
F. Identify, locate and expand available community resources for senior
citizens and the making of efforts to cause such resources to be more
readily accessible and available to those who need them.
G. Act as a liaison between individual senior citizens, senior citizen groups
and community resources and facilities and assistance to senior
citizens.
H. Refer to the appropriate municipal officials any problems of individual
senior citizens or groups of senior citizens relating to the functioning of
municipal government, its agencies and instrumentalities.
I. Distribute information on resources available to senior citizens.
J. Render assistance to senior citizens in dealing with the problems of
aging, including assistance programs for senior citizens, recreation,
social and entertainment programs available for senior citizens.
§ 3-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-79
1:61

ARTICLE VII
(Reserved)14
§ 3-80. through § 3-88. (Reserved)
14.Editor’s Note: Former Art. VII, Department of Community Development and Enforcement,
as amended, was repealed 12-22-2015 by Ord. No. 33-15.
§ 3-80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-80
1:63

ARTICLE VIII
Department of Law
§ 3-89. Creation; Director; qualifications.
There is hereby created the Department of Law, the head of which shall
be the Director of Law, who shall be the Municipal Attorney. The Municipal
Attorney may enter into a compensation agreement with the Township to
be negotiated by the Mayor and approved by the Township Council. To be
appointed to the position of Director of Law, an individual shall meet the
following requirements:
A. Shall be a graduate from an accredited college or university with a
bachelor's degree and a graduate of an accredited law school with a
juris doctorate degree.
B. Duly admitted to the practice of law in the State of New Jersey for at
least five years and an attorney at law of the State of New Jersey in
good standing.
C. Powers and duties. The Municipal Attorney shall be a legal advisor to
the Mayor, Council and all departments, except as otherwise provided
by the Charter or the Township Code. He or she shall prosecute and
defend actions and proceedings by and against the Township and every
department thereof. In furtherance of these general powers and
without limitation thereto, he or she shall:
(1) Advise the Council and its members, the Mayor and other officers
of the Township, as to all matters which may be submitted to her or
him for his or her opinion.
(2) Review and approve all contracts, deeds, documents and
instruments prior to the execution thereof by or on behalf of the
Township.
(3) Institute litigation and conduct appeals from orders, decisions or
judgments affecting any interest of the Township as he or she may
in his or her discretion determine to be necessary or desirable.
(4) Subject to the approval of Council, have the power to enter into any
agreement, compromise or settlement of any litigation in which the
Township is involved.
(5) Render opinions in writing upon any question of law submitted to
him or her by the Mayor, the Council, the Business Administrator,
Municipal Clerk, Tax Assessor, or the head of any department.
(6) Maintain a record of all actions, suits, proceedings and matters
which relate to the Township's interest and report thereon from
time to time as the Mayor or Council may require.
(7) Attend such Council meetings as requested by Council.
§ 3-89 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-89
1:65
§ 3-90. Special counsel.
Special counsel may only be appointed by resolution of the Township
Council. Such appointments shall be on a contractual basis and subject to
contractual approval by the Council as required under the law, including but
not limited to, the Local Public Contracts Law.15
§ 3-91. Creation of position of Municipal Prosecutor.
There is hereby created the position of Municipal Prosecutor.
§ 3-92. Qualifications of Municipal Prosecutor.
The Municipal Prosecutor shall be a graduate of an accredited law school
and an attorney at law of the State of New Jersey in good standing.
§ 3-93. Appointment and term of office of Municipal Prosecutor.
The Municipal Prosecutor shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice
and consent of the Township Council. He or she shall serve for a term of
one year and until his or her successor is appointed and qualified. More
than one Municipal Prosecutor may be appointed. If the Township appoints
two or more Municipal Prosecutors, the Township shall designate a "Chief
Municipal Prosecutor" who shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice
and consent of the Township Council. The Chief Municipal Prosecutor shall
have authority over other prosecutors serving that Court with respect to the
performance of their duties.
§ 3-94. Duties of Municipal Prosecutor.
The Municipal Prosecutor shall appear in the Municipal Court on behalf
of the State of New Jersey or the Township of Jackson in any case therein
pending, upon the request of the Municipal Judge, the Director of Public
Safety or directive of the Mayor or Council. He or she shall exercise the
powers and duties assigned to such office by N.J.S.A. 2B:25-5, any other
applicable statutes, and Rules of Court of the State of New Jersey.
§ 3-95. Compensation of Municipal Prosecutor.
The Municipal Prosecutor shall be compensated in accordance with a
professional services contract as approved by resolution of the Township
Council. The compensation shall be in lieu of any and all other fees;
provided, however, that when a Municipal Prosecutor is assigned to
prosecute a de novo appeal in Superior Court, the prosecutor shall be
entitled to additional compensation unless the municipality expressly
provides otherwise at the time the compensation is fixed.
(8) Have such other and different functions, powers and duties as may
be provided by the Charter, this chapter or other ordinance.
15.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.
§ 3-89 JACKSON CODE § 3-96
1:66
§ 3-96. Municipal Public Defender; office created; qualifications;
term.
There is hereby created the position of the Municipal Public Defender. The
Mayor, with the advice and consent of Township Council, may designate
one or more attorneys at law of the State of New Jersey to provide
representation of persons entitled by law to appointment of counsel
pursuant to the terms of N.J.S.A. 2B:24-3 for crimes and offenses cognizable
by the Municipal Court of the Township of Jackson. He or she shall serve
for a term of one year and thereafter until his or her successor has been
appointed and qualified. The Municipal Public Defender shall be a graduate
of an accredited law school and be an attorney at law of the State of New
Jersey in good standing.
§ 3-97. Duties of Public Defender.
The Public Defender shall defend indigent persons in the Municipal Court
of the Township of Jackson upon being requested to do so by the Municipal
Judge and shall perform such other duties as may be required by the N.J.S.A.
2B:24-6, other applicable statute, and the Rules of Court.
§ 3-98. Application fee for Public Defender.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2B:24-1 et seq., the Township of Jackson shall require
any person applying for representation by the Municipal Public Defender
to pay an application fee of not more than $200. The Municipal Court
may waive any required application fee, in whole or in part, if the Court
determines, in its discretion, that the application fee represents an
unreasonable burden on the person seeking representation.
§ 3-99. Compensation of Public Defender.
The Municipal Public Defender shall be compensated in accordance with
a professional services contract as approved by resolution of the Township
Council. The compensation shall be in lieu of any and all other fees;
provided, however, that when a Municipal Public Defender is assigned to
any interlocutory appeals in Superior Court, the Municipal Public Defender
shall be entitled to additional compensation unless the municipality
expressly provides otherwise at the time the compensation is fixed. The
compensation of a Municipal Public Defender for services rendered shall be
in lieu of any and all other compensation by the Township.
§ 3-100. Removal of Public Defender.
In addition to any other means provided by law for the removal from office
of a public official, a Municipal Public Defender may be removed by the
Township for good cause and after a public hearing, and upon due notice
and an opportunity to be heard.
§ 3-96 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-101
1:67
§ 3-101. Other representation.
The Municipal Public Defender may represent private clients in any
municipality, including the municipality where they act as a Municipal
Public Defender, subject to the Rules of Court Governing the Conduct of
Lawyers, Judges and Court Personnel.
§ 3-101 JACKSON CODE § 3-101
1:68
ARTICLE IX
Department of Public Safety
[Amended 4-22-2008 by Ord. No. 15-08]
§ 3-102. Police force and officers continued under Division of
Police; duties; rules and regulations.
§ 3-103. Services established.
The Division of Police within the Department shall be divided into the
Uniform Services, Special Services and Investigative Services. The head of
each Service shall be a Captain or other ranking officer as designated by
the Chief of Police from within the membership of the Division and shall
have such duties and responsibilities as shall be determined by the Chief
of Police in his or her discretion. In addition to the Division of Police, the
Municipal Alliance Committee and the Office of Emergency Management
shall be under the auspices of the Department of Public Safety.
§ 3-104. Personnel positions. [Amended 11-14-2011 by Ord. No.
35-11]
The Division of Police shall consist of up to 87 sworn officers, all of whom
shall have been duly appointed and shall serve in the following positions:
A. There is hereby continued in the Township of Jackson, in the County of
Ocean, the police force under the auspices of the Division of Police,
Department of Public Safety, of the Township of Jackson, and is
established in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118 et
seq.
B. Police officers regularly employed by the Township of Jackson at the
time of passage of this chapter shall continue as members of the police
forces of the Division of Police, Department of Public Safety, in the
Township of Jackson, in the County of Ocean.
C. The police forces under the Division of Police, Department of Public
Safety, shall preserve the public peace; protect life and property;
detect, arrest and prosecute offenders of the laws of New Jersey and the
ordinances of the Township of Jackson; direct and control traffic;
provide assistance and protection during emergencies; provide
appearances in court; cooperate with all other law enforcement
agencies; and provide training for the efficiency of its members and
officers.
D. The Business Administrator shall be designated as the appropriate
authority as provided by N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118.
A. One Chief of Police.
B. Three Captains.
C. Four Lieutenants.
§ 3-102 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-104
1:69
§ 3-105. Chief of Police.
§ 3-106. Appointment of Police Physicians. [Amended 12-11-2012
by Ord. No. 23-12]
Each Police Physician shall be appointed by the Township Council for the
term of one year, beginning on the first day of January of the year for which
the appointment shall be made. To be eligible, the appointee must be duly
licensed under the laws of the State of New Jersey for the general practice
of medicine.
§ 3-107. Appointments and tenure within Division of Police;
qualifications; leaves of absence.
D. Twelve Sergeants.
E. Up to 67 patrol officers.
A. The Chief of Police shall be the executive head of the Department.
B. The Chief of Police shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of Township Council and shall receive such compensation
within the Township Salary Ordinance.16
C. To be qualified for appointment, the Chief of Police shall hold a
minimum of a bachelor's degree from an accredited institution and shall
have at least 10 years of experience as a law enforcement officer, at
least five years of which shall be command level experience at or above
the rank of Lieutenant in municipal law enforcement. Four or more
years of command experience at or above the rank of Lieutenant in
municipal law enforcement may be substituted for the degree
requirement.
A. All appointments by the Township and promotions shall be in
accordance with applicable statutory and regulatory requirements for
the hiring of police officers.
B. In addition to the specific qualifications for appointment to police
officer as required by N.J.S.A. 40A:14-122, or special law enforcement
officer as required by N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.10, the following general
qualifications shall apply. No person shall be appointed an officer in the
Division unless that person:
(1) Completes an application on a form provided for such purpose. Any
misstatement or nonstatement of essential facts in such application
shall be sufficient cause for rejection of the applicant or for
dismissal from the Department if not discovered until after the
appointment is made.
(2) Is a citizen of the United States.
16.Editor's Note: See Ch. 62, Salaries and Compensation.
§ 3-104 JACKSON CODE § 3-107
1:70
§ 3-108. Probationary officers; reimbursements.
Probationary police officers shall pay for initial expenses for uniforms
received by them for use in connection with their probationary employment.
The Township shall reimburse the probationary officer for uniforms upon
the satisfactory completion of the probationary period and upon the
appointment, for an indefinite term, of said probationary officer to the
contemplated office in the Division of Police.
§ 3-109. Appointment after appropriate competitive examination.
All appointments to the office of Police Captain, Police Lieutenant and
Police Sergeant, respectively, shall be made after appropriate competitive
examinations conducted in such manner as shall be approved by the New
Jersey Merit System Board, and appointments shall be made from among
the candidates in accordance with Department of Personnel regulations
for the selection of police officers. The Chief of Police shall make said
appointments with the advice and consent of the Mayor. Said officers shall
be sound in body and in good health as determined by a Police Physician
after physical examination of the candidates.
§ 3-110. Acting or substitute personnel.
In the event that, by reason of absence, illness or other cause, the Chief
of Police, or a Police Captain, or a Police Lieutenant, or a Police Sergeant,
should be temporarily unable to perform the duties of his or her office, such
duties shall be performed in the interim as hereinafter provided:
(3) Is able to read, write and speak the English language well and
intelligently.
(4) Is sound in body and of good health.
(5) Is of good moral character.
(6) Never has been convicted of any criminal offense involving moral
turpitude.
(7) Has his or her fingerprints taken, which shall be filed with the State
Police and the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
(8) Having been a member of the armed forces, shall have completed
such services under honorable conditions.
C. Any full-time police officer who shall be injured, ill or disabled from any
cause shall be granted a leave of absence with pay not exceeding one
year pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-137, provided that the appointed
Police Physician shall certify to such illness or disability.
A. A Police Captain, when so ordered by the Chief of Police and the Mayor,
shall temporarily have the authority and perform the duties of the Chief
of Police; and if no Police Captain should be able to act, a Police
§ 3-107 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-110
1:71
§ 3-111. Special police officers.
Lieutenant, when so ordered by the Mayor, shall temporarily have the
authority and perform the duties of the Chief of Police; and if no Police
Lieutenant should be able to act, a Police Sergeant, when so ordered by
the Mayor, shall serve.
B. A Police Lieutenant, when so ordered by the Chief of Police and the
Mayor, shall temporarily have the authority and perform the duties of a
Police Captain.
C. A Police Sergeant, when so ordered by the Chief of Police and the
Mayor, shall temporarily have the authority and perform the duties of a
Police Lieutenant.
D. A patrol officer, when so ordered by the Chief of Police and the Mayor,
shall serve as a Police Sergeant; and in the event that such designation
shall not have been made prior to the beginning of a regular shift or
tour of duty, the uniformed patrol officer on duty during such tour of
duty and who has the longest record of police service in the Township
shall serve as Police Sergeant during such tour of duty.
A. The Township may appoint from time to time special law enforcement
officers in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.8 et seq. for terms not
exceeding one year, which shall be for 12 consecutive months. They
shall possess and exercise all the powers and duties provided by said
statutes during their term in office, but shall not be continued as
regular members of the Division of Police, Department of Public Safety,
and shall not be entitled to tenure. The Chief of Police may authorize
special law enforcement officers when on duty to exercise the same
powers and authority as regular members of the Division of Police,
Department of Public Safety, including the carrying of firearms and the
power of arrest in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.15.
B. Classification. There shall be the following two classes of special police
officers pursuant to law:
(1) Class 1: Officers of this class shall be authorized to perform routine
traffic detail, spectator control and similar duties. Such officers
shall have the duty to issue summonses for disorderly person's
offenses, petty disorderly person's offenses, violations of municipal
ordinances and violations of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes. The
use of a firearm by an officer of this class shall be strictly
prohibited, and no officer of this class shall be assigned any duties
which may require the carrying of or the use of a firearm. The
number of Class 1 officers shall not exceed 25% of the total number
of regular police officers.
(2) Class 2: Officers of this class are authorized to exercise the full
powers and duties of regular police officers. The use of a firearm by
such officer may only be authorized upon successful completion of
§ 3-110 JACKSON CODE § 3-111
1:72
§ 3-112. Rules and regulations of Division of Police.
training and instruction as required by law. The number of Class 2
officers shall not exceed 25% of the total number of regular police
officers.
C. Each special police officer shall receive compensation as set by the
Mayor as indicated in the appointment letter, which shall be within the
range provided for in the current Salary Ordinance.17
D. Use of uniforms and equipment limited. No special police officer shall
wear the police uniform except while actually on duty, nor shall any
special police officer carry any police equipment in any private vehicle
unless reporting to or returning from duty.
E. Use of private vehicle restricted. No special police officer shall use his
or her private vehicle upon official police business unless directly
ordered to do so by the Chief of Police.
F. Compliance with rules and regulations. Every special police officer,
while on duty, shall abide by all the rules and regulations of the Division
of Police, Department of Public Safety. Any violation of the rules and
regulations, where the penalty for a police officer is a suspension or
dismissal, may result in the immediate dismissal of the special police
officer.
A. Establishment of policies and procedures; posting of notice; when
effective.
(1) In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118, the Business
Administrator, in his or her capacity as the appropriate authority,
shall adopt and promulgate rules and regulations for the
government of the police force within the Division of Police,
Department of Public Safety, and for the discipline of its members,
after consideration of the recommendations by the Chief of Police.
(2) All rules and regulations promulgated by the appropriate authority
shall be posted upon the Department bulletin board and distributed
via memorandum to members of the Division of Police. An
acknowledgment of receipt shall accompany each manual and shall
state that the policies and procedures, rules and regulations apply
to all members and employees of the Division of Police. The
acknowledgment shall be signed and dated by each employee
receiving the manual. Said acknowledgment shall be placed in the
employee's personnel file.
(3) Such rules or regulations, including amendments thereto, shall not
take effect until five days after posting.
B. Manual form; distribution of copies.
17.Editor's Note: See Ch. 62, Salaries and Compensation.
§ 3-111 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-112
1:73
§ 3-113. Authority and duties of Chief of Police.
The Chief of Police shall be the head of the police force and shall be
directly responsible to the appropriate authority for the efficiency and
routine day-to-day operations of the Police Department. The Chief of Police
shall, pursuant to policies established by the appropriate authority:
§ 3-114. Authority and duties of Police Physician.
Each Police Physician shall have and exercise the following authority and
shall perform the following duties:
(1) Rules and regulations for the efficient operation of the Police
Division, the government of the police force and for the discipline
of its members shall be provided to all members of the Police
Department. The rules and regulations may be amended at any
time by the appropriate authority. Whenever such amendments or
additions to the police rules and regulations are adopted, copies of
such amendments or additions shall be supplied to all members of
the Police Division.
(2) A copy of the Rules and Regulations of the Division of Police and the
Division of Police Policies and Procedures shall be maintained in
the following locations:
(a) The office of the Business Administrator.
(b) The office of the Chief of Police.
(c) The Watch Commander's office.
A. Administer and enforce rules and regulations and special emergency
directives for the disposition and discipline of the force and its officers
and personnel;
B. Have, exercise, and discharge the functions, powers and duties of the
force;
C. Prescribe the duties and assignments of all subordinates and other
personnel;
D. Delegate such of his authority as he may deem necessary for the
efficient operation of the force to be exercised under his direction and
supervision; and
E. Report at least monthly to the appropriate authority in such form as
shall be prescribed by such authority on the operation of the force
during the preceding month, and make such other reports as may be
requested by such authority.
A. He or she shall, only upon request, advise the Mayor and Township
Council and the Chief of Police in all matters that may arise in the
course of operation and activities of the Department and shall likewise
§ 3-112 JACKSON CODE § 3-114
1:74
§ 3-115. Authority and duties of Police Captain.
Each Police Captain shall have and exercise the following authority and
perform the following duties:
advise in all matters pertaining to sanitation and public health that may
require the attention of the Department.
B. He or she shall, when requested by the Mayor, Business Administrator
or the Chief of Police, make a physical examination of an applicant for
an appointment to office in the Division of Police and shall submit his or
her report of such examination to the Chief of Police.
C. Upon the request of the Mayor, Business Administrator or Chief of
Police, he or she shall make a physical examination of the Police
Captain, all Police Lieutenants, Police Sergeants and patrol officers and
shall submit a report of his or her findings to the Chief of Police.
D. He or she shall, upon the request of any member of the Division of
Police effectuating the arrest of a person for driving under the influence
of alcohol or drugs, examine the accused and submit a report of his or
her findings to said arresting officer.
E. He or she shall, when requested by any member of the Division of
Police, examine any person taken into custody who evidences or
complains of any illness and shall submit a report of his or her findings
to said police officer.
F. He or she shall, when requested by the governing body of the Township,
conduct a physical examination or a mental examination of any police
officer and submit a report of his or her findings to said governing body,
with his or her recommendations.
A. He or she, if so designated by the Mayor, shall be next in command to
the Chief of Police and, in the case of absence or disability of the Chief
of Police, shall perform all the duties of the Chief of Police when so
ordered by the Mayor. He or she shall be superior in rank to Police
Lieutenants, Police Sergeants, patrol officers and special officers
assigned to active duty.
B. It shall be his or her duty to take cognizance of any and all neglect of
duty, disobedience of orders and other offenses on the part of members
of the Division of Police. He or she shall also ensure that the police
headquarters and other property of the Division of Police are kept in
proper order and condition and that strict discipline is always
maintained and that efficient service is performed by the Division of
Police.
C. He or she may, in the absence of the Chief of Police, issue such orders or
take such action as may be necessary, but in every case shall make a full
report of the entire occurrence to the Chief of Police at the earliest
practicable moment.
§ 3-114 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-115
1:75
§ 3-116. Authority and duties of Police Lieutenant.
Each Police Lieutenant shall have and exercise the following authority and
perform the following duties:
D. He or she shall ensure that every person connected with the Division of
Police is properly instructed in his or her duties by the Sergeants,
paying particular attention to the instruction of new members of the
force. He or she shall see that the Police Sergeants require all members
of the Division of Police to be attired in the proper uniform, with the
proper equipment to perform their duties.
E. He or she shall assist the Chief of Police in the performance of his or her
duties and shall be responsible for seeing that all laws of the State of
New Jersey and ordinances of the Township are duly enforced and
observed and that the public peace is maintained.
F. He or she shall, during his or her tour of duty, in addition to the
performance of the duties herein listed, exercise the authority and
perform the duties of a patrol officer as far as practicable.
G. He or she shall, in the absence of the Chief of Police, issue such orders
and give such instructions as he or she may deem necessary or proper,
from time to time, in the operation, administration and management of
the Division of Police and in relation to the work of the special police
officers assigned to active duty.
H. He or she shall, by virtue of his office, be vested with all the authority
and duty of a patrol officer with respect to the making of arrests.
I. He or she shall keep him- or herself fully informed at all times with
respect to conditions in the Township affecting the public safety and
good order.
J. He or she shall communicate to the other members of the Division of
Police and to the special police officers assigned to active duty all
orders made and instructions given by the Chief of Police in relation to
their work and shall require the prompt performance thereof and
compliance therewith.
K. He or she shall observe the work of all other members of the Division of
Police and the special police officers assigned to active duty and, as
occasion may require, shall criticize constructively the work of
individual officers and give such instruction and direction as may be
appropriate to improve the efficiency of their work.
L. He or she shall be administrative agent of the Chief of Police and shall
supervise and direct the Lieutenants, Sergeants and patrol officers,
whether uniformed or plain-clothed, in the proper administration of
their duties and shall be responsible to the Chief of Police for the proper
performance of their duties.
§ 3-115 JACKSON CODE § 3-116
1:76
A. He or she shall be next in command to the Captain, and in case of the
absence or disability of the Captain, the most senior Police Lieutenant
shall perform all of the duties of the Police Captain when so ordered by
the Mayor. He or she shall be superior in rank to Police Sergeants,
patrol officers and special officers assigned to active duty.
B. It shall be his or her duty to take cognizance of any and all neglect of
duty, disobedience of orders and other offenses on the part of members
of the Division of Police. He or she shall also ensure that the police
headquarters and other property of the Division of Police are kept in
proper order and condition and that strict discipline is always
maintained and that efficient service is performed by the Division of
Police.
C. He or she may issue such orders or take such action as may be
necessary, but in every case shall make a full report of the entire
occurrence to the Chief of Police at the earliest practicable moment.
D. In every case of disobedience, violation of rules or other offenses on the
part of any member of the Division of Police, Police Lieutenants shall
report the same as soon as possible to the Chief of Police and, in the
case of negligence or other dereliction by any person on duty at police
headquarters who is not employed in the police service, shall make a
full report to the proper authorities.
E. He or she shall devote his or her energies and plan his or her activities
for the health, safety, welfare and general well-being of the citizens and
residents of the Township and for the efficient and responsible
administration of the Division of Police. He or she shall stimulate in the
members of the Division of Police a concern for the well-being of all the
people and property in the community and an appreciation and respect
for the rights and liberties of all persons. He or she shall constantly
strive for a high degree of excellence in the quality of law enforcement
and service rendered by them.
F. He or she shall ensure that every person connected with the Division of
Police is properly instructed in his or her duties by the Sergeants,
paying particular attention to the instruction of new members of the
force. He or she shall see that the Police Sergeants require all members
of the Division of Police to be attired in the proper uniform, with the
proper equipment to perform their duties.
G. He or she shall be responsible for the maintenance of all records, files
and reports pertaining to the operations of the Division of Police.
H. He or she shall assist the Chief of Police in the performance of his or her
duties and shall be responsible for seeing that all the laws of the State
of New Jersey and ordinances of the Township are duly enforced and
observed and that public peace is maintained.
§ 3-116 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-116
1:77
§ 3-117. Authority and duties of Police Sergeants.
Each Police Sergeant shall have and exercise the following authority and
perform the following duties:
I. He or she shall supervise the uniformed members of the Division of
Police and shall be responsible to the Chief of Police for the correct
performance of their duties.
J. He or she shall, during his or her tour of duty, in addition to the
performance of the duties herein listed, exercise the authority and
perform the duties of a patrol officer as far as practicable.
K. He or she shall be responsible for the scheduling of the work of the
Police Sergeants, patrol officers and special police officers to ensure
that the proper number of officers will be on duty at all times.
A. He or she shall, during his or her regular tour of duty, be superior in
rank to and have charge of all patrol officers and special police officers
who shall be serving on the same shift and shall, generally, supervise
the work of all said members and shall give such instructions and
directions as he or she shall deem necessary for the proper and efficient
operation of the Division of Police in accordance with the provisions and
regulations of this chapter.
B. He or she shall designate the streets, avenues and areas of the
Township to be patrolled by such members of the Division of Police as
shall have been assigned to patrol duty on his or her shift.
C. He or she shall see that officers reporting to him or her properly relieve
the officers going off duty and that the officers are in proper uniform,
with the necessary equipment to perform their duties properly.
D. He or she shall assign all patrol officers to their respective duties and
shall note whether or not the officers to be relieved are at their given
relieving point and in proper condition.
E. He or she shall constantly patrol his or her assigned area and shall
supervise the work of the patrol officers in patrol cars and performing
any other type of duty.
F. He or she shall review for approval all written reports made by the
officers under his or her supervision during a tour of duty. If reports fail
to meet with his or her approval, he or she shall instruct the officers
under his or her supervision as to the proper form and information to be
supplied.
G. He or she shall perform his or her duties under the supervision and
direction of the Police Lieutenant and shall be responsible for seeing
that all laws of the State of New Jersey and ordinances of the Township
of Jackson are duly observed and enforced and that the public peace is
§ 3-116 JACKSON CODE § 3-117
1:78
§ 3-118. Authority and duties of patrol officers.
Each patrol officer shall have and exercise the following duties:
maintained. The Police Sergeants shall perform such duties as may be
assigned to them, from time to time, by the Chief of Police.
H. It shall be the duty of the Police Sergeants to take cognizance of any
and all neglect of duty, disobedience of orders and other offenses by
members of the Division of Police and to take immediate steps to
correct or eliminate same and to report same to their appropriate
superiors. They shall also ensure that the police headquarters and
property of the Division of Police are kept in proper order and condition
and that strict discipline is always maintained and that efficient service
is performed by the force.
I. He or she shall, during his or her regular tour of duty, in addition to the
performance of the duties of Sergeant specified herein, exercise the
authority and perform the duties of a patrol officer as far as practicable.
A. To perform general police work and to be the primary public relations
representative of the Division of Police.
B. To conduct preliminary investigations at the scenes of crimes or
accidents and to gather evidence, administer first aid, locate and
interview witnesses, make proper arrests and submit proper reports.
C. To watch particularly the actions of suspected criminals.
D. To be responsible for all phases of police work, not just his or her
specific assignments.
E. To confine his or her patrol within the limits of the Township of Jackson
except when making arrests or making urgent investigations or when
ordered elsewhere by his or her superior officer.
F. To maintain constant patrol of the Township except when taking a
proper lunch period or for personal necessity.
G. To note and investigate all vehicles, the driver or occupants of which
arouse suspicion, and question the occupants and driver, learning
names, ages, sexes, residence and other pertinent information,
together with the make, license number, serial number, color and type
of vehicle.
H. To note all defects in highways, sidewalks, buildings, etc., from which
accidents might arise, and when unable to immediately adjust such
defect, to notify his or her superior officer by written report or, where
urgency is required, by phone or other means.
I. To report at once to the desk officer all defective traffic signals,
streetlights, etc.
§ 3-117 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-118
1:79
§ 3-119. Rules of discipline.
§ 3-120. Members to secure uniforms; maintenance.
Every member of the Division of Police shall, under the supervision of the
Chief of Police, provide for him- or herself the necessary police uniforms,
which shall comply with standards and specifications prescribed, from time
to time, by the Township Council and shall at all times maintain his or her
uniforms in neat, clean and presentable condition.
J. To report to his or her superior officer as quickly as possible if, for any
reason, he or she cannot report by police radio.
K. To be responsible for seeing that all laws of the State of New Jersey and
ordinances of the Township of Jackson are duly observed and enforced
and that the public peace is maintained. He or she shall also be
responsible for the protection of life and property and for the health,
safety, welfare and general well-being of the citizens and residents of
the Township.
L. To appreciate and respect the rights and liberties of all persons and to
constantly strive for a high degree of excellence in the quality of law
enforcement and services rendered by him.
A. Authority to discipline.
(1) Within the limitations set forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:14-147 to
40A:14-151, inclusive, Article IX of this chapter of the Code of the
Township of Jackson, New Jersey, any appropriate collective
bargaining agreements between the Township of Jackson affecting
the employees effected by the discipline, the Rules and Regulations
of the Township, Division of Police, Department of Public Safety
and the Division of Police Policies and Procedures, the
departmental disciplinary authority and responsibility rests with
the Chief of Police or his or her representative designated by him or
her in writing to the Mayor and Township Council.
(2) No sworn member or officer of the Division of Police, Department
of Public Safety, shall be suspended, removed, fined or reduced in
rank for any cause other than for incapacity, misconduct or
disobedience as provided in the New Jersey statutes, the Division of
Police Rules and Regulations and Division of Police Policies and
Procedures.
(3) Revocation of appointment of special law enforcement officers with
or without cause shall be conducted in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40A:14-146.14.
B. Conflict with laws and contract provisions. Nothing contained herein
shall operate to deny any member or employee of the Department any
rights guaranteed under applicable law and any collective bargaining
agreement.
§ 3-118 JACKSON CODE § 3-121
1:80
§ 3-121. Annual physical examination.
Each member of the Division of Police shall submit to an annual physical
examination by one of the Police Physicians. Failure to submit to a physical
examination annually or when otherwise directed by the Chief of Police and/
or the Business Administrator may result in appropriate disciplinary action.
§ 3-122. Extra-duty assignments.
Whenever the Business Administrator or his or her designee determines
that extra-duty assignments shall be performed for a party requesting
private or quasi-public duty, the Business Administrator or his or her
designee shall enter into an agreement providing for extra-duty
assignments for which the Township shall be compensated at the rate set
from time to time by resolution. Such agreement shall be in accordance with
the following standards:
A. The party requesting the assignment shall execute and deliver an
agreement in a form approved by the Township Council by resolution
from time to time. The Business Administrator or his or her designee
shall be authorized to execute any such agreement, provided that it has
been submitted in the form approved by resolution. The Township shall
be responsible to provide all necessary insurance coverage as required
by law, including but not limited to worker's compensation, public
liability and claims for damage for personal injury, including death or
damage to property which may arise or result from the Township's
performance under the contract.
B. Officers engaged in special duty assignments shall be deemed on-duty
and shall conform to all Division of Police rules, regulations and
procedures.
C. Any and all extra-duty assignments shall be determined and approved
by the Business Administrator or his or her designee. The Business
Administrator or his or her designee may assign a patrol vehicle for use
in performing extra duty if and in the event it is determined that the use
of a patrol vehicle is necessary to perform the contracted duty.
D. All special-duty assignments shall be within the municipality, unless
specific written approval is given by the Business Administrator to the
officer to work outside of the municipality. If no municipal officers are
available to work on special-duty assignments within the municipality,
the Business Administrator may contact adjoining municipal police
departments or any other law enforcement agent as deemed
appropriate by the Business Administrator to see if they are willing to
perform such special assignments.
E. The work to be performed shall be considered special assignment from
independent contractors and will not be considered direct assignment
or duty on the job through the Township. The taking of any and all extra-
§ 3-121 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-122
1:81
§ 3-123. Residency requirements established.
Residency shall be required of all candidates for full-time police officer from
the closing date of the filing of the civil service examination and shall be
maintained at least until the date of appointment to a full-time position in
the Division of Police as is authorized by N.J.A.C. 4A:4-4.7(a)7.
duty assignments shall be on a voluntary basis in accordance with a
system established and administered by the Business Administrator.
F. The Chief of Police shall have the authority to order any police officer to
vacate or terminate any special-duty assignment in response to
emergency situations or whenever the assignment creates an
unacceptable risk to health, safety and welfare of the police officer and/
or the public, in the sole determination and discretion of the Chief of
Police. The contractor shall not be responsible for any compensation for
the time that the police officer is away from the special-duty assignment
and shall have no claim for any costs or damages against the
municipality, the Chief of Police or the police officer arising from the
termination of a special duty assignment other than the prorated return
of any costs prepaid to the Township or to the municipality.
G. Payment.
(1) Payment, in full, shall be made prior to the commencement of the
employment of police personnel. Any unused portion of the
payment shall be returned. For any period of employment that is
either unknown, or is anticipated to be in excess of 20 days, the
individual requesting the employment of the off-duty police officers
shall pay a deposit equivalent to 20 days' payment to the Township
prior to the commencement of any work. Any unused portion of the
deposit shall be returned or credited against the final amount
owed. [Amended 9-8-2009 by Ord. No. 26-09]
(2) Any and all payments due under any such agreement shall be paid
15 days from the date of billing. Interest shall be charged at the
rate of 12% per annum on any amount billed for which payment has
not been made within 15 days. The delinquent party shall be liable
for all costs, fees and attorney's fees associated with the collection
of any amounts due. The delinquent party shall forfeit the total
amount of the deposit. The Business Administrator shall have the
authority to cancel any agreement and to refuse to enter into future
agreements in the event that payment is not made within 15 days.
(3) In the event that the contractor fails to contact the Division of
Police at least two hours prior to the scheduled start time to cancel
the job, or the officer works less than four hours and the job is
completed, the officer is entitled to be paid for a minimum of four
hours at the current pay rate.
§ 3-122 JACKSON CODE § 3-124
1:82
§ 3-124. Oath required.
Before any appointment or promotion can become effective, the appointee
shall take an oath or affirmation as prescribed by regulation as herein after
provided.
§ 3-125. Municipal Alliance Committee.
A. Establishment. There shall be established a Municipal Alliance
Committee on Alcoholism and Drug Abuse within the Department of
Public Safety.
B. Membership. Membership on the Municipal Alliance Committee shall
be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Township
Council and shall include but not necessarily be limited to
representatives of the following groups:
(1) A Mayoral representative.
(2) The Chief of Police.
(3) The President of the School Board.
(4) The Superintendent of Schools.
(5) The Student Assistant Coordinator.
(6) A representative of the PTA.
(7) A representative of the local bargaining unit for teachers.
(8) A representative of the Chamber of Commerce.
(9) A representative of organized labor.
(10) A representative of the court system.
(11) A representative of a local civic association.
(12) A representative of a local treatment provider agency.
(13) A representative of a local religious group.
(14) A youth representative.
(15) A recovered substance abuser.
(16) A representative of Township Council.
C. Purpose. The purposes of the Municipal Alliance Committee shall
include the following:
(1) To organize and coordinate efforts involving school, law
enforcement, business and community groups for purposes of
reducing alcoholism and drug abuse.
§ 3-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-125
1:83
(2) To develop comprehensive alcoholism and drug abuse education
programs for Grades K through 12.
(3) To develop procedures for intervention, treatment/referral and
discipline of students involved with substance abuse.
(4) To develop comprehensive alcoholism and drug abuse education,
outreach and support efforts for parents.
(5) To develop a comprehensive alcoholism and drug abuse community
awareness program.
D. Functions. The functions of the Municipal Alliance Committee shall be:
(1) To create a network of community leaders, private citizens and
representatives for public and private human service agencies who
are dedicated to promote and support drug and alcohol prevention
and education programs.
(2) To conduct an assessment of community-wide needs pertaining to
drug abuse and alcohol issues.
(3) To identify existing efforts and services acting to reduce alcoholism
and drug abuse.
(4) To assist in the development of programs at the municipal level that
accomplish the purpose of the Alliance effort.
(5) To assist the municipality in acquiring funds for Alliance programs.
(6) To cooperate with the Governor's Council on Alcoholism and Drug
Abuse, as well as the County Alliance Committee, to provide data,
reports or other information that may be needed to assist in the
Alliance effort.
E. Municipal Alliance Coordinator, position created. There is hereby
created the position of Municipal Alliance Coordinator for the Township
of Jackson.
F. Qualifications of Municipal Alliance Coordinator. To be appointed to the
position of Municipal Alliance Coordinator for the Township of Jackson,
an individual must possess the following qualifications:
(1) Preferred, but not required, graduation from a four-year course at
an accredited college or university.
(2) Experience or training in the ATOD (Alcohol, Tobacco and Other
Drugs Council) field.
(3) Experience in coordinating and managing programs in a related
field.
§ 3-125 JACKSON CODE § 3-125
1:84
G. Duties. The Municipal Alliance Coordinator shall be responsible for the
planning, promotion, development and supervision of the Municipal
Alliance Program as follows:
(1) Coordinating and assuring the implementation of all Alliance ATOD
programs as outlined in the approved grant. These programs shall
include, but not be limited to, Project Graduation, the Senior
Citizen Awareness Program, the Tobacco Awareness Program, Teen
Coffee Shop Night and the Monthly Newsletter.
(2) Gathering information for the community needs assessment and
making recommendations for future grant applications based on
that information.
(3) Coordinating and managing Alliance volunteers by scheduling
meetings, providing information and training, overseeing
committees and maintaining pertinent records.
(4) Providing the community with information on ATOD prevention,
resources and specific Alliance programs through a monthly
newsletter, press and other media releases.
(5) Organizing fund-raising activities that will provide additional funds
as needed.
(6) Preparing the annual grant application which shall require
attendance at Ocean County grant-related meetings/training and
the compilation of statistical and financial information.
(7) Coordinating activities with other municipal agencies and
organizations, including the Board of Education.
(8) Maintaining and filing all records in a central office. Such records
shall include, but not be limited to, minutes of monthly meetings,
financial records, the annual grant and related documents,
program descriptions and evaluations, copies of the newsletter,
media releases, a video pamphlet library, correspondence with the
County of Ocean and training and time records for Alliance
volunteers.
H. Compensation. The salary for the position of Municipal Alliance
Coordinator shall be paid in accordance with the current Salary
Ordinance.18 Said position may also be funded by a grant from the
Governor's Council on Alcoholism and Drug Abuse.
I. Deputy Municipal Alliance Coordinator. There is hereby created the
office of Deputy Municipal Alliance Coordinator, which shall be a parttime
position. The duties and responsibilities of the Deputy Municipal
Alliance Coordinator shall be prescribed by the Municipal Alliance
Coordinator.
18.Editor's Note: See Ch. 62, Salaries and Compensation.
§ 3-125 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-126
1:85
§ 3-126. Office of Emergency Management.
A. Office of Emergency Management Coordinator.
(1) The Mayor shall appoint a Municipal Emergency Management
Coordinator from among the residents of the Township of Jackson.
The Municipal Emergency Management Coordinator shall serve,
subject to fulfilling the requirements of this section, for a term of
three years.
(2) As a condition of his or her appointment and his or her right to
continue for the full term of his or her appointment, the Municipal
Emergency Management Coordinator shall have successfully
completed, at the time of his or her appointment or within one year
immediately following his or her appointment, the current
approved Home Study Course and the basic Municipal Emergency
Management workshop. The failure of any Municipal Emergency
Management Coordinator to fulfill such requirements within the
period prescribed shall disqualify the Coordinator from continuing
in the office of Coordinator, and, thereupon, a vacancy in said office
shall be deemed to have been created.
(3) The Municipal Emergency Management Coordinator shall be
compensated at a salary to be determined by the Mayor within the
range set by the current Salary Ordinance for the position.19
B. Deputy Coordinator. The Municipal Emergency Management
Coordinator shall appoint a Municipal Emergency Management Deputy
Coordinator with the approval of the Mayor. Wherever possible, such
Deputy shall be appointed from among the salaried officers or
employees of the Township.
C. Duties of Coordinator.
(1) The Municipal Emergency Management Coordinator shall be
responsible for the planning, activating, coordinating and the
conduct of disaster control operations within the Township.
(2) Whenever, in his or her opinion, a disaster has occurred or is
imminent in any municipality, the Municipal Emergency
Management Coordinator of that municipality shall proclaim a
state or local disaster emergency within the Township. The
Municipal Emergency Management Coordinator, in accordance
with regulations promulgated by the State Director of Emergency
Management, shall be empowered to issue and enforce such orders
as may be necessary to implement and carry out emergency
management operations and to protect the health, safety and
resources of the residents of the Township.
19.Editor's Note: See Ch. 62, Salaries and Compensation.
§ 3-126 JACKSON CODE § 3-126
1:86
D. Emergency Management Council. There is hereby created an
Emergency Management Service Council, to be composed of not more
than 15 members, who shall be appointed by the Mayor and shall hold
office at the will and pleasure of the Mayor. The Municipal Emergency
Management Coordinator shall be a member and shall serve as
Chairman of the Emergency Management Service Council. The
members of the Emergency Management Service Council shall include
the Mayor, the Chief of Police, representatives from Fire District Nos. 1,
2, 3 and 4, representatives from all first aid squads, the Director of
Public Works, an environmental officer, a health officer, social service
personnel, a resource manager, a public information officer, a shelter
manager and one or more community group representatives.
E. Duties of Emergency Management Council.
(1) The Emergency Management Service Council shall assist the
municipality in establishing the various local volunteer agencies
needed to meet the requirements of all local civil defense and
disaster control activities in accordance with the rules and
regulations established by the Governor of the State of New Jersey
in pursuance of the provisions of acts concerning emergency
management.
(2) The Emergency Management Service Council is authorized, within
the limits of appropriations, to establish an adequate organization
to assist in supervising and coordinating the civil defense and
disaster control activities of the local municipality.
§ 3-126 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-126
1:87

ARTICLE X
Department of Public Works
§ 3-127. Department established; term of Director; qualifications;
Assistant Director.
§ 3-128. Divisions within Department of Public Works.
The following divisions are created within the Department of Public Works:
§ 3-129. Division of Streets and Roads.
The Division of Streets and Roads shall:
A. There is hereby created the Department of Public Works, the head of
which shall be the Director of Public Works. The Director of Public
Works shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of
the Township Council. The Director shall possess a bachelor's degree
from an accredited college or university and six years of experience in
the development, administration and implementation of public works or
other similar construction/maintenance programs, including
responsibility for budgeting and supervision, four years of which shall
have included management responsibilities. In lieu of a bachelor's
degree, the Director may substitute experience as described above on a
year-for-year basis with 30 semester-hour credits being equal to one
year of experience. A master's degree in business administration, public
administration, industrial management, industrial engineering,
management science or in a program related to the organization,
operation, administration, and control of private or public organizations
may be substituted for one year of the above nonsupervisory
experience.
B. There shall also be an Assistant Director of Public Works, who shall be
appointed by the Director with the approval of the Mayor.
A. Division of Streets and Roads.
B. Division of Vehicle Services and Equipment Maintenance.
C. Division of Recycling.
D. Division of Buildings and Groundskeeping.
E. Division of Recreation and Senior Services. [Added 6-28-2011 by
Ord. No. 23-11]
A. Construct, repair and maintain all Township streets and roads,
including pothole repair, and the cleaning and repair of catch basins.
B. Remove snow from Township streets and roads.
C. Maintain all signs, traffic markers, and streetlights which are owned or
under the control of the Township.
§ 3-127 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-129
1:89
§ 3-130. Division of Vehicle Services and Equipment Maintenance.
The Division of Equipment/Maintenance shall:
§ 3-131. Division of Recycling.
The Division of Recycling shall be responsible for:
§ 3-132. Division of Buildings and Groundskeeping.
The Division of Buildings and Groundskeeping shall:
D. Perform heavy street, road, drainage and park construction projects.
E. Maintain all drainage facilities located upon Township property.
A. Maintain automotive and radio equipment owned or controlled by the
Township.
B. Operate the centralized garage and motor pool.
C. Undertake performance analysis of Township equipment.
A. Administering the recycling program of the Township of Jackson under
the Township Code.
B. Administering leaf collection throughout the Township.
C. Organizing and maintaining the Jackson Township Recycling Center
and leaf yard.
D. Designating a Certified Recycling Coordinator (CRP) to administer and
oversee all recycling programs and tonnage grants within Jackson
Township as per the Recycling Enhancement Act (REA) (P.L. 2007, c.
311) and Recycling Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:26A. [Added 6-11-2013 by Ord.
No. 10-13]
A. Maintain and repair municipal playgrounds, play fields, recreational
facilities, public parks and public grounds and all municipal buildings
and facilities in general.
B. Provide and/or oversee custodial services for buildings and facilities.
C. Undertake construction projects related to municipally owned parks,
recreation facilities, play fields and buildings as directed by the
Director of Public Works.
D. Perform any and all related functions and duties as may be prescribed
from time to time by the Business Administrator and the Director of
Public Works.
E. The Division of Buildings and Groundskeeping shall be responsible for
maintaining all landscaping, grassy areas, lawns and outside areas of
all Township buildings and Township parks during the seasonal period
§ 3-129 JACKSON CODE § 3-132
1:90
§ 3-133. through § 3-136. (Reserved)20
of March 1 to October 31. During the period from March 1 to October
31, no less than three employees of the Public Works Department shall
be dedicated solely to these seasonal duties. Those employees assigned
to seasonal duties may be reassigned at the direction and discretion of
the Director of Public Works during the period of March 1 to October
31 and shall perform such duties as directed by the Director of Public
Works during the remainder of the calendar year.
20.Editor’s Note: Ord. No. 07-17, adopted 4-25-2017, repealed the following sections: § 3-133,
Division of Recreation and Senior Services, added 6-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-11; § 3-133.1,
Recreation Advisory Board, added 6-12-2012 by Ord. No. 17-12; § 3-134, Assistant
Recreation Supervisor, added 6-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-11; § 3-135, Senior Services
Program; Recreation Program Administrator, added 6-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-11; and §
3-136, Powers and duties of Senior Service Program, added 6-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-11.
See now §§ 3-75 through 3-79.
§ 3-132 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-133
1:91

ARTICLE XI
Municipal Court21
§ 3-137. Continuance.
The Municipal Court of the Township heretofore established as of January
1, 1949, in accordance with applicable law (now N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1 et seq.), is
hereby continued.
§ 3-138. Name of Court.
The name of the Municipal Court shall be the "Municipal Court of the
Township of Jackson."
§ 3-139. Seal.
The Municipal Court shall have an official seal which shall bear the impress
of the name of the Court.
§ 3-140. Municipal Court Judges; appointments; qualifications;
term.
The Municipal Court of the Township shall have one Judge who shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Township
Council. Said judge shall have the qualifications required by law. The Judge
shall serve a term of three years from the date of appointment and until
their successors are appointed and qualified.
§ 3-141. Compensation of Judge.
The Judge of the Municipal Court shall be compensated by an annual salary
as established by Mayor and Township Council. This compensation is in lieu
of any and all other fees.
§ 3-142. Jurisdiction; powers; duties.
The Municipal Court and the Judge thereof shall have, possess and exercise
all the jurisdictions, powers, functions and duties which are or may be
conferred by law and the applicable rules of the Supreme Court of New
Jersey.
§ 3-143. Court Administrator; term; appointment; duties. [Amended
12-11-2012 by Ord. No. 23-12]
There shall be a Court Administrator who shall be appointed by the Mayor
with the advice and consent of Township Council. The Court Administrator
shall serve for a term of three years from January 1 of the year in which
he or she is appointed and until a successor is appointed and qualified.
21.Editor's Note: Original Art. XI, Department of Recreation and Senior Services, of Ch. 3 of
the 2007 Administrative Code, was repealed 6-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-11.
§ 3-137 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-143
1:93
The Court Administrator shall supervise and administer the work of the
Municipal Court, subject to the direction of the Judges and applicable
statutes and Court rules, and act as the Clerk of said Court according to
statute and the rules of Court.
§ 3-144. Court costs; payment to state.
For violations of Title 39 of the New Jersey Revised Statutes, municipal
ordinances and violations of state law which are subject to Municipal Court
jurisdiction, the Municipal Court is authorized, at its discretion, to charge
court costs up to, but not exceeding, the maximum amount as is permitted
by N.J.S.A. 22A:3-4. For every such violation, all costs assessed pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 22A:3-4 which are payable to the State of New Jersey shall not be
suspended and must be collected by the Municipal Court and transmitted to
the applicable state fund.
§ 3-143 JACKSON CODE § 3-144
1:94
ARTICLE XII
Statutory Boards and Commissions
§ 3-145. Establishment of boards and commissions.
The following boards and commissions shall be established in accordance
with this chapter.
§ 3-146. Board of Adjustment.
A. Establishment. The Zoning Board of Adjustment, presently in existence
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., is hereby continued. The Zoning
Board of Adjustment shall consist of seven regular members, who shall
be appointed by the Township Council. Members and alternate
members shall comply with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23.3 and
40:55D-23.4.
B. Alternate members.
(1) The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall not have more than two
alternate members, who shall be appointed by the Township
Council. Alternate members shall be designated at the time of
appointment by the Township Council as "Alternate No. 1" and
"Alternate No. 2."
(2) Alternate members may participate in discussions of the
proceedings but may not vote except in the absence or
disqualification of a regular member. A vote shall not be delayed in
order that a regular member may vote instead of an alternate
member. In the event that a choice must be made as to which
alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote.
C. Terms.
(1) The members of the Board of Adjustment shall continue in office
until their respective terms expire.
(2) The terms of the members first appointed under this section shall
be so determined that to the greatest practicable extent the
expiration of such terms shall be distributed, in the case of regular
members, evenly over the first four years after their appointment
and, in the case of alternate members, evenly over the first two
years after their appointment, provided that the initial term of a
regular member shall not exceed four years and that the initial
term of an alternate member shall not exceed two years.
Thereafter, the term of each regular member shall be four years,
and the term of each alternate member shall be two years.
(a) Vacancies. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of
term shall be filled for the unexpired term only, as herein and
above provided.
§ 3-145 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-146
1:95
§ 3-147. Environmental Commission.
(b) Conflicts. No member of the Board of Adjustment shall be
permitted to act on any matter in which he or she has, either
directly or indirectly, any personal or financial interest. No
member may hold elective office or position under the
Township.
(c) Removal. A member may, after a public hearing if he or she
requests one, be removed by the Township Council for cause.
(d) Organization of the Board of Adjustment. The Board of
Adjustment shall annually elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman
from its members and shall also select a Secretary who may or
may not be a Board member or another municipal employee.
(e) Board of Adjustment Attorney. There is hereby created the
position of Attorney to the Zoning Board of Adjustment. The
Zoning Board of Adjustment may annually appoint and fix the
compensation of or agree upon the rate of compensation of the
Zoning Board of Adjustment Attorney, who shall be an attorney
other than the Municipal Attorney.
(f) Experts and staff. The Zoning Board of Adjustment may also
employ or contract for and fix the compensation of such
experts and other staff and services as it may deem necessary.
The Board shall not authorize expenditures which exceed,
exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by the
Township Council for its use.
(g) Rules and regulations. The Board shall adopt such rules and
regulations as may be necessary to carry into effect the
provisions and purposes of this chapter.
(h) The duties of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be as
established in Chapter 244, Land Use and Development
Regulations. The procedures for the establishment of the
Zoning Board of Adjustment as delineated in this section shall
supersede the procedures delineated within Chapter 244.
A. Creation. There is hereby created an Environmental Commission for the
protection, development or use of the natural resources within the
Township and to be known as the "Jackson Environmental Commission."
Said Commission is created pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 to 40:56A-5.
B. Membership. The Commission shall consist of seven members
appointed by the Mayor, one of whom shall also be a member of the
Planning Board and all of whom shall be residents of the Township of
Jackson. The members shall serve without compensation. The Mayor
shall annually designate one of the members to serve as Chairman and
presiding officer of the Commission. The terms of office of each member
shall commence on January 1 of the year of appointment and shall be
§ 3-146 JACKSON CODE § 3-147
1:96
for a term of three years, to expire on December 31 of the third year.
A vacancy occurring otherwise than by the expiration of the term shall
be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as an original
appointment. [Amended 12-11-2012 by Ord. No. 23-12]
C. Removal. The Mayor or governing body may remove any member of the
Commission for cause, on written charges served upon the member and
after a hearing thereon at which the member shall be entitled to be
heard in person or by counsel. A vacancy on the Commission occurring
otherwise than by expiration of a term shall be filled for the unexpired
term in the same manner as an original appointment.
D. Alternate members. In addition to the regular members, the
Environmental Commission shall have two alternate members,
designated as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2." The terms of the
alternate members shall be for two years. A vacancy occurring
otherwise than by the expiration of the term shall be filled by the
appointing authority for the unexpired term only. The terms of alternate
members shall commence on January 1 of the year of appointment and
expire on June 30 of the second year. [Amended 12-11-2012 by Ord.
No. 23-12]
E. Powers and duties. The Commission is established for the protection,
development or use of natural resources, including water resources,
located within the territorial limits of the Township of Jackson. The
Commission shall have power to conduct research into the use and
possible use of the open land areas of the Township and may coordinate
the activities of unofficial bodies organized for similar purposes and
may advertise, prepare, print and distribute books, maps, charts, plans
and pamphlets which, in its judgment, it deems necessary for its
purposes. It shall keep an index of all open areas, publicly or privately
owned, including open marshlands, swamps and other wetlands, in
order to obtain information on the proper use of such areas, and may
from time to time recommend to the Planning Board plans and
programs for inclusion in the Master Plan and the development and use
of such areas.
F. Acquisition of property. The Environmental Commission may, subject to
the approval of the Township Council, acquire property, both real and
personal, in the name of the Township, by gift, purchase, grant,
bequest, devise or lease for any of its purposes and shall administer the
same for such purposes subject to the terms of the conveyance or gift.
Such an acquisition may be to acquire the fee or any lesser interest,
development right, easement (including conservation easement),
covenant or other contractual right (including a conveyance on
conditions or with limitations or reversions), as may be necessary to
acquire, maintain, improve, protect and limit the future use or
otherwise conserve and properly utilize open spaces and other lands
and water areas in the Township.
§ 3-147 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-147
1:97
§ 3-148. Historic Preservation Commission.
§ 3-149. Municipal Utilities Authority.
G. Records and annual report. The Environmental Commission shall keep
records of its meetings and activities and shall make an annual report to
the Mayor and Township Council.
A. Establishment. There is hereby created an Historic Preservation
Commission for the Township of Jackson.
B. Class qualifications.
(1) The Historic Preservation Commission shall consist of nine regular
members and two alternate members. There shall be two members
each of Class A and B, and five members of Class C. Class
qualifications shall be as follows:
(a) Class A: a person who is knowledgeable in building design and
construction or architectural history and who may reside
outside the municipality.
(b) Class B: a person who is knowledgeable or with a
demonstrated interest in local history and who may reside
outside the municipality.
(c) Class C: citizens of the municipality who shall hold no other
municipal office, position or employment, except for
membership on the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment.
(2) Alternate members shall meet the qualifications of Class C
members.
C. Appointment of members; terms; vacancies. The Mayor shall appoint all
members of the Commission and shall designate at the time of
appointment the regular members by class and the alternate members
as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2." Commencing with the first
appointments to the Commission, three members shall be appointed for
terms of one year, three members shall be appointed for terms of two
years, and three members shall be appointed for terms of three years,
Alternate No. 1 shall be appointed for a term of two years, and
Alternate No. 2 shall be appointed for a term of one year, and thereafter
all regular members shall be appointed for terms of four years, and all
alternate members shall be appointed for terms of two years. A member
may be appointed for additional terms.
A. Organization of Municipal Utilities Authority; members; appointment;
compensation.
(1) There is hereby continued a public body corporate and politic
under the name the Jackson Municipal Utilities Authority
(hereinafter "JMUA"). Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:14B-4, the JMUA
§ 3-147 JACKSON CODE § 3-149
1:98
§ 3-150. Planning Board.
shall consist of five members appointed by Township Council. Each
member shall receive compensation not to exceed $3,500 in any
one year for services as a member of the Authority; provided,
however, that in the event that any member of the Authority is
or shall also be appointed an officer, agent or employee of the
Authority, then such member shall, in addition to such $3,500,
receive such compensation for such member's services as such
officer, agent or employee as the Authority may determine.
(2) Terms of regular members. The members first appointed shall, by
the resolution of appointment, be designated to serve for terms
respectively expiring on the first days of the first, second, third,
fourth and fifth Februaries next ensuing after the date of their
appointment. On or after January 1 in each year after such first
appointments, one person shall be appointed as a member of the
JMUA to serve for a term commencing on February 1 in such year
and expiring on February 1 in the fifth year after such year. In the
event of a vacancy in the membership of the JMUA occurring
during an unexpired term of office, a person shall be appointed as a
member of the JMUA to serve for such unexpired term.
(3) Alternate member. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:14B-4(e), only one
alternate member of the Municipal Utilities Authority is required.
Said alternate member shall be designated "Alternate No. 1" and
shall serve in rotation during the absence or disqualification of any
regular member. [Amended 1-27-2015 by Ord. No. 02-15]
(4) Terms for alternate members. The term of each alternate member
shall be five years commencing on February 1 of the year of the
appointment; provided, however, that in the event two alternate
members are appointed, their initial terms shall be four and five
years, respectively. The terms of the first alternate members
appointed pursuant to this chapter shall commence on the day of
their appointment and shall expire on the fourth or fifth January 31
next ensuing after the date of their appointments, as the case may
be. Alternate members may participate in discussions of the
proceedings but may not vote except in the absence or
disqualification of a regular member of the Authority. A vote shall
not be delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead of
an alternate member. Said alternate members shall be
compensated in the same manner and amount as the regular
members of the Authority.
B. Powers and duties. The JMUA shall be vested with all powers, duties,
authority and obligations as delineated within N.J.S.A. 40:14B-1 et seq.
A. Establishment. The Planning Board, presently in existence pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., is hereby continued, to consist of nine
members of the following four classes:
§ 3-149 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-150
1:99
(1) Class I: the Mayor or the Mayor's designee in the absence of the
Mayor.
(2) Class II: one of the officials of the Township other than a member of
the Township Council, to be appointed by the Mayor, provided that
if there is an Environmental Commission, the member of the
Environmental Commission who is also a member of the Planning
Board as required by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 shall be deemed to be the
Class II Planning Board member if there are both a member of the
Zoning Board of Adjustment and a member of the Jackson Township
Board of Education among the Class IV members or alternate
members.
(3) Class III: a member of the Township Council, to be appointed by it.
(4) Class IV: six other citizens of the Township of Jackson, to be
appointed by the Mayor. The members of Class IV shall hold no
other municipal office, position or employment, except that one
member may be a member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment, and
one may be a member of the Jackson Township Board of Education.
A member of the Environmental Commission who is also a member
of the Planning Board as required by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 shall be a
Class IV Planning Board member unless there are among the Class
IV members of the Planning Board both a member of the Zoning
Board of Adjustment and a member of the Board of Education, in
which case the member of the Environmental Commission shall be
deemed to be the Class II member of the Planning Board.
B. Terms.
(1) The term of the member composing Class I shall correspond with
his or her official tenure or if the member is the Mayor's designee
in the absence of the Mayor, the designee shall serve at the
pleasure of the Mayor during the Mayor's official tenure. The terms
of the members composing Class II and Class III shall be for one
year or terminate at the completion of their respective terms of
office, whichever occurs first, except for a Class II member who is
also a member of the Environmental Commission. The term of a
Class II or a Class IV member who is also a member of the
Environmental Commission shall be for three years or terminate at
the completion of his term of office as a member of the
Environmental Commission, whichever comes first.
(2) The term of a Class IV member who is also a member of the Zoning
Board of Adjustment or the Jackson Township Board of Education
shall terminate whenever he or she is no longer a member of such
other body or at the completion of his Class IV term, whichever
occurs first.
(3) The terms of all Class IV members first appointed pursuant to this
chapter shall be so determined that, to the greatest extent
practicable, the expiration of such terms shall be evenly distributed
§ 3-150 JACKSON CODE § 3-150
1:100
over the first four years after their appointment, provided,
however, that no term of any member shall exceed four years, and
further provided that nothing herein shall affect the terms of any
present members of the Planning Board, all of whom shall continue
in office until the completion of the terms for which they were
appointed. Thereafter, all Class IV members shall be appointed for
terms of four years, except as otherwise herein provided. All terms
shall run from January 1 of the year in which the appointment was
made. [Amended 12-11-2012 by Ord. No. 23-12]
C. Alternate members.
(1) There are hereby authorized two alternate members of the
Planning Board, who shall be appointed by the Mayor for Class IV
members and shall meet the qualifications of Class IV members.
The alternate members shall be designated at the time of
appointment by the Mayor as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No.
2."
(2) The alternate members shall serve for terms of two years,
terminating as of June 30 of the year next following appointment;
provided, however, that in the event two alternate members are
appointed initially, their initial terms shall terminate as of June 30
of the year next following appointment, respectively. A vacancy
occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled by the
Mayor for the unexpired term only. The alternate members may
participate in discussions of the proceedings but may not vote,
except in the absence or disqualification of a regular member of
any Class. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular
member may vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that
a choice must be made as to which alternate member is to vote,
Alternate No. 1 shall vote.
D. All members and alternate members of the Planning Board shall comply
with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23.3 and 40:55D-23.4.
E. Vacancies. If a vacancy of any class shall occur otherwise than by
expiration of the Planning Board term, it shall be filled by appointment,
as above provided, for the unexpired term.
F. Conflicts. No member of the Planning Board shall be permitted to act on
any matter in which he or she has, either directly or indirectly, any
personal or financial interest.
G. Removal. Any member other than a Class I member, after a public
hearing if he or she requests one, may be removed by the Township
Council for cause.
H. Organization of the Planning Board. The Planning Board shall annually
elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman from the members of Class IV and
select a Secretary and Assistant Secretary, who may be either a
§ 3-150 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-150
1:101
§ 3-151. Rent Leveling Board.
member of the Planning Board or a municipal employee designated by
it.
I. Planning Board Attorney. There is hereby created the position of
Planning Board Attorney. The Planning Board may annually appoint and
fix the compensation of or agree upon the rate of compensation of the
Planning Board Attorney, who shall be an attorney other than the
Municipal Attorney.
J. Experts and staff. The Planning Board may also employ or contract for
the services of experts and other staff and services as it may deem
necessary. The Planning Board shall not exceed, however, exclusive of
gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by the Township Council for its
use.
K. Rules and regulations. The Planning Board shall adopt such rules and
regulations as may be necessary to carry into effect the provisions and
purposes of this section. In the issuance of subpoenas, administration of
oaths and taking of testimony, the provisions of the County and
Municipal Investigations Law of 1953 (N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq.) shall
apply.
L. The duties and powers of the Planning Board are established in Chapter
244, Land Use and Development Regulations. The procedures for
establishment of the Planning Board as delineated in this section shall
supersede such procedures within Chapter 244.
A. There is hereby created an Apartment and Mobile Home Park Rent
Leveling Board within the Township of Jackson pursuant to the police
power within N.J.S.A. 40:48-2. The Board shall consist of nine members
and three alternate members who shall serve in the event of absence or
disqualification of a regular member. The members of the Board and the
alternate members shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice
and consent of the Township Council, and their terms of office shall be
for a period of three years each, commencing on January 1 of the year in
which they are appointed. Each member shall serve without
compensation. Each member shall be a resident of the Township. One
member and one alternate member shall be a tenant of a mobile home
park, and one member and one alternate member shall be a tenant of a
housing or rental unit, as that term is defined in Chapter 334.
[Amended 10-13-2009 by Ord. No. 31-09; 3-9-2010 by Ord. No.
05-10]
B. The powers and duties of the Rent Leveling Board are as established
within Chapter 334, Rent Control for Apartments and Mobile Home
Parks. The manner of appointment of the Rent Leveling Board as
established herein shall supersede the manner of appointment within
Chapter 334.
§ 3-150 JACKSON CODE § 3-151
1:102
§ 3-152. Shade Tree Commission.
C. Any professional services required by the Rent Leveling Board shall be
performed under professional services agreements by professionals
appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of Township
Council.
A. The regulation, planting, care and control of shade and ornamental
trees and shrubbery upon and in the streets, highways, public places
and parks and parkways of the Township of Jackson, except state
highways, unless the Department of Transportation shall assent
thereto, and except county highways, parks and parkways, if the
Pinelands Commission or a County Shade Tree Commission is operative
and gives assent to, shall be exercised by and under the authority of
Jackson Township Shade Tree Commission, which is hereby created.
The Commission shall consist of seven members and two alternate
members. The members and alternate members shall be appointed by
the Mayor, shall be residents of this municipality and shall serve
without compensation except as hereinafter provided.
B. First Commission: subsequent Commissions; terms.
(1) Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:69A-207, the Shade Tree
Commission as previously established shall continue and the terms
of the Commissioners shall continue. The terms of each appointee
shall be designated in his appointment. All subsequent
appointments, except to fill vacancies, shall be for the full term of
five years, to take effect on January 1 next succeeding such
appointment. In event that the membership of the Commission is
increased, the new members shall be appointed in such manner
that the terms shall expire in accordance with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:64-1 et seq.
(2) The terms of each alternate member shall be five years
commencing on January 1 of the year of appointment; provided,
however, that in the event two alternate members are appointed,
the initial term of Alternate No. 1 shall be five years, and the initial
term of Alternate No. 2 shall be four years.
(3) An alternate member may participate in discussions of the
proceedings but may not vote except in the absence or
disqualification of a regular member. A vote shall not be delayed in
order that a regular member may vote instead of an alternate
member.
C. Organization; salaries of officers and employees. The Commission shall
organize within 30 days after the appointment of its total membership
for the remainder of the then calendar year, and thereafter annually by
the election of one of its members as Chairman and the appointment of
a Secretary, who need not be a member. The salary of the Secretary,
who may be compensated even if a member of the Commission shall be
§ 3-151 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-152
1:103
fixed by the Mayor and Township Council, the salary of all other
employees shall be fixed by the Commission, with the approval of the
Mayor, within the range as established by the Township Council. All
salaries shall be fixed as nearly as practicable in accordance with the
salary schedule, if any, of the municipality for corresponding positions.
D. Vacancies. Any vacancy occurring by reason of the death, resignation or
removal of any Commissioner shall be filled for the unexpired term by
another appointee of the Mayor.
§ 3-152 JACKSON CODE § 3-152
1:104
ARTICLE XIII
Advisory Boards, Committees and Commissions
§ 3-153. Establishment and purposes.
A. Commission for the Disabled. There is hereby created the Commission
for the Disabled, which shall serve for the purpose of advising the
Mayor and Township Council and recommending policies and programs
in all matters related to the best interests of all disabled persons within
the Township.
B. Economic Development Advisory Committee. [Amended 9-23-2008
by Ord. No. 33-08; 6-23-2009 by Ord. No. 17-09; 3-12-2013 by
Ord. No. 05-13]
(1) The Economic Development Advisory Committee shall assist and
advise the Mayor and Council in implementing a program designed
to encourage economic growth and development by developing
policies to promote, attract and retain business in locations that are
consistent with the Master Plan and Land Use Regulations of the
Township.
(2) The Committee’s duties shall include, but are not limited to:
(a) Acting as liaison between the Township and the business
community, including coordinating meetings and dialogue
between the Township and the Chamber of Commerce and
assisting the Mayor and Council in promoting the many
advantages to opening and operating a business in Jackson
Township;
(b) Coordinating regular meetings with the Mayor and business
leaders to assist in establishing Township policies that promote
and encourage business development, including, where
possible, the marketing and promotion of Jackson Township’s
economic advantages and assisting the Mayor in identifying
and removing unnecessary obstacles to the creation and
development of smart business opportunities in the Township.
(3) The Committee shall consist of 11 members. The Committee shall
consist of two members of the Township Council; the Mayor or his
designee; the President of the Jackson Chamber of Commerce or
his designee; the Director of the Jackson Township MUA or his
designee; the Zoning Board Chairman or his designee; and the
Planning Board Chairman or his designee. The remaining four
members of the Committee shall be residents of Jackson, two of
whom shall be appointed by the Mayor and two of whom shall be
appointed by the Township Council, of which at least two shall be
members of the Jackson business community.
C. Information Technology and Telecommunications Advisory Board.
There is hereby created an Information Technology and
§ 3-153 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-153
1:105
Telecommunications Advisory Board, which shall conduct research and
make recommendations to the Mayor and Township Council as to
advancements in computer hardware and software, servers,
networking, and other computer-related systems. The Board shall
consist of the number of members deemed advisable by the Mayor and
the members shall be appointed by the Mayor.
D. Pathfinders. There is hereby created Pathfinders, an advisory board
which promotes nature walks, horse trails, appreciation of nature and
creation of paths and walkways within the Township. Pathfinders shall
consist of the number of members deemed advisable by the Township
Council, and the members shall be appointed by the Township Council.
Members of Pathfinders shall be chosen from members of the
community and shall include a designee of the Mayor and a designee of
the Township Council.
E. Private Residential Communities Advisory Board. There is hereby
created the Private Residential Communities Advisory Board, which
shall serve for the purpose of advising the Mayor and Township Council
and making recommendations on matters and policies which concern
and are of interest to private residential communities. The Board shall
be comprised of the presidents or designated representatives of each
private residential community homeowners' association within the
Township, no more than two from any one homeowners' association,
and one designee of the Mayor and one designee of the Township
Council.
F. Safety Committee. There is hereby created a Safety Committee, which
shall serve the purpose of discussing and recommending solutions to
work safety problems and advising the Mayor and Township Council as
to issues of a safe and healthy work environment and public safety. The
Committee shall be comprised of a representative from Public Works, a
Mayor's designee, a Township Council designee, the Township
Engineer, the Director of Public Safety and a resident of the Township
who has experience in safety matters.
G. Senior Citizen Advisory Board. There is hereby created the Senior
Citizen Advisory Board, which shall serve for the purpose of advising
the Mayor and Township Council on any and all matters and policies
which concern and are of interest to the Township's senior citizens. The
Board shall consist of representatives from each senior community in
the Township, one designee of the Mayor and one designee of the
Township Council.
H. Veterans' Commission. The objectives of the Veterans' Commission of
Jackson Township shall include, but not be limited to, recommending to
the Mayor and Township Council such measures as to promote the
welfare of veterans residing in Jackson Township, recommending and
coordinating public patriotic celebrations and cooperating with county,
state and federal veterans' agencies, so as to provide better service to
veterans who are residents of Jackson Township. The Veterans'
§ 3-153 JACKSON CODE § 3-153
1:106
Commission shall be composed of a maximum of 13 members appointed
annually. The Mayor shall appoint six members, and the Township
Council shall appoint five members. These members shall be residents
of the Township of Jackson who are veterans and shall include
representatives from the following:
(1) The commanders of all veterans' organizations in Jackson Township
chartered by the Congress of the United States.
(2) The Presidents of the Ladies Auxiliaries of all veterans'
organizations in Jackson Township chartered by the Congress of
the United States.
(3) All residents of Jackson Township who are holders of an honorable
discharge from any of the military services of the United States of
America.
I. Youth Advisory Council. There is hereby created the Mayor's Youth
Advisory Council, which shall serve for the purpose of advising the
Mayor and Township Council on any and all matters related to the
health, safety, welfare and betterment of the Township's youth.
J. Going Green Committee. [Added 2-24-2009 by Ord. No. 04-09;
amended 4-14-2009 by Ord. No. 07-09]
(1) There is hereby created a Going Green Committee which shall
conduct research and shall make recommendation to the Mayor
and Township Council as to ways in which the Township may
undertake official actions and conduct its business in a manner
which encourages, promotes and considers protection of the
environment and its sustainability.
(2) The Going Green Committee shall consist of nine to 15 members, as
deemed advisable by the Township Council, and the members shall
be appointed by the Township Council. Members of the Going
Green Committee shall be residents of the Township, a member of
the Environmental Commission, two members of the Board of
Education, one student of Jackson Memorial High School, one
student of Liberty High School, and shall include the Mayor, or his/
her designee, and two members of the Township Council.
K. Ethics Information Committee. The Ethics Information Committee shall
be established in accordance with the provision of Chapter 26, entitled
"Ethics," Part 3, entitled "Ethics Information Committee," of the
Township Code of the Township of Jackson. The manner of appointment
to the Ethics Information Committee within Chapter 26, Part 3, shall
supersede the provisions of § 3-154. [Added 11-24-2009 by Ord. No.
37-09]
L. Recreation Advisory Board. The Recreation Advisory Board shall be
established in accordance with the provision of Chapter 3, Article X,
§ 3-133.1, entitled "Recreation Advisory Board," of the Township Code
§ 3-153 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-153
1:107
§ 3-154. Terms of members; manner of appointment; number of
members.
Unless otherwise expressly indicated herein within this chapter, all advisory
boards, committees and commissions established under this chapter shall:
of the Township of Jackson. The manner of appointment to the
Recreation Advisory Board within Chapter 3, Article X, § 3-133.1, shall
supersede the provisions of Chapter 3, Article XIII, § 3-154, entitled
"Terms of members; manner of appointment; number of members."
[Added 6-12-2012 by Ord. No. 18-12]
A. Have a term for one year, commencing January 1 and terminating on
December 31 of that year; and [Amended 12-11-2012 by Ord. No.
23-12]
B. Have a number of members determined by the Mayor and Township
Council; and
C. Have members appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of
Township Council.
§ 3-153 JACKSON CODE § 3-154
1:108
ARTICLE XIV
Americans with Disabilities Act Advisory Board
§ 3-155. Establishment.
There is hereby established an Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA")
Advisory Board for the Township of Jackson.
§ 3-156. Membership; designation of Chairperson; alternates.
The Americans with Disabilities Act Advisory Board shall consist of five
regular members and two alternate members, designated as "Alternate No.
1" and "Alternate No. 2," appointed by the Mayor. The ADA Coordinator
shall be appointed as a regular member of the ADA Advisory Board and shall
be the Chairperson of the Board as provided for in § 3-159D. The Deputy
ADA Coordinator shall be appointed as "Alternate No. 1" to said Board as
provided for in § 3-159D.
§ 3-157. Terms of office; vacancies; participation by alternates.
§ 3-158. Powers and duties.
The Americans with Disabilities Act Advisory Board shall:
A. All appointments to the Americans with Disabilities Act Advisory Board
shall be for a term of one year, commencing January 1 of the year of
appointment and ending on December 31 of the year of appointment. A
vacancy on the Board occurring other than by expiration of term shall
be filled for the unexpired term by the Mayor. [Amended 12-11-2012
by Ord. No. 23-12]
B. An alternate member may participate in discussions of the proceedings,
but may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular
member. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular member
may vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that a choice
must be made as to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1
shall vote first.
A. Review the application of the Americans with Disabilities Act to the
Township of Jackson, its buildings, facilities and programs to ensure
that the Township of Jackson complies with the requirements of the
Americans with Disabilities Act.
B. Make recommendations to the Mayor and Township Council concerning
the implementation of compliance with the Americans with Disabilities
Act as it applies to Township buildings, facilities and programs.
C. Make such individual studies and reports as may be requested by the
Mayor and Township Council.
§ 3-155 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-158
1:109
§ 3-159. Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Coordinator.
§ 3-160. Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Advisory Board.
There is hereby established an Americans with Disabilities Act Advisory
Board for the Township of Jackson. Members to the Board shall be
appointed and perform their duties in accordance with Article I of this
chapter.
§ 3-161. Notice.
D. Hear appeals filed pursuant to § 3-162, and make the appropriate
report to the Mayor and Township Council regarding its findings and
recommendations.
A. The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Township Council, shall
appoint one employee to serve as ADA Coordinator. The ADA
Coordinator shall be familiar with the requirements of the ADA and
coordinate Township efforts to comply with and carry out Township
responsibilities under the ADA and the rules promulgated pursuant
thereto, including the investigation of complaints alleging violations of
the ADA.
B. The Township shall make the name, office address and telephone
number of the ADA Coordinator available to any interested individuals.
C. The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Township Council, may
appoint an individual to serve as Deputy ADA Coordinator. The Deputy
ADA Coordinator shall assist the ADA Coordinator and perform such
duties as required by the ADA Coordinator.
D. The ADA Coordinator shall be appointed as a member of the ADA
Advisory Board as provided for in § 3-156. The Deputy ADA Coordinator
shall be appointed as "Alternate No. 1" of the Board as provided for in
§ 3-156.
E. The term of office for the ADA Coordinator and Deputy ADA
Coordinator shall be for one year, commencing on January 1 of the year
of appointment and ending on December 31 of the year of appointment.
[Amended 12-11-2012 by Ord. No. 23-12]
A. The Township shall disseminate sufficient information to inform all
interested persons of the rights and protections afforded by ADA and
the rules promulgated pursuant thereto related to the responsibilities
of the Township of Jackson. This information shall be provided in a
manner consistent with the federal rules for effective communication.
B. The Township may fulfill this requirement by publication of information
in handbooks, manuals or pamphlets which describe the Township's
programs and activities, by the display of posters in service centers and
other public places, or the broadcast of information on radio or
television.
§ 3-158 JACKSON CODE § 3-162
1:110
§ 3-162. Grievance procedure.
The Township shall adopt and publish the following grievance procedure
which provides for the prompt and equitable resolution of complaints
alleging any action that is prohibited by the ADA and the rules promulgated
pursuant thereto:
A. Grievances shall be processed promptly and expeditiously and shall be
adjudicated according to the terms of the procedure provided herein.
B. Formal grievances and appeals shall be in writing.
C. Communications and decisions concerning formal grievances shall be
in writing.
D. A written complaint signed by the grievant shall be filed with the ADA
Coordinator within 15 days after the alleged violation. The ADA
Coordinator shall forward a copy of any written complaint received to
the Mayor and Township Council.
E. The complaint shall identify the parties and contain a clear and concise
statement of the facts that constitute the alleged discrimination on the
basis of disability.
F. The ADA Coordinator shall review the grievance and hold a hearing.
G. A grievant shall be permitted a representative at all levels of the
grievance procedure and may produce witnesses for the purpose of
providing testimony relevant to the alleged discrimination on the basis
of handicap.
H. A written determination shall be issued by the ADA Coordinator and a
copy forwarded by certified mail to the grievant no later than 30 days
after the date of the hearing on the complaint. A copy of said
determination shall be provided to the Mayor and Township Council.
I. If the grievant is dissatisfied with the answer submitted by the ADA
Coordinator, the grievant may appeal the answer to the ADA Advisory
Board within seven days after receipt of the written answer. A hearing
shall be scheduled within seven days after receipt of the grievance
appeal. The hearing granted by the ADA Advisory Board will take place
within 15 days after the scheduled date is submitted to the grievant.
J. Minutes of the hearing shall be kept or, in the alternative, the hearing
may be recorded.
K. The ADA Advisory Board shall hear the appeal within 15 days from the
date of filing of the appeal and thereafter, make the appropriate written
report to the Mayor and Township Council setting forth its findings and
recommendations. The Mayor and Township Council shall review the
findings and recommendations of the ADA Advisory Board and make a
final determination on the appeal.
§ 3-162 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-162
1:111
§ 3-163. Self-evaluation.
§ 3-164. Maintenance of accessible features.
§ 3-165. Employment.
L. The ADA Coordinator shall maintain the files and records of the
Township relating to complaints filed.
M. Failure by the grievant to process a grievance or appeal the decision of
the ADA Coordinator within the specified time limit shall render the
grievance as settled in favor of the Township. Failure by the Township
to issue a decision within the specified time limit shall render the
grievance advanced to the next level. The aforementioned time limits
may, however, be extended by mutual consent of the parties.
N. This grievance procedure shall be construed to protect the substantive
rights of interested persons, to meet appropriate due process
standards, and to assure that the Township complied with the
requirements of the ADA and the regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
A. The ADA Advisory Board shall evaluate all Township programs and
services to ensure equal opportunity and equal access.
B. The ADA Advisory Board shall distribute the self-evaluation plan and
permit comment thereon by all interested parties.
C. The self-evaluation shall in all respects comply with the federal rules
adopted pursuant to the ADA and shall be kept on file for a period of
three years.
A. The Township shall maintain in proper working condition those features
of facilities and equipment that are required to be accessible and usable
by persons with disabilities.
B. This section of the Township Code shall not be interpreted to prohibit
reasonable shut-down times for repairs.
A. The hiring practices of the Township shall not discriminate against
persons with disabilities.
B. All job descriptions shall precisely and accurately describe the essential
functions of the job performed by each employee.
C. Job applications shall pertain strictly to job performance.
D. All job interviews shall be limited to questions concerning the
applicant's ability to perform the job.
E. The interviewer shall not inquire about disabilities or conduct tests that
screen out people with disabilities.
§ 3-162 JACKSON CODE § 3-165
1:112
§ 3-166. Program accessibility.
F. Questions about the applicant's addiction to alcohol or drugs shall not
be asked.
G. The Township shall not conduct medical examinations or inquiries of job
applicants prior to an offer of employment. The Township may, however,
require medical examinations and/or inquiries after making an offer of
employment to a job applicant and before the applicant begins
employment with the Township. The Township may condition an offer of
employment on the results of the medical examination or inquiry. If the
Township chooses to conduct such medical examinations or inquiries,
all entering employees in the same job category shall be subject to the
examination or inquiry regardless of disability.
H. Any medical information obtained from employee medical examinations
and inquiries shall be maintained on separate forms and shall be
treated as confidential and not kept in an employee's personnel file.
I. Persons with mental or physical disabilities are eligible as long as they
can perform the essential functions of the job after reasonable
accommodation is made to their known limitations. If the
accommodation cannot be made because it would cause the employer
undue hardship, such person may not be eligible.
A. The Township shall make reasonable accommodations to make its
facilities accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities. An
individual shall not be excluded from participation in or be denied the
benefits of the services, programs or activities of the Township due to
disability.
B. The Township shall make reasonable accommodations to its facilities as
required by the ADA.
C. The Township shall prepare a transition plan setting forth the steps
necessary to complete the structural changes in all public facilities. All
interested persons, including individuals with disabilities, shall be able
to participate in the development of the transition plan. After
completion, a copy of the transition plan shall be made available for
public inspection. The transition plan shall include, at a minimum, the
following:
(1) Identification of physical obstacles in the Township's facilities that
limit the accessibility of its programs or activities to individuals
with disabilities.
(2) Description in detail of the methods that will be used to make the
facilities accessible.
(3) Specify the schedule for taking the steps necessary to achieve
compliance.
§ 3-165 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-166
1:113
§ 3-167. Communications.
(4) Indicate the official responsible for implementation of the plan.
(5) Indicate why certain Township facilities cannot be made accessible.
D. Effective immediately, the new construction and alteration provisions of
the ADA and the regulations adopted pursuant thereto shall apply to all
Township construction.
A. The Township shall take whatever steps may be necessary to ensure
that communications with applicants, participants and members of the
public with disabilities are as effective as communications with others.
B. Auxiliary aids and services shall be furnished to afford individuals with
disabilities an equal opportunity to participate in and enjoy the benefits
of the Township's services, programs and activities.
C. The Township shall equip emergency systems with telecommunications
devices for the deaf (TDD's) and computer modems.
D. All Township communications, including the public notices required by
§ 3-161 of this chapter, shall comply with the communication
requirements of the ADA and the regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
E. The Township shall place an appropriate access statement on all public
communications.
§ 3-166 JACKSON CODE § 3-167
1:114
ARTICLE XV
Emergency Medical Services Advisory Board
[Added 3-25-2008 by Ord. No. 12-08]
§ 3-168. Establishment.
There is hereby created a Medical Services Advisory Board to be known as
the "Jackson Township Medical Services Advisory Board."
§ 3-169. Duties.
The Emergency Medical Services Advisory Board shall assist and advise the
Mayor and Township Council in monitoring and evaluating the emergency
medical services that are provided to the residents of Jackson Township
by the duly appointed provider. A member of the Jackson Township Police
Department, Jackson Township Volunteer First Aid and Jackson Township
Council (all serving as liaisons) together with the Emergency Medical
Services Advisory Board shall review the performance of the emergency
medical services provider, review reports from the emergency medical
services provider, and review the response times of the emergency medical
services provider. The Emergency Medical Services Advisory Board shall
periodically provide reports to the Mayor and Township Council. The
Emergency Medical Services Advisory Board shall include in such report
any recommendations for improving the emergency medical services
provided to the residents of the Township of Jackson.
§ 3-170. Appointment of members.
The Emergency Medical Services Advisory Board shall consist of no more
than five members. The members are to be appointed by the Mayor with
the advice and consent of the Township Council. The membership of the
Emergency Medical Service Advisory Board shall consist of five residents of
the Township of Jackson.
§ 3-171. Terms of members.
Each member appointed to the Emergency Medical Services Advisory Board
shall serve for a term of one year commencing on January 1 and ending on
December 31 of each year. Any member of the Emergency Medical Services
Advisory Board shall continue to serve in that position until such time as a
successor is qualified and appointed.
§ 3-172. Appointment of Chairman.
The Chairman of the Emergency Medical Services Advisory Board shall be
selected by a majority vote of the members of that Board and shall serve for
a term of one year.
§ 3-168 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-172
1:115
Chapter 10
CLAIMS APPROVAL
§ 10-1. Submission of detailed statement.
Any person claiming payment from the Township of Jackson shall first
submit a detailed statement of the items or demand necessitating such
claim to the Chief Financial Officer, specifying particularly how the bill or
demand is made up, and a certification of the party claiming payment that it
is correct. No bill, claim or demand shall be considered for payment unless
the voucher has attached to it or includes a certification of a department
head, or other municipal official responsible for certain functions, or of his
or her duly designated representative having personal knowledge of the
facts that the goods have been received by or the services rendered to the
Township of Jackson, and that those services or goods are consistent with
any existing contract or purchase order. The Chief Financial Officer shall
have the duty to audit, warrant and make recommendations on all claims
and bills.
§ 10-2. Inclusion in agenda.
The bill or claim duly certified shall be presented to the Municipal Clerk for
inclusion in the agenda of the next formal meeting of the Township Council
so as to comply with N.J.S.A. 2A:30A-1 et seq., and it shall be the duty of
the Clerk to examine all bills or claims submitted for payment in order to
ascertain if proper administrative procedures have been followed. Claims
or bills to be considered by the Township Council shall be listed without
preference, and said list shall be made available to every member of said
Township Council prior to formal action by that body.
§ 10-3. Approval or disapproval of claims.
Claims shall be considered by the Township Council, which shall approve
the same, except that said Township Council may reject any claim presented
to it, stating the reason for such rejection. Any disapproved claim shall be
referred back to the Municipal Clerk with such instructions as the Township
Council may give at the time of disapproval.
§ 10-4. Records.
It shall be the duty of the Municipal Clerk to record all claims in the
official minutes or through an appropriate claims register, indicating that
the Township Council has by formal action approved the same, with
appropriate record as to any claims disapproved or rejected. All records
pertaining to approved and disapproved bills or claims shall be available for
public inspection.
§ 3-172 JACKSON CODE § 10-5
1:116
§ 10-5. Payment of claims.
After the Clerk has certified that the claims have been approved, he or she
shall submit said claims to the Chief Financial Officer, who shall forthwith
prepare the necessary checks for the payment thereof, which said checks
shall be signed by the Mayor and thereafter signed by the Township Clerk
and Chief Financial Officer. After preparing checks for the payment of
claims, he or she shall record them in proper books of account and forward
said checks to claimants.
§ 10-6. Payment of advances for travel expenses.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the Township Council
may, by resolution, provide for and authorize the payment of advances to
specific Township officers and employees for travel expense and incidental
expenses thereto when such travel and incidental expenses are necessary
and proper, as the Township Council in its sole discretion shall determine,
in advancing the scope and nature of the work of the particular Township
officer or employee, subject to § 10-8.
§ 10-7. Payment of advances for vendor services.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the Township Council
may, by resolution, provide for and authorize the payment of advances for
vendor services, excluding the provision of materials and supplies, when
such services are of a professional nature as defined in the Local Public
Contracts Law of New Jersey, N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq., and when the
Township Council, in its sole discretion, shall determine that circumstances
exist which require the simultaneous payment for the services when the
services are provided.
§ 10-8. Procedure for payment of advances.
In making advances pursuant to this chapter, to any individual and/or
vendor, the following procedure shall govern:
A. A resolution shall be prepared by the Township Administrator, setting
forth the department head requesting the advance, the party to whom
the advance is to be paid and the purpose and amount of the advance.
B. A voucher requesting the advance and completed in accordance with
§ 10-1 shall be attached to the original resolution on file in the office of
the Township Administrator, bearing the signature of the appropriate
department head requesting the advance and the party to whom the
advance is to be paid.
C. The advance resolution shall be submitted to the Township Council for
consideration at the next regular meeting of the Township Council,
pursuant to §§ 10-2 and 10-3.
D. If the resolution is approved, an advance check shall be issued pursuant
to § 10-5.
§ 10-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-8
1:117
Chapter 16
COOPERATIVE PRICING AGREEMENTS
§ 16-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Ocean County
Cooperative Pricing System of the Township of Jackson; Lead
Agency — Township of Jackson."
§ 16-2. Statutory authority.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:11-11(5), the Township of Jackson
is hereby authorized to enter into a cooperative pricing agreement with
the Township of Jackson, as the lead agency, or any other contracting unit
within the County of Ocean or adjoining counties for the purchase of work,
materials and supplies.
§ 16-3. Responsibilities of lead agency.
The lead agency entering into contracts on behalf of the Township of
Jackson shall be responsible for complying with the provisions of the Local
Public Contracts Law (N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.) and all other provisions of
the revised statutes of the State of New Jersey.
Chapter 22
DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Ethics — See Ch. 26.
Personnel policies and procedures — See Ch.
50.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 62.
§ 22-1. Indemnification of public officials authorized.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 59:10-4, the Township of Jackson
authorizes the indemnification of each Township public official, as defined
in § 22-3 of this chapter, who was or is a party or is threatened to be made
E. Within 10 days of the completion of the authorized travel or payment for
the vendor's services, the Township department head from whose
department the request originated shall countersign the previously
submitted voucher, submit a detailed bill and require any necessary
adjustment to be made as to the advance payment to any officer or
employee within his or her department, including the repayment of any
excess advance, under the supervision of the Township Administrator.
§ 10-8 JACKSON CODE § 22-1
1:118
a party to any threatened, pending or completed action, suit or proceeding,
whether civil, criminal, administrative or investigative, by reason of the fact
that he or she is or was a public official of the Township of Jackson, against
any claims, losses, expenses (including attorneys' fees), judgments, fines
and amounts paid in settlement actually and reasonably incurred by him
or her in connection with such action, suit or proceeding to the full extent
permitted under the laws of the State of New Jersey.
§ 22-2. Payment of incurred expenses; exceptions.
§ 22-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PUBLIC OFFICIAL — All persons who were, now are or shall be lawfully
appointed or elected officials of the Township of Jackson while acting within
the scope of their official duties. The term "public official" shall include
members of such commissions, boards or other units operating by and
under the jurisdiction of Jackson Township and within an appointment of the
total operating budget of Jackson Township, while acting within the scope of
their official duties. The term "public official" shall also include employees
who may be responsible to the Township of Jackson or its commissions,
boards or other units. "Public official" does not mean and does not apply to
any officials, members or employees of any board of education, municipal
utilities authority or other agency outside the jurisdiction of the governing
body of the Township of Jackson. With the exception of full-time engineers
employed on staff by the Township of Jackson, the term "public employee"
shall not include any person working on retainer nor any independent
contractor or professional services contractor, nor shall the term "public
A. Expenses incurred in defending a civil or criminal action, suit or
proceeding shall be paid by the Township in advance of the final
disposition of such action, suit or proceeding to the extent authorized
by the Township in accordance with the laws of the State of New Jersey.
B. Notwithstanding the foregoing, nothing herein shall require the
Township to pay for punitive or exemplary damages or any damages
resulting from the commission of a crime or any act involving actual
fraud, actual malice, dishonesty, willful misconduct or an intentional
wrong, or any willful violation of any federal, state or local statute,
ordinance, rule, regulation, agreement or judicial or regulatory order.
In such a case, the public official of the Township shall be required to
establish that the act or omission upon which the claim or judgment is
based occurred within the scope of his or her official action or
employment as a public official or employee of the Township of Jackson
and that it was not the result of an act or failure to act constituting a
crime, actual fraud, actual malice, dishonesty, willful misconduct or an
intentional wrong, or any willful violation of any federal, state or local
statute, ordinance, rule, regulation, agreement or judicial or regulatory
order.
§ 22-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-3
1:119
employee" be construed to include any person performing services which
are covered by, connected with, or supervised by any court, penal or law
official or institution.
Chapter 26
ETHICS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 22.
Personnel policies and procedures — See Ch.
50.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 62.
§ 22-3 JACKSON CODE § 22-3
1:120
Part 1
[Adopted 12P-2u6b-l2ic0 0C7onBtyraOcrtds. No. 38-07]
ARTICLE I
Prohibition on Award of Contracts to Certain Contributors
§ 26-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this Part 1 is to comply with and adopt the provisions of P.L.
2004, c. 19, as amended, P.L. 2005, c. 51, and P.L. 2005, c. 271 (the "Pay-to-
Play Act").22
§ 26-2. Definitions.
As used in this Part 1, unless otherwise noted, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated, as delineated within N.J.S.A. 19:44A-20.7:
BUSINESS ENTITY — Any natural or legal person, business corporation,
professional services corporation, limited-liability company, partnership,
limited partnership, business trust, association or any other legal
commercial entity organized under the laws of this state or of any other
state or foreign jurisdiction.
INTEREST — The ownership or control of more than 10% of the profits or
assets of a business entity or 10% of the stock in the case of a business
entity that is a corporation for profit, as appropriate.
POLITICAL CONTRIBUTION — Any loans and transfers of money or other
things of value to any candidate, elected official or representative of any
political organization, or other commitments or assumptions of liability to
make any such transfer. Political contributions shall be deemed to have been
made upon the date when such commitment is made or liability assumed.
POLITICAL ORGANIZATION — Any two or more persons acting jointly,
or any corporation, partnership or other incorporated or unincorporated
association which is organized to, or does, aid or promote the nomination,
election or defeat of any candidate or candidates for Jackson Township
municipal or school board office. "Political organization" includes
organizations defined in N.J.S.A. 19:44A-3 as a "political committee," "joint
candidates committee," "continuing political committee," "political party
committee," or "candidate committee" and which aid or promote the
nomination, election or defeat of any candidate or candidates for Jackson
Township municipal or school board office.
§ 26-3. Prohibition on awarding public contracts to certain
contributors.
A. The Township of Jackson, and any agency or instrumentality thereof,
shall not enter into a contract having an anticipated value in excess of
$17,500, as determined in advance and certified in writing by the
22.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 19:44A-20.3 et seq.
§ 26-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-3
1:121
§ 26-4. Certain contributions deemed as contributions by business
entity.
When a business entity is a natural person, a contribution by that person's
spouse or child residing therewith shall be deemed to be a contribution by
the business entity. When a business entity is other than a natural person,
a contribution by any person or other business entity having at least a
ten-percent interest therein shall be deemed to be a contribution by the
business entity.
§ 26-5. Return of excess contributions.
If a business entity makes a contribution that would cause it to be ineligible
to receive a public contract, or in the case of a contribution made during
the term of a public contract that would constitute a violation of the Payto-
Play Act, the business entity may request, in writing, within 60 days of
the date on which the contribution was made, that the recipient thereof
repay the contribution and, if repayment is received within those 60 days,
the business entity would again be eligible to receive a contract, or would
no longer be in violation, as appropriate.
Township, with a business entity, except a contract that is awarded
pursuant to a fair and open process, if, during the preceding one-year
period, that business entity has made a contribution that is reportable
by the recipient under P.L. 1973, c. 83 (N.J.S.A. 19:44A-1 et seq.), to any
Jackson Township political organization, if a member of that political
party is serving in an elective public office of Jackson when the contract
is awarded or to any candidate committee of any person serving in an
elective public office of the municipality, when the contract is awarded;
and
B. A business entity that has entered into a contract having an anticipated
value in excess of $17,500 with the Township of Jackson, or any agency
or instrumentality thereof, except a contract that is awarded pursuant
to a fair and open process, shall not make such a contribution,
reportable by the recipient under P.L. 1973, c. 83 (N.J.S.A. 19:44A-1 et
seq.), to any Jackson Township municipal political organization, if a
member of that political party is serving in an elective public office of
that municipality when the contract is awarded, or to any candidate
committee of any person serving in an elective public office of that
municipality when the contract is awarded during the term of that
contract.
C. No such committee as referenced in Subsection A or B above shall
accept such a contribution from a business entity during the term of the
business entity's contract with the Township of Jackson, unless it was
awarded under a fair and open process.
§ 26-3 JACKSON CODE § 26-6
1:122
§ 26-6. Public exigency.
Nothing contained in this Part 1 shall be construed as prohibiting the
awarding of a contract when the public exigency requires the immediate
delivery of goods or performance of emergency services as determined by
the State Treasurer.
§ 26-7. Violations and penalties.
Violations of this article shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000.
§ 26-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-7
1:123

ARTICLE II
Fair and Open Process
§ 26-8. Use required; definition; disclosure of political
contributions.
A. The Township shall award all contracts with a business entity having an
anticipated value in excess of $17,500 on the basis of the fair and open
process herein, in accordance with N.J.S.A. 19:44A-20.7. For purposes
of this article, contracts awarded by public bidding pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40A:11-4, and competitive contracting pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:11-4.1
to 40A:11-4.5, shall be deemed to have satisfied the Township's fair and
open process. This article shall not apply to any contract for which the
entity is regulated by the state so as to prohibit or restrict said entity
from making political contributions.
B. Fair and open process defined.
(1) Requests for proposal shall be published by the posting of a public
notice at least 10 days prior to the awarding of any contract herein.
(a) The public notice shall be:
[1] Prominently posted in the public place reserved for
Sunshine Law notices;
[2] Mailed, telephoned, telegrammed, faxed, or hand
delivered to at least two newspapers designated to receive
such notice because they have the greatest likelihood of
informing the public within the municipality, one of which
shall be the official newspaper of the municipality; or
placed on the Township website; and
[3] Filed with the Township Clerk.
(b) The public notice shall, at minimum, include:
[1] A description of the goods or services needed, including,
where appropriate, a description of tasks involved.
[2] Threshold qualification requirements setting the highest
possible minimum standards for qualifying to compete for
the particular goods or services and tasks involved.
[3] Notice that the selection criteria are on file and available
at a stated location in the Township.
[4] Deadline and place for all submissions.
(2) The selection criteria to be used in awarding a contract or
agreement for goods or services shall include:
(a) Name and business address of proposed contractor. For
service contracts, the names and roles of the individuals who
§ 26-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-8
1:125
will perform the task, and a description of their experience
with projects similar to the matter being advertised.
(b) References which include evidence of successful transactions
for provision of similar goods or services.
(c) Description of ability to provide the goods or services in a
timely fashion (for service contracts, include staffing,
familiarity, and location of key staff).
(d) Cost details. For service contacts, include the hourly rates of
each of the individuals who will perform services, time
estimates for each individual, all expenses.
(e) Qualifications of the individuals who will perform the tasks and
the amounts of their respective participation (services only).
(f) Other relevant experience.
(g) Ability to perform the task or provide goods in a timely fashion.
(h) Cost consideration, including, but not limited to, as applicable,
historical costs for similar goods or services, expertise involved
and comparable costs for comparable entities.
(3) All submissions shall be kept on file during the term of the related
contract, and shall be public records after the deadline for the
submission of proposals.
(4) Contracts awarded under this article shall be publicly announced
and awarded.
C. Disclosure of political contributions. Any business entity submitting a
proposal to the Township under the fair and open process shall include
a statement of all political contributions made to a candidate for
political office in Jackson Township and any political organization as
defined in this Part 1, during the twelve-month period prior to the
submission of the proposal of the Township.
§ 26-8 JACKSON CODE § 26-8
1:126
Part 2
Political Contributions; Disclosures In Certain Land Use
[Adopted 12-2A6p-2p0li0c7atBioynOsrd. No. 39-07]
ARTICLE III
Use of Government Buildings and Equipment
§ 26-9. Definitions.
As used in this Part 2, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CANDIDATE — Any individual seeking election to a public office of the
federal, state, county or municipal government, or school district or political
party, and any individual who shall have been elected or failed of election to
any such office.
MUNICIPALITY — The government of the Township of Jackson, including
any officer, department, board, commission or agency thereof.
MUNICIPAL OFFICIAL, EMPLOYEE AND APPOINTEE — Any person
holding elective municipal office or holding an appointed position in the
municipal government, or in any agency, commission, board or office
thereof, whether the position is full-time or part-time, compensated or
uncompensated; and any employee of municipal government or of any
municipal agency, commission, board or office thereof, whether the position
is full-time or part-time.
POLITICAL CONTRIBUTION — Any loans and transfers of money or other
things of value to any candidate, elected official or representative of any
political organization, or other commitments or assumptions of liability to
make any such transfer. Political contributions shall be deemed to have been
made upon the date when such commitment is made or liability assumed.
POLITICAL ORGANIZATION — Any two or more persons acting jointly,
or any corporation, partnership or other incorporated or unincorporated
association which is organized to, or does, aid or promote the nomination,
election or defeat of any candidate or candidates for Jackson Township
municipal or school board office. "Political organization" includes
organizations defined in N.J.S.A. 19:44A-3 as a "political committee," "joint
candidates committee," "continuing political committee," "political party
committee," or "candidate committee" and which aid or promote the
nomination, election or defeat of any candidate or candidates for Jackson
Township municipal or school board office.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — All real or personal property owned, leased or
controlled by the Township of Jackson.
SOLICIT — To ask for, by oral or written communication, a contribution as
defined herein.
§ 26-10. General regulations; violations and penalties.
§ 26-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-10
1:127
A. Prohibition against soliciting or accepting political contribution in
rooms or buildings occupied in the discharge of public duties. No
municipal official, employee or appointee may solicit, commit to pay or
receive payment of or a commitment to pay any political contribution
for any candidate, elected official or political organization while in any
Township room or building occupied in the discharge of official
municipal business. This section shall include solicitation or acceptance
of political contributions made over a private cell phone or by use of a
private computer if the person soliciting or accepting the political
contribution or using the cell phone or computer for purposes of
soliciting or accepting the political contribution is in any Township
room or building occupied in the discharge of official municipal
business.
B. Prohibition against use of public property for political fund-raising. No
municipal official, employee or appointee may solicit, commit to pay or
receive payment of or a commitment to pay any political contribution
for any candidate, elected official or political organization while
utilizing public property.
C. Exceptions. In the event Township public facilities are made available to
any group for nongovernmental use, this prohibition shall not be
deemed to prevent fund-raising of any sort among members of such
groups during the time such groups have reserved exclusive use of the
Township facility.
D. Violations and penalties. Violation of any provision of this article shall
be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000.
§ 26-10 JACKSON CODE § 26-10
1:128
ARTICLE IV
Disclosure in Zoning and Planning Board Applications
§ 26-11. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICATION CHECKLIST — The list of submission requirements adopted
by ordinance and provided by the municipal agency to a developer pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.3.
CONTRIBUTION — Every loan, gift, subscription, advance or transfer of
money or other thing of value, including any item of real property or
personal property, tangible or intangible (but not including services
provided without compensation by individuals volunteering a part or all
of their time on behalf of a candidate, committee or organization), made
to or on behalf of any candidate, candidate committee, joint candidates
committee, political committee, continuing political committee or political
party committee and any pledge, promise or other commitment or
assumption of liability to make such transfer. For purposes of reports
required under the provisions of the ordinance, any such commitment or
assumption shall be deemed to have been a contribution upon the date
when such commitment is made or liability assumed.
CONTRIBUTION DISCLOSURE STATEMENT — A list specifying the
amount, date and the recipient of any and all contributions made to or on
behalf of any candidate, candidate committee, joint candidates committee,
political committee, continuing political committee or political party
committee of, or pertaining to, this municipality, made up to one-year
prior to filing the variance application and/or during the pendency of the
application process, and required to be reported pursuant to N.J.S.A.
19:44A-1 et seq.
DEVELOPER — A developer as defined by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-4, i.e., the legal
or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any land proposed to be included
in a proposed development, including the holder of an option or contract
to purchase, or other person having an enforceable proprietary interest in
such land.
PROFESSIONAL — Any person or entity whose principals are required to be
licensed by New Jersey law and who supplies legal representation, expert
testimony or written reports in support of an application. Professionals shall
include both any individuals supplying the representation, testimonies or
reports and the firms or entities in which said individuals practice.
§ 26-12. Disclosure statements.
A. Disclosure requirements.
(1) Any applicant for a variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d, or a
variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c in conjunction with any
application for a subdivision not considered a minor subdivision
§ 26-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-12
1:129
pursuant to local ordinance, or a site plan not considered a minor
site plan pursuant to local ordinance, as well as any application for
a subdivision not considered a minor subdivision pursuant to local
ordinance, or site plan not considered a minor site plan pursuant
to local ordinance requiring waivers or exceptions pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-51, shall, for applications made after the effective
date of this article, include in the application contribution
disclosure statements for all developers, all associates of said
developers who would be subject to disclosure pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-48.1 or 40:55D-48.2 and all professionals who apply for or
provide testimony, plans or reports in support of said variance and
who have an enforceable proprietary interest in the property or
development which is the subject of the application or whose fee,
in whole or part, is contingent upon the outcome of the application.
Regardless of whether the owner of the property which is the
subject of the variance application falls in any of the categories
established in the preceding sentence, the applicant shall include
in the application a contribution disclosure statement for said
owner.
(2) During the pendency of the application process for applications
made after the effective date of this article, until final site plan
approval is granted, any applicant required to comply with this
article shall amend its contribution disclosure statements to
include continuing disclosure of all contributions within the scope
of disclosure requirement of the above subsection.
B. Inclusion of contribution disclosure statements as an element of the
application checklist.
(1) An application checklist is hereby adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-10.3 to require that the contribution disclosure statements
specified in Subsection A of this section shall be submitted by the
applicant for all applications for variance relief pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d as well as for relief pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c or
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-51 in applications for site plan and subdivision
approval not considered to be minor site plans or minor
subdivisions pursuant to local ordinance.
(2) The Municipal Planning Board and Board of Adjustment shall
amend its application checklist for variances pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d as well as for relief pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c or
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-51 in applications for site plan and subdivision
approval not considered to be minor site plans or minor
subdivisions pursuant to local ordinance to include the contribution
disclosure statements specified in Subsection A of this section.
(3) An application shall not be deemed complete by the administrative
official or accepted for public hearing by the municipal agency until
the required contribution disclosure statements are submitted.
§ 26-12 JACKSON CODE § 26-12
1:130
C. Availability of the disclosure statement. All contribution disclosure
statements shall be available in the office of the administrative officer
for review by any member of the public.
D. Intent of the disclosure statement. It is the intent of this article that the
disclosure statement shall serve to inform the public and not serve as
evidence relevant to the decision criteria for variance applications
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d as well as for relief pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70c or N.J.S.A. 40:55D-51 in applications for site plan and
subdivision approval not considered to be minor site plans or minor
subdivisions pursuant to local ordinance.
§ 26-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-12
1:131

Part 3
[AdopEttehdic1s1 I-n2f4o-r2m00a9tioBny COormd.m Niott.e 3e7-09]
ARTICLE V
Establishment; Membership; Powers and Duties
§ 26-13. Establishment; definitions.
A. There is hereby established a Township Ethics Information Committee
consisting of seven members. The Mayor shall appoint three members
of the public to the Ethics Information Committee, two of whom shall be
from different political parties (e.g., one Republican and one Democrat)
and one member who shall be an Independent or undeclared. The
Council shall appoint three members of the public to the Ethics
Information Committee, two of whom shall be from different political
parties (e.g., one Republican and one Democrat) and one member who
shall be an Independent or undeclared. A Republican member shall
have been a registered Republican for at least five years prior to
appointment. A Democrat shall have been a registered Democrat for at
least five years prior to appointment. An Independent shall have been
registered as an Independent for at least five years prior to
appointment. The seventh member shall be a member of the clergy, and
shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the
Council. An alternative seventh member shall be appointed who is also
a member of the clergy, who shall participate in discussions, but shall
only have a vote if the regular seventh member is not present. The
members shall be chosen by virtue of their known and consistent
reputation for integrity and their knowledge of local government
affairs. All members must be residents of Jackson Township, except the
clergy members who are the seventh members, who shall either be
Jackson Township residents, or whose congregations shall be located in
Jackson Township in accordance with § 26-15. All members, except the
seventh regular and alternate members, shall agree to a background
check by the Township.
B. For purposes of this Part 3, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EMPLOYEE — Any person who is not a local government officer,
whether compensated or not, whether part-time or full-time, whether
employed by or serving on an agency of or for the Township of Jackson.
OFFICER or LOCAL GOVERNMENT OFFICER — Any person, whether
compensated or not, whether part-time or full-time, who is one of the
following:
(1) Mayor;
(2) Township Council;
(3) Municipal Clerk;
§ 26-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-13
1:133
(4) Deputy Municipal Clerk;
(5) Business Administrator;
(6) Confidential Aide to Mayor;
(7) All department heads;
(8) All salaried division heads;
(9) Township Engineer;
(10)Municipal Prosecutor;
(11)Public Defender;
(12)Members, Zoning Board of Adjustment;
(13)Attorney, Zoning Board of Adjustment;
(14)Engineer, Zoning Board of Adjustment;
(15)Planner, Zoning Board of Adjustment;
(16)Members, Planning Board;
(17)Attorney, Planning Board;
(18)Engineer, Planning Board;
(19)Planner, Planning Board;
(20)Code Enforcement Officer;
(21)Members, Jackson Township Municipal Utilities Authority;
(22)Attorney, Jackson Township Municipal Utilities Authority;
(23)Members, Rent Leveling Board;
(24)Attorney, Rent Leveling Board;
(25)Accountant, Rent Leveling Board;
(26)Members, Historic Preservation Commission;
(27)Members, Environmental Commission;
(28)Members, Shade Tree Commission;
(29)All police officers above the title of patrolman;
(30)Members, Economic Development Commission;
Any other person who is a managerial executive or confidential
employee, as defined the New Jersey Employer-Employee Relations
Act, N.J.S.A. 34:13A-3 et seq., of the Township of Jackson, or of
(31)
§ 26-13 JACKSON CODE § 26-13
1:134
§ 26-14. Political activity of members; confidentiality.
Subsequent to appointment to the Ethics Information Committee, members
shall not participate in any kind of political activity or campaign activity,
such as, but not limited to, being a member of or in attendance at political
party club meetings, campaigning door-to-door, participating in political
party phone banks, or writing letters to media which are of a political
nature. Members shall not make monetary or in-kind contributions to any
political party committee, candidate committee or political action
committee, whether local, state, county or national, while a member of the
Ethics Information Committee. If a member is determined to have violated
the provisions of this section, the member shall be immediately dismissed
from the Ethics Information Committee. Any member who is determined to
have disclosed the name and/or information contained in a complaint made
in accordance with § 26-20 herein shall be dismissed immediately from the
Committee.
§ 26-15. Chairperson; term.
The Chairperson shall be the seventh member of the Ethics Information
Committee, appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the
Council, and shall be a member of the clergy. The term of this member
shall be a five-year term. The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the
Council, shall appoint an alternate seventh member, who shall also be a
member of the clergy, and shall also serve a five-year term. The regular
and alternate seventh member shall be residents of Jackson Township or, in
the alternative, shall have congregations whose physical base and religious
home are located in the borders of Jackson Township.
§ 26-16. Ethics Officer.
The Township Clerk shall serve as Ethics Officer.
§ 26-17. Terms; vacancies.
UNDECLARED — A person shall be considered to be of this status if the
person has not voted in a political party primary in the immediate five
years prior to appointment.
an agency created under the authority of or appointed by the
Township of Jackson.
A. The Mayor shall appoint his or her members by letter. The Council shall
appoint its members by resolution of the Township Council. The seventh
member shall also be appointed by resolution of the Township Council.
Initial terms of the members for the Ethics Information Committee shall
be determined by random lottery selection, conducted by the
Chairperson of the Committee as follows:
(1) Of the two members appointed from one political party (e.g., two
Republicans, one appointed by the Mayor and one appointed by the
§ 26-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-17
1:135
§ 26-18. Compensation.
Members of the Ethics Information Committee shall serve without
compensation.
§ 26-19. Distribution of ethics information.
Within 90 days after the establishment of a Township Ethics Information
Committee, and by January 31 of each succeeding year, the Ethics Officer
shall distribute the Township Code of Conduct and the applicable state
Ethics Law to all local government officers and employees, including all
elected officials, appointed board and committee members, as defined
herein under § 26-13B. The Township Code of Conduct and applicable state
Ethics Law shall be deemed to mean, but not be limited to, the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 40A:9-22.6 and N.J.S.A. 40:69A-163 to 40:69A-167. The Ethics
Officer shall obtain and maintain a signed statement from each person
to whom the information is distributed, acknowledging receipt of the
distributed materials. If the Township Code of Conduct, or the relevant
state ethics standard is revised or supplemented, copies of such revision or
supplement shall be provided, and acknowledged, in the same manner as
set forth herein for the annual distribution.
§ 26-20. Receipt of ethics questions and complaints.
Council), one shall have a term for one year and the other shall
have a term for three years, as determined by the random lottery.
(2) Of the two members appointed from the other political party (e.g.,
two Democrats, one appointed by the Mayor and one appointed by
the Council), one shall have a term for one year, and the other shall
have a term for three years, as determined by the random lottery.
(3) Of the two members appointed as Independent or undeclared, (e.g.,
one Independent and one undeclared, one appointed by the Mayor
and one appointed by the Council), one shall have a term for one
year, and the other shall have at term for three years, as
determined by the random lottery.
B. After the serving of the initial terms, appointment to the Ethics
Information Committee shall be for a term of five years.
C. Any vacancy occurring in the membership of the Ethics Information
Committee shall be filled in the same manner as the original
appointment for the unexpired term.
A. The Township Ethics Information Committee, through the Ethics
Officer, shall establish an e-mail address, and a toll-free phone number
for the receipt of ethics questions or complaints alleging that the
conduct of any local government officer or employee serving the
municipality is in conflict with the Code of Conduct or applicable ethical
standard. Employees, officials or other identified individuals may
§ 26-17 JACKSON CODE § 26-20
1:136
submit questions and complaints with regard to possible violations
of the Township Code of Conduct or state ethics requirements. All
complaints or questions received must be submitted with the name and
address of the submitter. Anonymous submissions will not be forwarded
to the Committee.
B. The Ethics Officer will forward such questions and complaints to the
Committee. The Committee will hold meetings at least quarterly and
will respond, in writing, to questions as soon as practicable. Complaints
will be submitted by the Ethics Officer to the Committee without
identifying individual employees.
C. Response of Committee.
(1) If the complaint describes what the Committee considers
questionable conduct, the Ethics Officer shall contact the accused
officer or employee and advise that he or she may submit
documentation to refute the allegations in writing to the Committee
within 30 days of the date of notification by the Committee. The
accused officer or employee may also request a meeting in person
with the Committee to present evidence to refute the complaint. If,
subsequently, the Committee determines that the complaint should
be reviewed, it shall direct the Ethics Officer to forward the
complaint to the Ethics Division of the Local Finance Board in the
State Office of Community Affairs, with a letter from the Committee
advising as to its findings, along with any pertinent documentation
and evidence received by the Committee. Additionally, if the
Committee determines that its findings warrant the complaint,
findings, documentation and evidence will be forwarded to the
Ocean County Prosecutor's Office, or other appropriate legal
investigatory, entity for further investigation.
(2) The individual submitting the complaint shall be advised, in
writing, whether the matter was so forwarded, or if the information
presented did not appear to the Committee to describe an ethical
lapse. If the Committee is not forwarding the complaint to the
Ethics Division of the Local Finance Board in the State Office of
Community Affairs, the Committee will advise, in writing, the
individual submitting the complaint that he or she may file such
complaint directly with the Ethics Division of the Local Finance
Board in the State Office of Community Affairs.
D. If the Committee determines that the individual submitting the
complaint has revealed its contents to the media or has published the
information publicly, whether written or orally, the Committee will
advise, in writing, the individual submitting the complaint that, the
Committee will not consider the complaint and that he or she may file
such complaint directly with the Ethics Division of the Local Finance
Board in the State Office of Community Affairs.
§ 26-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-20
1:137
Chapter 29
FUNDS
§ 26-20 JACKSON CODE § 26-20
1:138
ARTICLE I
Open Space Trust Fund
[Adopted 12-10-2001 by Ord. No. 47-01 (Ch. 80 of the 1972 Code)]
§ 29-1. Establishment; use; disbursement.
§ 29-2. Funding. [Amended 12-13-2004 by Ord. No. 42-04;
2-23-2010 by Ord. No. 03-10]
Beginning in 2010, a special tax rate shall be added to the total Township
rate in the amount of $0.02 per $100 of the annual assessment valuations
and tax rate, the revenue from which shall be deposited into the Open
Space Trust Fund. The Township may, in its discretion, deposit additional
municipal monies into the Open Space Trust Fund, which deposits shall
then be subject to all of the provisions governing the Open Space Trust
Fund. The Open Space Trust Fund shall also be authorized to accept
donations and testamentary bequests.
§ 29-3. Utilization of funds.
The funds accumulated within the Open Space Trust Fund shall be utilized
for the acquisition of real estate and interests in real estate as more fully
delineated in § 29-1 hereinabove. In connection with such acquisitions, the
funds may be utilized for appraisals, title fees, professional fees and other
items of expense permitted by law in connection with the acquisition of real
A. There is hereby established a reserve in the General Trust Fund which
shall be noted and designated as the "Open Space Trust Fund." A
separate bank account shall be established and maintained entitled
"Township of Jackson Open Space Trust Account."
B. As authorized by ordinance, funds from the Open Space Trust Fund may
be utilized to acquire all types of interests in real property, including,
but not by way of limitation, fee simple acquisitions, easements,
development rights, or any other lesser interest in real estate which will
further the goal of property acquisitions for passive recreation, active
recreation and water quality protection. The Township shall have the
option of funding property acquisitions with funds solely from the Open
Space Trust Fund or by apportioning the cost thereof by charging the
Open Space Trust Fund for a portion thereof. It is understood that
acquisitions may occur via gift, purchase or by eminent domain.
C. In addition, the Township may authorize the disbursement of monies
from the Open Space Trust Fund to assist the County of Ocean or the
State of New Jersey or any political subdivision thereof in acquiring
interests in real property located within the Township of Jackson for the
purposes stated herein, provided that, in the event such interests are
sold, the net proceeds of such disposition will be paid to the Township's
Open Space Trust Fund in the same proportion that the Township's
contribution bore to the original acquisition price.
§ 29-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-3
1:139
estate. Additionally, funds accumulated within the Open Space Trust Fund
may be used as a down payment for the issuance of bonds or for debt service
for the same purpose at the discretion of the Township Committee. Any and
all interest or gain accruing shall remain in the Open Space Trust Fund and
may be utilized for the above-described purposes.
§ 29-4. Utilization of land acquired with funds.
The land acquired under the Open Space Trust Fund shall be utilized for all
categories of open space, including parks, recreation areas, natural areas
and such other uses consistent with the concept of open space.
§ 29-5. Sale of property.
No real property or interest therein acquired with funds from the Open
Space Trust Fund shall be sold, conveyed, leased or otherwise alienated,
unless it is needed for another public use or otherwise furthers the purposes
of the trust.
§ 29-3 JACKSON CODE § 29-5
1:140
Chapter 33
LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM
§ 29-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-5
1:141

ARTICLE I
First Aid Squad
[Adopted 5-24-2004 by Ord. No. 24-0423 (Ch. 72, Art. I, of the 1972
Code)]
§ 33-1. Program creation.
A Length of Service Awards Program (hereinafter referred to as "LOSAP")
is hereby created in the Township of Jackson in accordance with Chapter
388 of the Laws of 1997 of the State of New Jersey (N.J.S.A. 40A:14-183 et
seq.) and N.J.A.C. 5:30-14.1 et seq. to reward the members of the Jackson
Township First Aid Squad, all of whom are volunteer First Aid Squad
members, for their loyal, diligent and devoted service to the residents of the
Township of Jackson.
§ 33-2. Definitions.
The definitions as provided in N.J.A.C. 5:30-14.1 are hereby included in this
article as if cited in full or as complemented by the following:
ACTIVE EMERGENCY SERVICE — Participation in the affairs of the Jackson
Township First Aid Squad in accordance with the bylaws established by the
squad and applied on a consistent and uniform basis and in accordance with
the eligibility system as identified in Appendix A to this article.24
EMERGENCY SERVICE ORGANIZATION — The Jackson Township First Aid
Squad, a duly incorporated volunteer first aid, emergency and volunteer
ambulance association.
LOCAL PLAN ADMINISTRATOR — The Township Administrator of the
Township of Jackson.
§ 33-3. Defined contribution program.
The Township LOSAP shall provide for the funding of a fixed contribution
annual contribution by the Township of Jackson to a deferred income
account for each active volunteer member that meets the criteria set forth
in this article. Such contributions shall be made in accordance with the
requirements of Chapter 388 of the Laws of 1997 of the State of New Jersey
(N.J.S.A. 40A:14-183 et seq.) and N.J.A.C. 5:30-14.1 et seq. The plan shall
be administered in accordance with the laws of the State of New Jersey,
the United States Internal Revenue Code and this article. The following
provisions shall apply to this plan:
A. Annual contributions. The annual contribution to be made by the
Township of Jackson for each active volunteer member shall be $1,150
per year of active emergency service commencing with the year 2005.
There shall be no contributions for prior years of service.
23.Editor's Note: This ordinance passed at referendum 11-2-2004.
24.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 33-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-3
1:143
B. Appropriations. Appropriations for the purpose of funding the
Township's LOSAP plan shall be included as a separate line item in the
Township's budget commencing in the year 2005.
C. Periodic increases. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A
above, the annual contribution to be made by the Township of Jackson
for each of the active volunteer members shall be subject to periodic
increases based upon the consumer price index factor pursuant to
Subsection f of Section 3 of P.L. 1997, c. 388.25
D. Estimated cost. The estimated cost of the LOSAP to the Township of
Jackson has been calculated to be approximately $45,000 per year.
E. Criteria for eligibility.
(1) An active volunteer member shall be eligible to participate in the
LOSAP plan immediately upon commencement of the member's
performance of active emergency services in the Jackson Township
First Aid Squad.
(2) Annual contributions to the deferred income account for each
member shall be made by the Township; however, only for those
active members who have earned the minimum number of points
for performing certain volunteer services basis pursuant to the
requirements set forth in Appendix A attached hereto for a twelvemonth
period.26
(3) A volunteer who is an active volunteer member of the Jackson
Township First Aid Squad and is also a member of a volunteer fire
department with a separate LOSAP plan cannot receive more than
the maximum annual benefit amount in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:30-14.15.
(4) In computing credit for those active volunteer members who also
serve as paid employees within a local governmental unit, credit
shall not be given for activities performed during the individual's
regularly assigned work periods.
F. Determination as to eligibility. The Jackson Township First Aid Squad
shall provide to the Local Plan Administrator a certified list as to active
volunteer members who are initially eligible to participate in the LOSAP
as of January 1 of 2005. Annually in January of subsequent years, the
Jackson Township First Aid Squad shall provide to the Local Plan
Administrator a certified list as to active volunteer members who are
eligible to participate in the LOSAP for that year having complied with
the approved point plan in Appendix A27 in the prior year. The Local
Plan Administrator shall forward said certified list to the Jackson
Township Committee with a copy to the Jackson Township Mayor and
25.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:14-185f.
26.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included at the end of this chapter.
27.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 33-3 JACKSON CODE § 33-3
1:144
Council for approval in accordance with the provisions of N.J.A.C.
5:30-14.10. Within 30 days of the receipt of the certified list from the
First Aid Squad and any requested clarifications thereto, the Township
Committee shall approve the certified list as being accurate and shall
return the approved certified list to the Jackson Township Clerk and the
Jackson Township First Aid Squad for posting. Said approved list shall
be posted for a thirty-day period for membership review. Appeals from
the decision of the Township Committee shall be governed by N.J.A.C.
5:30-14.11. The decision of the Township Committee as to such active
members' eligibility shall be binding upon the Plan Administrator,
participants, beneficiaries and any and all other persons having an
interest hereunder, subject to appropriate judicial review.
G. Terms of participation. The Plan Administrator shall have the right to
require any active volunteer member at the time of his or her becoming
a participant to agree in writing to be bound by the terms, covenants
and conditions of the LOSAP and accompanying trust. Each participant
shall furnish to the Plan Administrator all pertinent information
required for the administration of the LOSAP. The Plan Administrator
shall rely upon all such information furnished.
H. Vesting. The active volunteer member shall not be permitted to receive
a distribution of the funds in his or her LOSAP account until the
completion of a five-year vesting period.
I. Termination of service.
(1) Any participant who terminates service as an active volunteer
member shall cease to participate hereunder and no contribution
shall be made on their behalf. A former participant may resume
participation immediately upon returning to the service of the
Jackson Township First Aid Squad as an active volunteer member.
(2) Any active volunteer member who was not fully vested and
terminates service with the Jackson Township First Aid Squad, and
who subsequently returns to service and again becomes a
participant, shall be treated as a new participant for purposes of
eligibility.
(3) Any active volunteer member who was fully vested and terminates
service with the Jackson Township First Aid Squad, and
subsequently returns to service and again becomes a participant,
shall receive credit for their former years of eligible service and
shall resume participation in the same manner as prior to their
termination.
(4) Should a volunteer fail to vest or terminate their association with
the Jackson Township First Aid Squad prior to the completion of the
vesting period, the funds placed in the LOSAP account on behalf of
the volunteer shall revert to the Township, not to the volunteer.
§ 33-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-4
1:145
§ 33-4. Approval by voters required.
This article shall not take effect unless it is approved by the voters of the
Township of Jackson as a public question at the next general election.
§ 33-5. Referendum.
A. The following referendum question shall be submitted to the voters of
the Township of Jackson at the next general election in November 2004:
Shall the Township of Jackson be authorized to establish a Length of
Service Awards Program (LOSAP) for the volunteers of the Jackson
Township First Aid Squad that serve the Township of Jackson pursuant
to the following terms and conditions:
1. The program shall provide for annual contributions to be made
by the Township to a deferred income account for each active
volunteer member of the Jackson Township First Aid Squad who
meets the criteria adopted by the Township of Jackson.
2. The annual contribution to be made by the Township shall be $1,150
per eligible active volunteer member.
3. The initial cost of the program has been estimated to be $45,000
per year.
B. Explanatory statement.
(1) The Township of Jackson has decided to create a Length of Service
Awards Program (LOSAP) to benefit eligible members of the
Jackson Township First Aid Squad, all of whom are volunteers who
serve the citizens of the Township Jackson. The Township of
Jackson has determined that the creation of a LOSAP will enhance
the ability of the Township to recruit and retain volunteer First Aid
Squad members. The general requirements of a LOSAP are set
forth in State law N.J.S.A. 40A:14-183 et seq.
(2) Each volunteer First Aid Squad member who performs the
minimum amount of required service required by the Township
ordinance shall have the sum of $1,150 per year deposited into a
tax-deferred income account that will earn interest for the
volunteer.
(3) The cost of these contributions will be provided for annually in the
budget of the Township of Jackson commencing in the year 2005,
and it is anticipated to be approximately $45,000 per year.
(4) Additional details regarding the program may be found in the
ordinance adopted by the Township of Jackson, which is available
for public inspection, along with a copy of the state enabling law in
the Ocean County Public Library at 2 Jackson Drive, Jackson, New
Jersey, and the Township Clerk's office at 95 West Veteran's
Highway, Jackson, New Jersey, between 8:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m.,
Mondays through Fridays, holidays excepted.
§ 33-4 JACKSON CODE § 33-6
1:146
§ 33-6. Availability of legislation.
A copy of this article and the Emergency Service Volunteer Length of
Service Award Act (N.J.S.A. 40A:14-183 et seq.) shall be made available to
the public at the Ocean County Public Library and shall be kept on file in
the Township Clerk's office.
§ 33-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-6
1:147
Chapter 37
MUTUAL AID AGREEMENTS
§ 37-1. Statutory authority; findings.
§ 37-2. Mutual aid agreements established.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-156 and N.J.S.A. 40A:14-156.1 et seq., there
are hereby established mutual aid agreements among and between this
municipality and each of the aforementioned municipalities in the County
of Ocean, New Jersey, which shall become effective upon the adoption by
one or more of the aforementioned municipalities (hereinafter referred to
as "participating municipalities") of reciprocal ordinances to provide mutual
aid in police services in case of emergency. This agreement shall apply
whenever this municipality may have an emergency within its boundaries
requiring additional police assistance to protect life and property and
whenever any of the aforementioned municipalities may experience a
similar emergency.
§ 37-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EMERGENCY — Includes situations in which the number of available police
officers in a participating municipality is insufficient to meet the public need
in a particular situation and situations where police aid involving special
expertise or training is required in order to protect life and property or to
assist in suppressing a riot or disorder. No formal declaration of emergency
is required to implement the provisions of the mutual aid agreement.
A. N.J.S.A. 40A:14-156, 40A:14-156.1, 40A:14-156.2 and 40A:14-156.3
authorize municipalities to enter into mutual aid and assistance
agreements for police services in cases of emergencies.
B. The County of Ocean consists of 33 municipalities, 32 of which have
municipal police departments operating for or within the Township of
Barnegat, Borough of Barnegat Light, Borough of Bay Head, Borough of
Beach Haven, Borough of Beachwood, Township of Berkeley, Township
of Brick, Township of Dover, Borough of Harvey Cedars, Borough of
Island Heights, Township of Jackson, Township of Lacey, Borough of
Lakehurst, Township of Lakewood, Borough of Lavallette, Township of
Little Egg Harbor, Township of Long Beach, Township of Manchester,
Borough of Mantoloking, Borough of Ocean Gate, Township of Ocean,
Borough of Pine Beach, Township of Plumsted, Borough of Point
Pleasant, Borough of Point Pleasant Beach, Borough of Seaside
Heights, Borough of Seaside Park, Borough of Ship Bottom, Borough of
South Toms River, Township of Stafford, Borough of Surf City, Borough
of Tuckerton and Township of Eagleswood, which regularly interact and
provide assistance to each other in police-related emergencies.
§ 33-6 JACKSON CODE § 37-4
1:148
§ 37-4. Requests for assistance.
The Director of Public Safety, acting head of the police division, Mayor, or
chief executive officer of a participating municipality is hereby authorized
to request assistance from the Chief or other head of the police department
of any other participating municipality to provide aid in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-156 et seq.
§ 37-5. Limits to providing assistance.
A participating municipality shall provide police assistance when a valid
request in accordance with this agreement to supply personnel is made,
to the extent possible without endangering persons or property within the
confines of the providing municipality.
§ 37-6. Powers, rights and immunities of members providing aid.
The members of the providing municipality's police department or division
supplying aid shall have the same powers, authority, rights and immunities
as the members of the police force of the requesting municipality when aid
is being rendered therein. Said members shall also have, while so acting,
such rights and immunities as they may otherwise enjoy in the performance
of their normal duties in the municipality rendering such assistance.
§ 37-7. County Critical Incident Management Plan.
These mutual aid agreements established herein by and between the
aforementioned municipalities in the County of Ocean shall further
authorize mutual police aid and assistance under the County Critical
Incident Management Plan as established by the Ocean County Prosecutor,
as the chief law enforcement official in the county. The plan provides
for a response by specially trained regional Emergency Response/Special
Weapons and Tactics Team in the event of certain hostage, barricade,
sniper, high-risk armed apprehensions, terrorist or similar situations
occurring within a municipality within the County of Ocean.
§ 37-8. Benefits in case of injury or death.
Members of the police force of the providing municipality suffering injury,
or their legal representatives, if death results while rendering assistance
in the requesting municipality, shall be entitled to all such salary, pension
rights, workers' compensation or other benefits, as they would have accrued
if such injury or death had occurred in the performance of duties in their
own municipality, with such benefits to be the responsibility of the providing
municipality.
§ 37-9. Reimbursement.
A. A municipality receiving police assistance hereunder pursuant to the
terms of the County Critical Incidental Management Plan shall not be
required to directly reimburse the regional team for services so
§ 37-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37-9
1:149
§ 37-10. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon final passage and publication according
to law. It shall become effective with respect to this municipality's activities
with another participating municipality when such other participating
municipality has adopted an ordinance reciprocal to this one, and such
ordinance has become effective in that municipality.
Chapter 43
OFFICIAL MAP
GENERAL REFERENCES
Tax Map — See Ch. 68.
§ 43-1. Map established and adopted.
An Official Map of and for the Township of Jackson is hereby established
and adopted.
§ 43-2. Copies on file; adoption by reference.
Three copies of said Official Map shall be maintained in the office of the
Township Clerk and shall be open to the public for inspection, said map
being adopted by reference.
Chapter 50
PERSONNEL POLICIES AND PROCEDURES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 22.
Ethics — See Ch. 26.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 62.
provided. The member municipalities shall, however, otherwise support
the function of the respective regional response teams by providing the
necessary manpower, equipment and supplies on an ongoing annual
basis pursuant to the terms of the County Critical Incident Management
Plan.
B. Where emergency police aid is otherwise provided under
circumstances outside the County Critical Incident Management Plan,
reimbursement shall be pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-156, or such other
terms and conditions for reimbursement specifically agreed to between
specific municipalities.
§ 37-9 JACKSON CODE § 43-2
1:150
§ 50-1. Personnel Policies and Procedures Manual.
The Township Council of the Township of Jackson has adopted and enacted
a Personnel Policies and Procedures Manual and an employee handbook.
The Personnel Policies and Procedures Manual applies to all officials,
appointees, employees, volunteers and independent contractors. The
Policies and Procedures Manual is not a contract and is intended to provide
guidelines covering public service by Township employees. The manual
shall be kept on file in the Township Clerk's office for inspection and review
by all employees of the Township, as well as the general public, during
normal business hours.
§ 50-2. Amendments to Personnel Policies and Procedures Manual.
The Township Council of the Township of Jackson reserves the right to
rescind or revise, without notice, and at the sole discretion of the governing
body, any policies and provisions of the manual. In the event there is
a conflict between the manual and any collective bargaining agreement,
personnel services contract, federal law or state law, the terms and
conditions of that contract or law shall prevail.
§ 50-3. Residency requirements.
A. Appointment. All officers and employees appointed to positions of
classified service under Title 11 of the New Jersey statutes for the
Township shall be bona fide residents of the Township of Jackson. A
"bona fide resident," for the purposes of this section, is a person having
a permanent domicile within the Township, and one which has not been
adopted with the intention of again taking up or claiming a previous
residence acquired outside of the Township.
B. Eligibility of applicants for positions and employments in the classified
service of the Township. The Township Council hereby limits the
eligibility of applicants for positions and employments in the classified
service of the Township to bona fide residents, except as otherwise
provided herein or by law.
C. Unavailability of qualified residents for available specific positions or
employments.
(1) Whenever the Township Council shall, by resolution, determine
that there cannot be recruited a sufficient number of qualified
residents for available specific positions or employments, the
Township shall advertise for other qualified applicants, who shall
be classified as follows:
(a) Class 1: other residents of Ocean County.
(b) Class 2: other residents of counties contiguous to Ocean
County.
§ 43-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 50-3
1:151
§ 50-4. Establishment of direct deposit program. [Added 7-8-2014
by Ord. No. 11-14]
As of September 1, 2014, mandatory direct deposit of net pay is established
for all employees of the Township of Jackson, including any person holding
public office, position, or employment whose compensation is paid by the
Township of Jackson. Compensation shall be deposited directly into each
employee's specific banking institution based upon information provided by
the employee. Seasonal and temporary employees may be exempt from the
direct deposit mandate.
§ 50-5. Information to be provided to employees. [Added 7-8-2014
by Ord. No. 11-14]
The Chief Financial Officer shall make available, for such employees who
have net pay directly deposited, any information concerning net pay, any
(c) Class 3: other residents of the state.
(d) Class 4: all other applicants.
(2) The Township shall first appoint all those in Class 1 and then those
in each succeeding class in the order above listed after all qualified
applicants in the preceding class or classes have been appointed or
have declined an offer of appointment.
D. Specific positions and employments requiring special talents or skills;
filling without reference to residency. Whenever the Township Council
shall determine, by resolution, that there are certain specific positions
or employments requiring special talents or skills which are necessary
for the operations of the Township and which are not likely to be found
among the residents of the Township, such positions or employments so
determined shall be filled without reference to residency. Any such
resolution shall set forth in detail the reasons upon which such a
determination is made.
E. Preference in promotion to bona fide residents. When promotions are
based on merit, as determined by suitable promotion tests or other
objective criteria, officers and employees who are bona fide residents
shall be given preference over a nonresident in any instance when all
measurable criteria are equal. The preference granted by this section
shall in no way diminish, reduce or affect the preference granted
pursuant to any other provision of law.
F. Preemption by order of court or of state or federal agency to eliminate
discrimination. Any requirements concerning eligibility, appointment or
promotion contained in this section shall be subject to any order issued
by any court or by any state or federal agency pursuant to law with
respect to a requirement of action to eliminate discrimination in
employment based upon race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry,
marital status or sex.
§ 50-3 JACKSON CODE § 50-5
1:152
accompanying information approved for distribution with net pay, and W-2
forms in accordance with applicable federal law, only on the Internet, or
via e-mail, with restricted access and policies and procedures to protect the
integrity and confidentiality of the information.
§ 50-6. Exceptions to direct deposit. [Added 7-8-2014 by Ord. No.
11-14]
Chapter 55
PUBLIC RECORDS
§ 55-1. Statutory authority; right of citizens to inspect records.
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq. (the "Act"),
government records shall be readily accessible for inspection, copying, or
examination by the citizens of this state, with certain exceptions, for the
protection of the public interest, and any limitations in the right of access
accorded by the Act as amended and supplemented shall be construed in
favor of the public's right of access.
§ 55-2. Definitions.
A "government record" or "record" shall be as defined within N.J.S.A.
47:1A-1.1. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1.1, the "custodian of a
government record" or "custodian" shall mean the Municipal Clerk.
§ 55-3. Deputy custodians.
The Municipal Clerk may delegate responsibility for handling records
requests for particular departments within the Township to deputy
custodians.
§ 55-4. Granting of permission to examine records; exceptions.
The custodian of a government record shall permit the record to be
inspected, examined, and copied by any person during regular business
hours unless a government record is exempt from public access by the Act,
as amended and supplemented, any other statute, resolution of either or
both houses of the Legislature, regulation promulgated under the authority
of any statute or executive order of the Governor, executive order of the
Governor, Rules of Court, any federal law, federal regulation, or federal
order. A request for a record must be made on a form adopted by the
custodian of the government record.
A. The governing body is authorized to grant an exemption from the
requirements adopted pursuant to this subsection on such terms and
conditions as the governing body may deem necessary.
B. The governing body is authorized to grant an exemption for seasonal
and temporary employees as the governing body may deem necessary.
§ 50-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-5
1:153
§ 55-5. Time limit for granting access to records.
Unless a shorter time period is otherwise provided by statute, regulation, or
executive order, a custodian of a government record shall grant access to a
government record or deny a request for access to a government record as
soon as possible, but not later than seven business days after receiving the
request, provided that the record is currently available and not in storage
or archived.
§ 55-6. Copying of records by hand or purchasing; cost.
During such regular business hours and under the supervision of a
representative of the custodian, every citizen of the state shall also have the
right to copy such records by hand and to purchase copies of the records.
Copies of records shall be made available upon the payment of the price as
established by law. The custodian may require a deposit against costs for
reproducing documents sought whenever the custodian anticipates that the
information thus requested will cost in excess of $5 to reproduce.
§ 55-7. Fees for copies. [Amended 11-23-2010 by Ord. No. 38-10]
A. The following fees shall be charged for copies of public documents and
records:
(1) Duplicate tax bills: $5 for an initial duplicate copy of a tax bill; $25
for each subsequent copy of a tax bill for the same tax year
requested by the same person or organization.
(2) Police reports: The fee shall be in accordance with the rates
established by N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5, set forth in Subsection A(3) below.
For police accident reports not requested in person, an additional
fee of $5 shall be charged to cover the administrative costs of the
report, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-131.
(3) All other documents: Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5, except as
otherwise provided by law or regulation, the fee assessed for the
duplication of a government record embodied in the form of printed
manner shall be $0.05 per letter-size page or smaller and $0.07 per
legal-size page or larger. If the actual costs of reproduction exceeds
$0.05 per letter-size page or smaller or $0.07 per legal-size page or
larger, the Township may charge the actual cost of duplication.
Access to electronic records and nonprinted materials shall be
provided free of charge, but the Township will charge for the actual
costs of any needed supplies, such as computer discs.
(4) Copies of videotapes or audiotapes; review of videotapes or
audiotapes: The Township shall charge the actual cost of
duplication.
(5) Redemption calculations:
§ 55-5 JACKSON CODE § 55-7
1:154
(a) In accordance with N.J.S.A. 54:5-54, the Tax Collector shall
provide to any party entitled to redeem a certificate pursuant
to this section (N.J.S.A. 54:5-54) two calculations of the amount
required for redemption within a calendar year at no cost. For
each subsequent calculation requested from the Tax Collector,
there shall be a fee of $50. A request for a redemption
calculation shall be made in writing to the Tax Collector.
(b) In accordance with N.J.S.A. 54:5-97.1, the Tax Collector may
charge a lienholder of a tax lien $50 for the calculation of the
amount due to redeem the tax lien as required pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 54:5-97.1. Any request for a redemption calculation
shall specify the date to be used for the calculation, which shall
be the date of the notice. Neither the Tax Collector nor the
municipality shall be liable for an incorrect calculation. The fee
paid to the municipality shall not become part of the lien and
shall not be passed on to any party entitled to redeem pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 54:5-54.
B. Whenever the nature, format, manner of collation or volume of a
government record embodied in the form of printed matter to be
inspected, examined or copied is such that the record cannot be
reproduced by the Township by ordinary document-copying equipment
in ordinary business size or involves an extraordinary expenditure of
time and effort by the Township to accommodate the request, the
Township may charge, in addition to the actual cost of duplicating the
record, a special service charge that shall be reasonable and based
upon the actual direct cost of providing the copy or copies. The
requestor shall have the opportunity to review and object to the charge
prior to it being incurred.
C. In the event an extraordinary expenditure of time and effort is needed
by the Township to accommodate a request to inspect, in addition to any
fees for actual duplication and copying incurred by the requestor under
this chapter, the Township shall assess a special service charge based
upon the cost incurred for such extensive use of information technology
resources and/or the labor cost of the personnel providing the service
that is actually incurred or attributable to the Township for the clerical
and supervisory assistance required, or both. The manner by which
such special inspection service fee is calculated shall be kept on file
with the Township. The requestor shall have the opportunity to review
and object to the charge prior to it being incurred.
§ 55-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-7
1:155
Chapter 62
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
Chapter 68
TAX MAP
GENERAL REFERENCES
Official Map — See Ch. 43.
§ 68-1. Approval.
The revision and updating of the Jackson Township Tax Map by the
Township Engineer, to show conditions of lands and real estate in this
municipality as of October 1, 2006, is hereby accepted and approved.
§ 68-2. Copies sent to certain officials.
The Township Clerk shall send a certified copy of this chapter to the County
Tax Administrator of the Ocean County Board of Taxation and to the Tax
Collector of this municipality.
§ 68-3. Engineer to forward copy for state records.
The Township Clerk shall send two certified copies of this chapter to the
Township Engineer, one being for his or her records and the other for her
or him to forward to the Director, Division of Taxation, Engineering and
Railroad Tax Bureau, Department of the Treasury, State of New Jersey, with
a reduced-size Tax Map for the records and information of said Director.
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 80
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 162.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 204.
Housing standards — See Ch. 233.
Noise — See Ch. 291.
§ 80-1. Purpose.
§ 55-7 JACKSON CODE § 80-1
1:156
§ 80-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALARM ADMINISTRATOR — A person or persons designated by the
governing authority to administer, control and review alarm applications,
permits and alarm dispatch requests.
ALARM BUSINESS — The business, by an individual, partnership,
corporation or other entity, of selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing,
repairing, altering, replacing, moving, installing or monitoring an alarm
system in an alarm site.
ALARM DISPATCH REQUEST — A notification to the police by the alarm
business that an alarm, either manual or automatic, has been activated at a
particular alarm site.
ALARM REVIEW BOARD — Shall consist of five members as follows: the
alarm administrator, a dispatcher or other person appointed by the Chief/
Director, a local alarm business representative appointed by the Local
Alarm Association/Chamber of Commerce and two members of the public at
large, appointed by the governing authority.
ALARM SITE — A single premises or location served by an alarm system
or systems. Each tenancy, if served by a separate alarm system, in a
multitenant building or complex shall be considered a separate alarm site.
ALARM SYSTEM — A device or series of devices, including, but not limited
to, systems interconnected with radio frequency signals, which are
designed to discourage crime or alert to fire danger by emitting or
transmitting a remote or local audible, visual or electronic signal indicating
an alarm condition. "Alarm system" does not include:
ALARM USER — Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity
who (which) uses an alarm system at its alarm site.
CHIEF/DIRECTOR — The Chief of Police or the Director of Public Safety of
the municipality or an authorized representative.
A. The purpose of this chapter is to encourage alarm users and alarm
businesses to maintain the operational reliability and proper use of
alarm systems and to reduce or eliminate false alarm dispatch requests.
B. This chapter governs systems intended to summon police response,
requires permits, provides for penalties for violations, establishes a
system of administration and sets conditions for suspension or loss of
permits.
An alarm installed on a vehicle unless the vehicle is permanently
located at a site; or
A.
An alarm designed to alert only the inhabitants of a premises that does
not have a sounding device which can be heard on the exterior of the
alarm site.
B.
§ 80-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-2
1:157
CONVERSION — The transaction or process by which one alarm business
begins monitoring of an alarm system previously monitored by another
alarm business.
DURESS ALARM — A silent alarm signal generated by the manual
activation of a device intended to signal a crisis situation requiring police
response.
FALSE ALARM DISPATCH — An alarm dispatch request to the Police or
Fire Department, when the responding police officer or fire personnel finds
no evidence of a criminal offense, attempted criminal offense or signs of
smoke, fire or other such condition, including weather conditions, after
having completed a timely investigation of the alarm site. An alarm dispatch
request, which is canceled by the alarm business or the alarm user prior
to the time the responding officer reaches the alarm site, shall not be
considered a false alarm dispatch.
FALSE ALARM USER AWARENESS CLASS — A class operated by the
governing entity for the purpose of educating alarm users about the
problems created by false alarm dispatches and in the responsible use of
their alarm system.
HOLDUP ALARM — A silent alarm signal generated by the manual
activation of a device intended to signal a robbery in progress.
KEYPAD — A device that allows control of an alarm system by the manual
entering of a coded sequence of numbers or letters.
MONITORING — The process by which an alarm business receives signals
from alarm systems and relays an alarm dispatch request to the
municipality for the purpose of summoning police response to the alarm
site.
ONE-PLUS DURESS ALARM — The manual activation of a silent alarm
signal by entering at a keypad a code that adds one to the last digit of the
normal arm/disarm code (e.g., normal code = 1234; one-plus duress code =
1235).
PERSON — An individual, corporation, partnership, association,
organization or similar entity.
TAKEOVER — The transaction or process by which an alarm user takes
over control of an existing alarm system which was previously controlled by
another alarm user.
VERIFY — An attempt, by the alarm business or its representative, to
contact the alarm site by telephonic or other electronic means, whether
or not actual contact with a person is made, before requesting a police
dispatch, in an attempt to avoid an unnecessary alarm dispatch request.
§ 80-3. Permit required; application; transferability; false
statements.
A. No alarm user shall operate, or cause to be operated, an alarm system
at its alarm site without first obtaining a valid electrical or fire permit
§ 80-2 JACKSON CODE § 80-3
1:158
and passing an inspection by the Jackson Township Building
Department, in accordance with the Uniform Construction Code.28
B. No alarm user shall operate, or cause to be operated, an alarm system
at its alarm site without a valid alarm permit issued by the alarm
administrator.
(1) A separate permit is required for each alarm site.
(2) A special classification shall be required for an alarm system
equipped for duress alarm.
C. Upon receipt of a completed application form, the alarm administrator
shall issue an alarm permit to an applicant unless the applicant has:
(1) Failed to pay a fine assessed under § 80-14; or
(2) Had an alarm permit for the alarm site suspended or revoked, and
the violation causing the suspension or revocation has not been
corrected.
D. Each permit application must include the following information:
(1) The name, address and telephone numbers of the person who will
be the permit holder and be responsible for the proper
maintenance and operation of the alarm system.
(2) The classification of the alarm site as either residential, commercial
or apartment.
(3) For each alarm system located at the alarm site, the purpose of the
alarm system, i.e., burglary, holdup, duress, fire or other.
(4) Signed certification from the alarm user and the alarm business
stating:
(a) The date of installation, conversion or takeover of the alarm
system, whichever is applicable;
(b) The name, address and phone number of the alarm business
performing the alarm system installation, conversion or alarm
system takeover and responsible for providing repair service to
the alarm system;
(c) The name, address and phone number of the alarm business
monitoring the alarm system if different from the installing
alarm business;
(d) That a set of written operating instructions for the alarm
system, including written guidelines on how to avoid false
alarms, has been left with the applicant; and
28.Editor's Note: See Ch. 162, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 80-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-3
1:159
§ 80-4. Alarm systems in apartment complexes contracted for by
individual tenant.
§ 80-5. Alarm systems in apartment complexes furnished by
apartment complex.
(e) That the alarm business has trained the applicant in proper use
of the alarm system, including instructions on how to avoid
false alarms.
(5) Classification of the alarm site as being equipped or nonequipped
for duress alarm.
E. Any false statement of a material matter made by an applicant for the
purpose of obtaining an alarm permit shall be sufficient cause for
refusal to issue a permit.
F. An alarm permit cannot be transferred to another person. An alarm
user shall inform the alarm administrator of any change that alters any
information listed on the permit application within five business days.
G. Information contained in permit applications shall be held in confidence
by all employees or representatives of the municipality with access to
such information.
A. If an alarm system installed by an individual tenant in an apartment
complex unit is monitored, the tenant must provide the name of a
representative of the apartment owner or property manager who can
grant access to the apartment to the alarm business which is providing
the monitoring service.
B. A tenant of an apartment complex shall also obtain an alarm permit
from the alarm administrator before operating or causing the operation
of an alarm system in the tenant's residential unit.
C. For purposes of enforcing this chapter against an individual residential
unit, the tenant is responsible for false alarm dispatches emitted from
the alarm system in the tenant's residential unit.
A. If the owner or property manager of an apartment complex provides
alarm systems in each residential unit as an amenity, then the owner or
property manager of the apartment complex shall obtain a master
alarm permit from the alarm administrator.
B. For purposes of assessing fines and enforcing this chapter, the master
alarm permit holder is responsible for payment of fines for false alarm
dispatches emitted from the alarm systems in residential units.
C. The owner or property manager of an apartment complex shall obtain a
separate alarm permit for any alarm system operated in a
nonresidential area of the apartment complex, including, but not
§ 80-3 JACKSON CODE § 80-5
1:160
§ 80-6. Permit duration and renewal. [Amended 11-25-2002 by Ord.
No. 49-02]
A permit shall be valid unless and until revoked or suspended in accordance
with the terms of this chapter. A new permit shall, however, be required
at the time of a conversion or takeover of the alarm system, whichever is
applicable.
§ 80-7. Operation and maintenance requirements.
§ 80-8. Monitoring procedures.
limited to, common tenant areas and office, storage and equipment
areas.
A. An alarm user shall:
(1) Maintain the premises and the alarm system in a manner that will
minimize or eliminate false alarm dispatches; and
(2) Make every reasonable effort to respond or cause a representative
to respond to the alarm system's location within one hour when
notified by the municipality to deactivate a malfunctioning alarm
system, to provide access to the premises or to provide security for
the premises; and
(3) Not manually activate an alarm for any reason other than an
occurrence of an event that the alarm system was intended to
report.
B. An alarm user shall adjust the mechanism or cause the mechanism to be
adjusted so that an alarm signal audible on the exterior of an alarm site
will sound for no longer than 10 minutes after being activated (or 15
minutes for systems operating under Underwriters Laboratories, Inc.,
Standards 365 or 609).
C. An alarm user shall have a properly licensed alarm business inspect his
alarm system after three false alarm dispatches in a one-year period.
After three false alarm dispatches, the alarm user must have a properly
licensed alarm business modify the alarm system to be more false-alarm
resistant or provide additional user training as appropriate.
A. An alarm business performing monitoring services shall:
(1) Not request dispatch for police response during the first week after
installation of an alarm system, but rather use that week to train
the alarm user on proper use of the alarm system unless
extenuating circumstances necessitate immediate requests for
response as determined by the alarm administrator.
(2) Report alarm signals by using telephone numbers designated by
the alarm administrator.
§ 80-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-8
1:161
§ 80-9. Duties of alarm businesses.
§ 80-10. Display of operating instructions.
An alarm user shall maintain at each alarm site a set of written operating
instructions for each alarm system.
§ 80-11. Alarm dispatch request records.
(3) Attempt to verify every alarm signal, except a duress alarm or
holdup alarm, before requesting a police response to an alarm
signal.
(4) Communicate alarm dispatch requests to the municipality in a
manner and form determined by the alarm administrator.
(5) Communicate verified cancellations of alarm dispatch requests to
the municipality in a manner and form determined by the alarm
administrator.
(6) Ensure that all alarm users of alarm systems equipped with duress
alarm are given adequate training as to the proper use of the
duress alarm.
B. The alarm administrator shall:
(1) Designate a manner, form and telephone numbers for the
communication of alarm dispatch requests; and
(2) Develop a procedure to accept verified cancellation of alarm
dispatch requests.
A. Alarm businesses shall not program alarm systems so that they are
capable of sending one-plus duress alarms. When performing a
takeover or conversion, an alarm business must remove the one-plus
duress alarm capability from the alarm system being taken over or
converted.
B. Alarm businesses shall not install any devices for activating a holdup
alarm, which is a single-action nonrecessed button.
A. The telecommunicator responding to an alarm dispatch request shall
record such information as necessary to permit the alarm administrator
to maintain records, including, but not limited to, the following
information:
(1) Identification of the permit number for the alarm site, when
available.
(2) Identification of the alarm site.
(3) Arrival time at the alarm site and dispatch received time.
§ 80-8 JACKSON CODE § 80-11
1:162
§ 80-12. System performance reviews.
If there is reason to believe that an alarm system is not being used or
maintained in a manner that ensures proper operation and suppresses false
alarms, the alarm administrator may require a conference with an alarm
user and the alarm business responsible for the repair of the alarm system
to review the circumstances of each false alarm.
§ 80-13. False alarm user awareness class.
(4) Date and time.
(5) Weather conditions.
(6) Area and/or subarea of premises involved.
(7) Name of alarm user's representative on premises, if any.
(8) Identification of the responsible alarm business.
(9) Unable to locate the address.
B. The responding police officer shall advise the telecommunicator to
indicate on the dispatch record whether the alarm dispatch was caused
by a criminal offense, an attempted criminal offense, or was weatherrelated
(thunder and/or lightning) or appears as a false alarm dispatch.
C. In the case of an assumed false alarm dispatch, the responding police
officer shall leave notice at the alarm site that the Police Department
has responded to a false alarm dispatch. The notice shall include the
following information:
(1) The date and time of police response to the false alarm dispatch.
(2) The identification number of the responding police officer.
(3) A statement urging the alarm user to ensure that the alarm system
is properly operated, inspected and serviced in order to avoid fines.
D. Alarm businesses which perform monitoring services must maintain
records relating to a request for police dispatch to an alarm site for a
period of at least one year. Records must include the name, address and
phone number of the alarm user, the alarm system zone(s) or point(s)
activated, the time of request for police dispatch and evidence that an
attempt to verify was made to the alarm site prior to the request for
police dispatch. The alarm administrator may request copies of such
records for individually named alarm users.
A. The alarm administrator shall oversee the creation and implementation
of a false alarm user awareness class. The two-hour program shall
inform alarm users of the problems created by false alarm dispatches
and teach alarm users how to operate alarm systems without
generating false alarm dispatches.
§ 80-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-13
1:163
§ 80-14. Fines.
B. This class will not be specific to any type of alarm system, merely
techniques or actions on the part of the alarm user to eliminate false
alarm dispatches. The class will be modeled from information received
from the National Burglar and Fire Alarm Association and the False
Alarm Reduction Association.
A. An alarm user or the master permit holder for an apartment complex
shall be subject to fines, warnings and suspension or revocation of
permit depending on the number of false alarm dispatches emitted from
an alarm system within a twelve-month period based upon the following
schedule:
Number of
False Alarm
Dispatches Action Taken Fines
1 On-site written notice and warning
letter No. 1
0
2 On-site written notice and warning
letter No. 2
0
3 On-site written notice and warning
letter No. 3
$25
(Advise to notify alarm installer to
make repairs and/or recertify alarm)
4 On-site written notice and suspension
of permit
$25
(False alarm reduction course
mandated)
5 On-site written notice and warning
letter
$50
(Alarm Review Board)
6 On-site written notice and revocation
of permit
$50
B. Fines are to be paid within 30 days of receipt of notification.
C. In addition, any person operating a nonpermitted alarm system
(whether revoked, suspended or never acquired) will be subject to a
citation and assessment of a $50 fine for each false alarm dispatch, in
addition to any other fines. The alarm administrator may waive this
additional fine for a nonpermitted system if the alarm user applies for a
permit within 10 days after such violation.
D. An alarm user shall, after the third false alarm dispatch, have the option
of attending a false alarm user awareness class in lieu of paying the
prescribed fine.
§ 80-13 JACKSON CODE § 80-14
1:164
§ 80-15. Appeal from fines.
§ 80-16. Revocation, suspension or loss of permit.
E. Alarm dispatch requests caused by actual criminal offense or with
evidence of a criminal attempt, or deemed caused by weather-related
conditions, shall not be counted as a false alarm dispatch.
F. The alarm administrator may reinstate a suspended permit upon
receipt of acceptable evidence that the cause has been addressed and
appropriate corrective action has been taken as outlined in § 80-17.
A. An alarm user may appeal assessment of a fine to the Alarm Review
Board by filing a written request for hearing setting forth the reasons
for the appeal within 10 days after receipt of the fine. The filing of a
request for an appeal hearing with the Alarm Review Board stays the
assessment of the fine until the Alarm Review Board makes a final
decision.
B. The Alarm Review Board shall conduct a formal hearing and consider
the evidence by any interested person(s). The Board shall make its
decision on the basis of the preponderance of evidence presented at the
hearing, including, but not limited to, evidence that a false alarm
dispatch was caused by a defective part that has been repaired or
replaced or that an alarm dispatch request was caused by a criminal
offense. The Board must render a decision within 30 days after the
request for an appeal hearing is filed. The Board shall affirm, reverse or
modify the assessment of the fine. The decision of the Board is final as
to administrative remedies with the municipality.
A. In addition to suspension or revocation pursuant to § 80-14, the alarm
administrator may suspend or revoke an alarm permit if it is
determined that:
(1) There is a false statement of a material matter in the application for
a permit; or
(2) The permit holder has failed to make timely payment of a fine
assessed under § 80-14A.
B. A person commits an offense if he operates an alarm system during the
period in which his alarm permit is suspended or revoked.
C. Unless there is separate indication that there is a crime in progress, the
Chief/Director may refuse police response to an alarm dispatch request
at an alarm site for which the alarm permit is revoked.
D. If the alarm permit is reinstated pursuant to § 80-17, the alarm
administrator may revoke the alarm permit if it is determined that
subsequent false alarm dispatches occur within 60 days after the
reinstatement date.
§ 80-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-17
1:165
§ 80-17. Appeal from denial, suspension or revocation of permit.
§ 80-18. Reinstatement of permit.
A person whose alarm permit has been revoked may be issued a new permit
if the person:
§ 80-19. Violations and penalties.
A person commits an offense if he violates, by commission or omission, any
provision of this chapter that imposes upon him a duty or responsibility and
is subject to a fine of not more than $50 for each offense.
A. If the alarm administrator denies the issuance or renewal of a permit,
or suspends or revokes a permit, he or she shall send written notice of
his action and a statement of the right to an appeal, by certified mail,
return receipt requested, to both the applicant or alarm user and the
alarm business. The applicant or alarm user may appeal the decision of
the alarm administrator to the Chief/Director by filing a written request
for a review setting forth the reasons for the appeal within 20 days after
receipt of the notice from the alarm administrator. An alarm business
may submit the request for review on behalf of an alarm user. Filing of a
request for appeal shall stay the action by the alarm administrator
suspending or revoking a permit until the Chief/Director has completed
his/her review. If a request for appeal is not made within the twenty-day
period, the action of the Chief/Director is final.
B. Alarm users shall be entitled to a hearing before the Alarm Review
Board, if requested within 20 days of receipt of notice of a sustained
denial or revocation of permit by the Chief/Director. An alarm business
may submit a request for hearing on behalf of an alarm user.
C. The Alarm Review Board shall conduct a formal hearing and consider
the evidence by any interested person(s). The Board shall make its
decision on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence presented at
the hearing, including, but not limited to, certification that alarm users
have been retrained, that a defective part has been repaired or
replaced or that the cause of the false alarm has been otherwise
determined and corrected. The Board must render a written decision
within 30 days after the request for an appeal hearing is filed. The
Board shall affirm, reverse or modify the action of the Chief/Director.
The decision of the Board is final as to administrative remedies with the
municipality.
A. Submits an updated application; and
B. Pays, or otherwise resolves, all citations and fines; and
C. Submits a certification from an alarm business that complies with the
requirements of this chapter, stating that the alarm system has been
inspected and repaired (if necessary) by the alarm business.
§ 80-17 JACKSON CODE § 80-19
1:166
Chapter 86
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Drug-free zones — See Ch. 179.
Licensing — See Ch. 251.
Smoking — See Ch. 357.
Retail food establishments — See Ch. 479.
§ 80-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-19
1:167

ARTICLE I
Licensing
[Adopted 7-1-1940 (Ch. 37, Art. I, of the 1972 Code)]
§ 86-1. Number of licenses limited. [Amended 6-2-1964 by Ord. No.
15-64; 9-21-1971 by Ord. No. 23-71; 12-19-1972 by Ord. No. 38-72]
The number of each class of outstanding licenses to be issued in this
municipality for the sale at retail of alcoholic beverages shall be limited as
follows:
§ 86-2. Hours of sale.
§ 86-3. Licenses subject to statutory provisions, rules and
regulations.
Each and every license for the sale of any alcoholic beverage shall be
issued subject to statutory provisions, the rules and regulations of the
State Commissioner of Alcoholic Beverage Control, and also subject to any
A. Not more than 18 plenary retail consumption licenses. [Amended
6-14-1982 by Ord. No. 21-82; 3-22-1993 by Ord. No. 5-93;
6-10-2002 by Ord. No. 30-02; 4-12-2011 by Ord. No. 15-11]
B. Not more than nine club licenses. [Amended 2-10-1976 by Ord. No.
2-76; 4-27-1981 by Ord. No. 12-81]
C. Not more than seven plenary retail distribution licenses. [Amended
6-14-1982 by Ord. No. 21-82; 3-22-1993 by Ord. No. 5-93;
11-28-2005 by Ord. No. 42-05; 4-12-2011 by Ord. No. 15-11]29
A. No licensee shall sell, serve or deliver or allow, permit or suffer the sale,
service or delivery of any alcoholic beverage or allow the consumption
of any alcoholic beverage on licensed premises on weekdays between
the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. or on Sundays between the hours
of 3:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m., excepting January 1 of each year, as
hereinafter provided.
B. No licensee shall sell, serve or deliver or allow, permit or suffer the sale,
service or delivery of any alcoholic beverages on licensed premises on
January 1, when it is a Sunday, between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 7:00
a.m.; sales of alcoholic beverages shall be permissible on January 1
when it is a weekday, at any time.
C. The hours above referred to shall be Eastern standard time, except
from 2:00 a.m. on the last Sunday in April until 2:00 a.m. on the last
Sunday in October each year, when they shall be Eastern daylight
saving time, which is one hour in advance of Eastern standard time.
29.Editor's Note: Original § 37-2, Plenary retail distribution licenses: location restricted, of
the 1972 Code, added 2-15-1961, which immediately followed this section, was repealed
8-9-1982 by Ord. No. 38-82.
§ 86-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 86-3
1:169
and all rules and regulations to be adopted by the governing body of this
municipality.
§ 86-4. Fees. [Amended 2-15-1961; 2-11-1975 by Ord. No. 2-75;
3-22-1993 by Ord. No. 5-93]
§ 86-5. Violations and penalties.
Upon conviction, after hearing, of any violation of any provision of this
article or of any statute, rule or regulation aforesaid, any license issued or
created by this municipality may be suspended or revoked in accordance
with rules and regulations heretofore or hereafter promulgated by the
Commissioner of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
A. Plenary retail consumption license fees. The annual license fees from
and after July 1, 1993, in the Township of Jackson for each plenary retail
consumption license shall be, beginning July 1 of each of the following
years:
Year Annual Fee
1993 $1,368
1994 $1,641
1995 $1,965
1996 and thereafter $2,000
B. Plenary retail distribution licenses. The annual license fees from and
after July 1, 1993, in the Township of Jackson for each plenary retail
distribution license shall be, beginning July 1 of each of the following
years:
Year Annual Fee
1993 and thereafter $2,000
C. Club license fee. The annual license fee for a club license shall be,
beginning July 1 of each of the following years:
Year Annual Fee
1993 $120
1994 $144
1995 $150
§ 86-3 JACKSON CODE § 86-5
1:170
ARTICLE II
Use by Minors
[Adopted 8-3-1948 (Ch. 37, Art. II, of the 1972 Code); amended in
its entirety 4-23-2019 by Ord. No. 10-19]
§ 86-6. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GUARDIAN — A person who has qualified as a guardian of the underage
person pursuant to a testamentary or court appointment.
RELATIVE — The underage person's grandparent, aunt or uncle, sibling or
any other person related by blood or affinity.
§ 86-6.1. Consumption of alcoholic beverages by underage person
on private property prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person under the legal age to, without legal authority,
knowingly possess or knowingly consume an alcoholic beverage on private
property.
§ 86-6.2. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person found guilty of violating the terms of this article shall be
subject to a fine of $250 for a first offense and a fine of $350 for any
subsequent offense. In addition, the court may, upon a finding of guilt,
in addition to the fine authorized for this offense, suspend or postpone
for six months the driving privileges of the defendant. Upon the
conviction of any person and the suspension or postponement of that
person's driver's license, the court shall forward a report to the Division
of Motor Vehicles stating the first and last day of the suspension or
postponement period imposed by the court pursuant to this article. If a
person at the time of the imposition of a sentence is less than 17 years
of age, the period of license postponement, including a suspension or
postponement of the privilege of operating a motorized bicycle, shall
commence on the day the sentence is imposed and shall run for a period
of six months after the person reaches the age of 17 years. If the
defendant at the time of the imposition of the sentence has a valid
driver's license issued by this state, the court shall immediately collect
the license and forward it to the Division of Motor Vehicles along with
the report. If for any reason the license cannot be collected, the court
shall include in the report the complete name, address, date of birth,
eye color, and sex of the person, as well as the first and last date of the
license suspension period imposed by the court.
B. The court shall inform the person orally and in writing that if the person
is convicted of operating a motor vehicle during the period of license
suspension or postponement, the person shall be subject to the
penalties set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:3-40. The defendant shall be required
§ 86-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 86-6.2
1:171
§ 86-6.3. Exceptions.
§ 86-6.4. Underage possession or consumption; exemption from
prosecution.
to acknowledge receipt of the written notice in writing. Failure to
receive a written notice or failure to acknowledge in writing the receipt
of the written notice shall not be a defense to a subsequent charge of a
violation of N.J.S.A. 39:3-40.
C. If the person convicted under this article is not a New Jersey resident,
the court shall suspend or postpone, as appropriate, the nonresident
driving privilege of the person based on the age of the person and
submit to the Division the required report. The court shall not collect
the license of a nonresident convicted under this article. Upon receipt
of a report by the court, the Division shall notify the appropriate
officials in the licensing jurisdiction of the suspension or postponement.
A. This article shall not prohibit an underage person from consuming or
possessing an alcoholic beverage in connection with a religious
observance, ceremony or rite or consuming or possessing an alcoholic
beverage in the presence of and with the permission of a parent,
guardian or relative who has attained the legal age to purchase and
consume alcoholic beverages.
B. This article shall not prohibit the possession of alcoholic beverages by
any underage person while actually engaged in the performance of
employment by a person who was licensed under Title 33 of the revised
statutes or while actively engaged in the preparation of food while
enrolled in a culinary arts or hotel management program at a county
vocational school or post-secondary educational institution; however,
this ordinance shall not be construed to preclude the imposition of a
penalty under this article, N.J.S.A. 33:1-81, or any other section of law
against a person who is convicted of unlawful alcoholic beverage
activity on or at premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages
A. An underage person and one or two other persons, if applicable, shall
be immune from prosecution under this article prohibiting any person
under the legal age who, without legal authority, knowingly possesses
or knowingly consumes an alcoholic beverage on private property if:
(1) One of the underage persons called 9-1-1 and reported that another
underage person was in need of medical assistance due to alcohol
consumption;
(2) The underage person who called 9-1-1 and, if applicable, one or two
other persons acting in concert with the underage person who
called 9-1-1 provided each of their names to the 9-1-1 operator;
(3) The underage person was the first person to make the 9-1-1 report;
and
§ 86-6.2 JACKSON CODE § 86-6.4
1:172
(4) The underage person and, if applicable, one or two other persons
acting in concert with the underage person who made the 9-1-1 call
remained on the scene with the person under the legal age in need
of medical assistance until assistance arrived and cooperated with
medical assistance and law enforcement personnel on the scene.
B. The underage person who received medical assistance as provided in
Subsection A of this article shall also be immune from prosecution
under this article prohibiting the possession or consumption of an
alcoholic beverage on private property.
§ 86-6.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 86-6.4
1:173

ARTICLE III
Consumption and Possession in Public
[Adopted 4-11-1988 by Ord. No. 10-88 (Ch. 37, Art. III, of the 1972
Code)]
§ 86-7. Consumption prohibited in certain areas.
No person shall drink, imbibe or consume any alcoholic beverage in or
upon:
§ 86-8. Consumption in public places restricted.
No person shall consume alcoholic beverages or offer to another for
consumption any alcoholic beverage in, on or upon any place to which
the public at large is generally invited; provided, however, that nothing
herein shall be constructed to prohibit the consumption or sale of alcoholic
beverages within the licensed premises of a plenary retail consumption
liquor license.
§ 86-9. Possession prohibited in certain areas.
No person shall have in his possession or possess any alcoholic beverage
in, on or upon any public street, road, alley, sidewalk, park or playground
or in, on or upon any land or building owned or occupied by the municipal
government, unless the same is contained within a closed or sealed
container.
§ 86-10. Possession in public places restricted.
No person shall have in his possession or possess any alcoholic beverage
in or upon any place to which the public at large is generally invited
unless the same is contained within a closed or sealed container; provided,
however, that nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the possession
of alcoholic beverages within the licensed premises of a plenary retail
consumption liquor license.
A. A public street, lane, roadway, avenue, sidewalk, public parking place,
park, playground, recreation area or any other public or quasi-public
place.
B. A public conveyance.
C. A private motor vehicle while the same is in motion or parked in any
public street, lane, public parking lot or public or quasi-public place.
D. Any private property, not his or her own, without the express
permission of the owner or other person having authority to grant such
permission.
§ 86-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 86-11
1:175
§ 86-11. Exceptions.
Notwithstanding the provisions contained in §§ 86-7, 86-8, 86-9 and 86-10,
the Mayor and Committee of the Township of Jackson may, by resolution,
permit the possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages in a
designated park, recreation area or other public place at a designated time
or times in connection with a special event, series of events or observance
which has been authorized by the Mayor and Committee of the Township,
which possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages shall, in addition,
comply with any applicable ordinances, laws or regulations.
§ 86-12. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-22-1993 by Ord. No.
5-93]
Any person who violates any one or more provisions of this Chapter 86 shall
be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 for each separate offense and/
or confinement in the Ocean County Jail for a period of not more than 90
days and, in the case of a continuing violation or violations which continue
unabated, until such time as said violation or violations are corrected. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which
a violation occurs or continues.
§ 86-11 JACKSON CODE § 86-12
1:176
Chapter 92
AMUSEMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licensing — See Ch. 251.
Parks and recreation facilities — See Ch. 304.
Raffles and bingo — See Ch. 322.
Zoological or animal exhibition parks — See
Ch. 443.
§ 86-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 86-12
1:177

ARTICLE I
Licensing of Games
[Adopted 3-25-1975 by Ord. No. 14-75 (Ch. 38, Art. II, of the 1972
Code)]
§ 92-1. Designation of amusement park.
It is hereby determined, decided and declared that there exists within the
Township of Jackson a recognized amusement park located on Lot 1 in Block
27 as shown on the Official Tax Map of the Township of Jackson, which
amusement park is presently known and designated as "Great Adventure."
§ 92-2. License required to operate games.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to own or operate
within this municipality any amusement game or games as said amusement
game or games are defined by the aforesaid "Amusement Games Licensing
Law" (P.L. 1959, c. 10930), whether said amusement game or games are of
skill or chance, or both, and whether said amusement game or games are
played and operated with or without numbers, symbols or figures, without
first having obtained a proper license from the Township Committee of the
Township of Jackson. Said license shall be issued subject to the provisions of
the "Amusement Games Licensing Law" (P.L. 1959, c. 109), and the Revised
Amusement Games Regulations, effective April 11, 1966, promulgated by
the Office of Amusement Games Control, Department of Law and Public
Safety of the State of New Jersey.
§ 92-3. Application for license.
Each applicant for such a license shall file with the Township Clerk a
written application in duplicate therefor. The application must be in the
form prescribed by the Commissioner of Amusement Games Control and
must comply with all the requirements as specifically set forth in Section 2
of P.L. 1959, c. 109,31 and any amendments and supplements thereto and
any additional requirements as may be promulgated from time to time by
the Amusement Games Control Commissioner of the State of New Jersey.
§ 92-4. Investigation of qualifications; fingerprinting.
The Township Committee shall make an investigation of the qualifications
of each applicant and the merits of each application as authorized and
directed by the Amusement Games Licensing Law. Each individual
applicant, the officers, directors and stockholders (including the officers,
directors and stockholders of any corporation holding 5% or more of the
capital stock) of any corporate applicant, as well as the partners or
members, as the case may be, of any partnership, association or
organization applicant, shall be fingerprinted under the supervision of the
30.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 5:8-100 et seq.
31.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 5:8-101.
§ 92-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-4
1:179
Municipal Chief of Police. The fingerprint records so obtained shall be
marked "applicant" and shall be submitted to the Federal Bureau of
Investigation and the New Jersey State Police Bureau of Investigation and,
upon receipt of returns from such Bureaus, the Chief of Police shall make
a report thereof to the Township Committee, together with a report of
any other arrest or conviction record which may be obtained from other
sources. Failure or refusal of any of the above-designated persons to submit
to fingerprinting shall be deemed cause for denial of the application. No
license shall be issued to any applicant if any of the above persons required
to be fingerprinted in connection with the application are not of good moral
character or have ever been convicted of a crime, unless the disqualification
resulting from such conviction has been removed by the Commissioner of
Amusement Games Control pursuant to P.L. 1962, c. 200.32
§ 92-5. Issuance of license; certificate; display.
A. Upon proof of compliance with all applicable requirements, the
Township Committee shall authorize the issuance of a license, by
resolution, said license to be effective for a term of one year,
commencing with date of issuance and terminating on December 31 in
each year. Said resolution shall specifically recite that the premises to
be licensed are located in a recognized amusement park in the
municipality. A certified copy of the resolution shall be transmitted,
together with copy of the application and license certificate issued, to
the Commissioner of Amusement Games Control.
B. License certificate.
(1) Each license certificate shall be issued in triplicate, the original to
be delivered to the applicant, with one copy to the Commissioner,
as aforesaid, and the additional copy to be retained by the
Township Clerk.
(2) Each license certificate shall indicate:
(a) The name of the licensee.
(b) The address of the licensed premises.
(c) The name or description of the kind of game licensed.
(d) The amount of fee paid.
(e) A statement of the dates between which and the hours between
which such game may be conducted.
(3) The license certificate shall be in the form prescribed by the
Commissioner of Amusement Games Control.
32.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 5:8-103.
§ 92-4 JACKSON CODE § 92-5
1:180
§ 92-6. Refusal of license; amendments; state requirements.
§ 92-7. Control and supervision.
The Township Committee shall have and exercise control and supervision
over all amusement games held, operated or conducted under such license
with all the powers authorized or granted to it under said Amusement
Games Licensing Law and all amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 92-8. Forfeiture of license.
Any person, association or corporation who or which shall make any false
statement in any application for such license or shall fail to keep such
adequate and proper books and records as shall fully and truly record
all transactions connected with the holding, operating or conducting of
amusement games under such license or shall falsify or make any false
entry in any books or records so far as they relate to any transaction
connected with the holding, operating and conducting of any amusement
game under any such license or shall violate any of the provisions of this
article or the Amusement Games Licensing Law (P.L. 1959, c. 10933) or
of any of the terms of such license shall be a disorderly person and, if
convicted as such, shall, in addition to suffering any other penalties which
may be imposed, forfeit any license issued to it under this article.
§ 92-9. Separate licenses required; fees.
There shall be issued to an applicant who shall qualify a separate license
for each specific game authorized to be held, operated and conducted on
the licensed premises by the licensee, and a separate license shall be issued
for each place at which the licensee is authorized to hold, operate and
C. Each license shall be conspicuously displayed at the place or places
where the game is to be conducted at all times during the conduct
thereof.
A. No application for the issuance of a license shall be refused by the
Township Committee until after a hearing is held on due notice to the
applicant, at which the applicant shall be entitled to be heard upon the
qualifications of the applicant and the merits of the application.
B. Any license issued under this article may be amended, upon application
made to the Township Committee, if the subject matter of the proposed
amendment could lawfully and properly have been included in the
original license and upon payment of such additional license fee, if any,
as would have been payable if it had been so included.
C. No license issued pursuant to this article shall become operative unless
and until the licensee named therein shall have procured a state license
from the Commissioner of Amusement Games Control.
33.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 5:8-100 et seq.
§ 92-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-9
1:181
conduct such game. The annual license fee for each such license shall be the
sum of $100. Said annual fee shall be payable without proration and shall
accompany the license application. In the event of denial or withdrawal of
the application, or in the event of denial or withdrawal of the application for
a state license filed with the Commissioner of Amusement Games Control,
the sum of $10 or 25% of the application fee, whichever shall be greater,
shall be retained by the Township as an investigation fee.
§ 92-10. Definitions. [Amended 2-10-1992 by Ord. No. 2-92]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GAME — Any game or amusement which is authorized under the provisions
of the Amusement Games Licensing Law (P.L. 1959, c. 109).34
§ 92-11. Expiration of license.
All licenses issued under this article shall expire on December 31 of each
year.
§ 92-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a penalty not to exceed $200 or imprisonment not to
exceed 90 days, or both. The same shall be in addition to the powers of
suspension or revocation of any such license as provided for herein.
34.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 5:8-100 et seq.
§ 92-9 JACKSON CODE § 92-12
1:182
Chapter 98
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Pet waste — See Ch. 216, Art. I.
Noise — See Ch. 291.
Zoological or animal exhibition parks — See
Ch. 443.
Swine — See Ch. 499.
§ 92-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-12
1:183

ARTICLE I
Licensing of Dogs
[Adopted 12-5-1972 by Ord. No. 18-72 (Ch. 51, Part 1, Art. I, of the
1972 Code)]
§ 98-1. Fees; exemptions.35
§ 98-2. Newly acquired dogs: application for license.
The owner of any newly acquired dog of licensing age or of any dog which
attains licensing age shall make application for license and registration tag
for such dog within 10 days after such acquisition or age attainment.
A. A person applying for an annual license and registration tag shall pay to
the Township a total of $16.70 for each dog if said license is applied for
on or before March 31 of said year. Said fee includes a one-dollar
registration tag fee and a twenty-cent pilot clinic fund fee. A person
applying for a license and registration tag after April 1 of any given year
shall be assessed an additional five-dollar late fee per license. If a
person applying for the license and registration tag presents a
certificate signed by a licensed veterinarian stating that the dog has
been spayed or neutered, the annual fee shall be reduced by $3. Each
license and tag shall be renewed annually, unless a three-year license
has been purchased at a fee of three times the annual license fee. Of the
above fees, for each dog and for each year, the one-dollar registration
tag fee, the twenty-cent pilot clinic fund fee and the three-dollar
spaying/neutering fee, if applicable, shall be forwarded to the State of
New Jersey as required by N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.1 et seq., and the remainder
of the total fees shall be the license fee retained by the Township. Each
license tag shall be renewed either prior to or upon the expiration of the
license previously issued, and for each animal renewal, a fee for the
license and registration tag shall be paid. Said license and registration
tags and renewal thereof shall expire on December 31 of each year and
can be renewed after January 1 of the new year. [Amended 2-11-1975
by Ord. No. 1-75; 9-27-1977 by Ord. No. 53-77; 11-24-1980 by
Ord. No. 51-80; 11-9-1981 by Ord. No. 49-81; 10-25-1982 by Ord.
No. 46-82; 4-24-2007 by Ord. No. 10-07; 11-29-2011 by Ord. No.
39-11]
B. Only one license and registration tag shall be required in any licensing
year for any dog owned in New Jersey, and such license and tag shall be
accepted by the Township of Jackson as compliance with this article.
C. Dogs used as guides for blind persons, commonly known as "Seeing
Eye" dogs, shall be licensed and registered as other dogs hereinabove
provided for, except that the owner or keeper of such dog shall not be
required to pay any fee therefor.
35.Editor's Note: Original §§ 51-1, Definitions, 51-2, License required, and 51-3, Annual
licensing and issuance of registration tags, of the 1972 Code, which immediately preceded
this section, were repealed 8-13-1974 by Ord. No. 3374.
§ 98-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-3
1:185
§ 98-3. Application information required.
The application shall state the breed, sex, age, color and markings of the
dog for which license and registration are sought, and whether it is of
a longhaired or shorthaired variety; also the name, street and post office
address of the owner and person who shall keep or harbor such dog. The
information of said application and the registration number issued for the
dog shall be preserved for a period of three years by the Clerk or other local
official designated to license dogs in the Township of Jackson. In addition,
he shall forward to the State Department of Health each month, on forms
furnished by said Department, an accurate account of registration numbers
issued or otherwise disposed of Registration numbers shall be issued in the
order of the applications.
§ 98-4. Rabies vaccination required. [Added 2-11-1975 by Ord. No.
1-75]
No license shall be issued or granted nor shall any official registration
tag be issued or granted for any dog unless the owner thereof provides
evidence that the dog to be licensed and registered has been inoculated
with a rabies vaccine of a type approved by and administered in accordance
with the regulations of the United States Department of Health, Education
and Welfare, or has been certified exempt as provided by regulations of the
State Department of Health. Such vaccination shall be repeated at intervals
as provided by regulations of the State Department of Health, and shall
be administered by a duly licensed veterinarian or by such veterinarian
permitted by law to do the same.
§ 98-5. Dogs from other states.
§ 98-6. Removal of tags restricted.
No person, except an officer in the performance of his duties, shall remove a
registration tag from the collar of any dog without the consent of the owner,
nor shall any person attach a registration tag to a dog for which it was not
issued.
§ 98-7. Disposition of moneys collected.
A. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the Township of
Jackson any dog licensed in another state for the current year and
bearing a registration tag, and shall keep the same or permit the same
to be kept within the Township of Jackson for a period of more than 90
days, shall immediately apply for a license and registration tag for each
such dog.
B. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the Township of
Jackson any unlicensed dog and shall keep the same or permit the same
to be kept within the Township limits for a period of more than 10 days
shall immediately apply for a license and registration tag for each such
dog.
§ 98-3 JACKSON CODE § 98-7
1:186
A. License fees and other moneys collected or received under the
provisions of this article shall be forwarded to the Treasurer of the
Township of Jackson within 30 days after collection or receipt and shall
be placed in a special account separate from any of the other accounts
of the Township and shall be used for the following purposes only; for
collecting, keeping and disposing of dogs liable to seizure under this
article; for local prevention and control of rabies; for providing
antirabies treatment under the direction of the Township Committee for
any person known or suspected to have been exposed to rabies; for all
other purposes prescribed by the statutes of New Jersey governing the
subject, and for administering the provisions of this article. Any
unexpended balance remaining in such special account shall be
retained therein until the end of the third fiscal year following and may
be used for any of the purposes set forth in this section. At the end of
the said third fiscal year following, and at the end of each fiscal year
thereafter, there shall be transferred from such special account to the
general funds of the Township any amount then in such account which
is in excess of the total amount paid into said special account during the
last two fiscal years next preceding.
B. The registration fee of $1 collected pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.11, the
twenty-cent pilot clinic fund fee collected pursuant to N.J.S.A.
4:19-15.3c and the three-dollar spayed or neutering fee, if applicable,
collected pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.3b, for each dog, shall be
forwarded within 30 days after collection by the Office of Animal
Control to the State Department of Health.36 [Amended 4-24-2007 by
Ord. No. 10-07]
36.Editor's Note: Original § 51-10, Violations and penalties, of the 1972 Code, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed 8-13-1974 by Ord. No. 33-74.
§ 98-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-7
1:187

ARTICLE II
Control and Care of Animals
[Adopted 12-5-1972 by Ord. No. 18-72 (Ch. 51, Part 1, Art. II, of the
1972 Code)]
§ 98-8. Definitions. [Added 10-3-1983 by Ord. No. 50-83]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — Any person designated by the governing
body as a law enforcement officer and who qualifies to perform such duties
under the laws of the State of New Jersey.[Amended 9-11-2007 by Ord.
No. 31-07]
DOG — Any member of the species generally referred to as canis familiaris,
irrespective of age, sex or breed.
DOG OF LICENSING AGE — Any dog which has attained the age of seven
months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
OVERBURDEN — The chains on an animal shall not weigh more than 1/5 of
the total weight of the animal.[Added 6-10-2008 by Ord. No. 21-08]
OWNER — Any person, partnership or corporation owning, keeping or
harboring one or more animals. An animal shall be deemed to be harbored
if it is fed or sheltered for three consecutive days or more.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, company or corporation.
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG — Any dog or dog hybrid declared
potentially dangerous by a municipal court pursuant to N.J.S.A.
4:19-23.[Added 1-23-1998 by Ord. No. 3-98]
PROPER SHELTER — A structure fully enclosed on three sides. The fourth
wall shall have an entranceway large enough to allow the animal to enter
and exit comfortably, but not too large so as to allow all heat to escape.
It shall be roofed and have a solid floor. The shelter shall be small enough
to retain the animal's body heat, and large enough for the animal to stand
and turn around. The shelter and enclosure shall be sturdy and structurally
sound and in good repair. Bedding in the structure shall be clean and dry.
The area around the shelter shall be clear of debris.[Added 6-10-2008 by
Ord. No. 21-08]
RESTRAINT — Any animal secured by a leash or lead, or under the control
of a responsible person and obedient to that person's command within the
real property limits of its owner.
VICIOUS DOG — Any dog or dog hybrid declared vicious by a municipal
court pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-22.[Amended 1-26-1998 by Ord. No.
3-98]
§ 98-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-9
1:189
§ 98-9. Running at large. [Amended 10-3-1983 by Ord. No. 50-83]
All dogs shall be kept under restraint, and no dogs shall run at large at any
time in this municipality.
§ 98-10. Dogs in public parks and trails: adequate leash required.
[Amended 5-26-2015 by Ord. No. 16-15]
A. Leashed dogs are permitted in any Township park, or hiking trail, as
long as such dog is accompanied by a person over the age of 12 years
that is of sufficient strength to hold the dog, is controlled by an
adequate leash not to exceed six feet in length, and remains on the
leash at all times.
B. No person owning, keeping, or harboring any dog shall suffer or permit
such dog to be upon sports fields, playground areas, or buildings.
C. Unleashed dogs are not permitted upon the public streets or in any of
the public places of the Township of Jackson, except:
(1) In accordance with the rules and regulations of Johnson Park, for
use of the Dog Park Facility in accordance with the rules and
regulations established by the Jackson Township Council by
resolution, which rules and regulations will be available for the
public at the Township Clerk's office. See § 304-19; or
(2) When the dog is on enclosed property with the consent of the
owner, lessee, or other person with legal control of the property; or
(3) When the dog is assisting a peace officer who is engaged in law
enforcement duties; or
(4) When the dog is a service animal, guide dog, or Seeing Eye dog
used by a visually or mobility-impaired individual; or
(5) When the dog is assisting a duly authorized person in an official
search and rescue operation; or
(6) When the dog is participating in a law enforcement exercise or law
enforcement training authorized by the Jackson Township Chief of
Police; or
(7) When the dog is in a designated off-leash area as designated by the
Township Council pursuant to resolution or when the dog and the
dog owner are in compliance with a park use permit issued by the
Jackson Township Department of Recreation for training,
exhibition, or competition. The permit must be displayed, on
request of any Township employee, to establish the dog owner's
compliance with the permit.
§ 98-9 JACKSON CODE § 98-11
1:190
§ 98-11. Training for hunting.
Any dog while engaged in hunting or training for hunting shall be in the
immediate control, custody and management of its owner or custodian.
§ 98-12. Animals on private property. [Amended 9-11-2007 by Ord.
No. 31-07]
No owner of any animal shall suffer or permit such animal to be upon any
private property other than the premises of the owner without consent of
the owner or tenant of said property.
§ 98-13. Dogs creating disturbances restricted.
No person shall keep, harbor or maintain any dog which habitually barks or
cries between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
§ 98-14. Owner responsibility. [Amended 9-11-2007 by Ord. No.
31-07]
Owner or custodian of any animal shall be responsible for the damages done
or caused by such animal.
§ 98-15. Muzzling requirements.
The Township of Jackson may designate such time or times of the year
during which dogs outside the premises occupied by the owner of such dog
shall be muzzled, such designation to be by publication at least three times
in a newspaper in which legal notices of the Township may be published,
and after such publication, no person owning, keeping or harboring a
dog shall permit it upon public highways, public places or outside of the
premises occupied by the owner, during the period designated, unless such
dog wears a muzzle securely fastened over its jaws in such a manner that it
cannot bite.
§ 98-16. Vicious dogs. [Amended 10-3-1983 by Ord. No. 50-83;
1-26-1998 by Ord. No. 3-98]
Notwithstanding anything set forth in Chapter 98 of the Code of the
Township of Jackson, any dog or dog hybrid declared vicious by a municipal
court pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-20 shall be dealt with in accordance with
state statutes or requirements. All provisions of N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 et seq.
imposing a uniform set of state requirements for the owners of vicious or
potentially dangerous dogs and amendments to said statutes are hereby
adopted by the Township of Jackson. This includes, but is not limited to, the
requirement for municipal court hearings and the holding of said hearings
in a manner as set forth in said state statutes. Additionally, any required
fees and costs concerning the impoundment and destruction of a dog or dog
hybrid shall be established by the Jackson Township Code.37
§ 98-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-17
1:191
§ 98-17. License required; fee; failure to obtain license. [Added
10-3-1983 by Ord. No. 50-83]
§ 98-18. Dogs in heat. [Added 10-3-1983 by Ord. No. 50-83]
Every female dog in heat shall be confined in a building or secure enclosure
in such manner that such female dog cannot come into contact with another
dog except for planned breeding.
§ 98-19. Failure to provide control. [Added 10-3-1983 by Ord. No.
50-83]
No owner shall fail to exercise proper control of his dog to prevent it from
becoming a public nuisance. Excessive, continuous or untimely barking,
molesting passersby, chasing vehicles, habitually attacking other domestic
animals, trespassing upon school grounds or trespassing upon private or
public property shall be deemed a nuisance.
§ 98-20. Failure to provide proper care; abandonment. [Added
10-3-1983 by Ord. No. 50-83; amended 6-10-2008 by Ord. No.
21-08]
No owner shall fail to provide any animal in his or her control with sufficient
good and wholesome food and water, proper shelter and protection from
A. Any resident who shall own, keep or harbor a dog of licensing age shall,
in the month of January of each year, apply for and procure from the
Township Clerk, or other official designated by the governing body
thereof to license dogs in the municipality, a license and official
registration tag for each such dog so owned, kept or harbored and shall
place upon each such dog a collar or harness with the registration tag
fastened thereon. The fee set by the municipality shall not be in excess
of the maximum established by state law. Failure of the owner to obtain
a license within the time prescribed by ordinance shall be subject to a
fine of not less than $10 nor more than $50, in the discretion of the
Judge. Each day's failure to obtain a license will be considered a
separate violation.
B. Fee for potentially dangerous dog license. There is hereby established
an annual fee for a potentially dangerous dog license or for renewal
thereof which shall be established at the sum of $500 per annum. All
other requirements of the aforesaid state statute concerning potentially
dangerous dogs shall be complied with by the owner of said animal, or
said owner may be considered in violation of Ordinance No. 3-98.38 Said
conditions of licensing shall include all those required under N.J.S.A.
4:19-24. [Added 1-26-1998 by Ord. No. 3-98]
37.Editor's Note: Original §§ 51-19, Dogs causing nuisances or disturbing the peace, and
51-20, Construal, of the 1972 Code, which immediately followed this section, were
repealed 10-3-1983 by Ord. No. 50-83.
38.Editor's Note: See also §§ 98-8 and 98-16.
§ 98-17 JACKSON CODE § 98-20
1:192
the weather, veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering, and with
humane care and treatment. No person shall beat, cruelly ill-treat, torment,
overload, overwork, overburden and otherwise abuse any animal or cause
or permit any animals to combat between themselves, nor shall any owner
abandon such animal.
§ 98-21. Animals as prizes. [Added 10-3-1983 by Ord. No. 50-83]
No person shall give away any animal as a prize for, or as an inducement to
enter any contest, game or other competition, or as an inducement to enter
a place of amusement or offer such animal as an incentive to enter into
any business agreement whereby the offer was for the purpose of attracting
trade.
§ 98-22. Animals which bite. [Added 10-3-1983 by Ord. No. 50-83]
Any animal which bites a person shall be quarantined on the premises
of its owner under the supervision of the authority designated by the
municipality for the period of time ordered by said authority. The animal
shall be securely confined and kept from contact with any other animal
during quarantine. The designated authority may require, at its discretion,
special confinement and order the animal surrendered to the animal shelter
or veterinary hospital at the owner's expense.
§ 98-23. Rabid animals. [Added 10-3-1983 by Ord. No. 50-83;
amended 5-22-2007 by Ord. No. 14-07]
No police officer or other person shall kill or cause to be killed, any animal
suspected of being rabid, except after the animal has been placed in
quarantine and the diagnosis of rabies is made by a licensed veterinarian. If
a veterinarian diagnoses rabies in an animal in quarantine, then the animal
shall be humanely killed and the head of such animal sent to a laboratory
for pathological examination and confirmation of the diagnosis. The cost
pertaining to diagnosis, pathological examination and confirmation shall be
paid by the owner.
§ 98-24. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-3-1983 by Ord. No.
50-83; 9-11-2007 by Ord. No. 31-07]
Any person, whether as owner or custodian of a dog, convicted of a violation
of any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction of the provisions
hereof, be subject to a fine or penalty not exceeding $1,000 or imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 90 days or a period of community service not
exceeding 60 days, or all, at the discretion of the Judge before whom such
conviction is had. In addition to or in lieu of impounding a dog found at
large, the Animal Control Officer may issue to the known owner of such dog
a summons for violation of this article.
§ 98-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-24
1:193

ARTICLE III
Kennels and Pet Shops
[Adopted 12-5-1972 by Ord. No. 18-72 (Ch. 51, Part 1, Art. III, of the
1972 Code)]
§ 98-25. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to operate a kennel
or pet shop in the Township of Jackson without first having secured a license
therefor.
§ 98-26. Definitions. [Amended 10-1-1984 by Ord. No. 40-84;
3-22-2016 by Ord. No. 07-16]
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall be applicable:
CAT — Any member of the domestic feline species; male, female or altered
female.
DOG — Any dog, bitch or spayed bitch.
ESTABLISHMENT — A place of business or residence with its furnishings
and staff; public or private institution.[Added 11-29-2016 by Ord. No.
26-16]
KENNEL — Any establishment wherein or whereon the business of
boarding or selling cats or dogs for sale is carried on, where more than five
dogs or cats over the age of seven months are harbored or kept.[Amended
11-29-2016 by Ord. No. 26-16]
PET SHOP — Any room or group of rooms or cages or exhibition pen
or other establishment which is not part of a kennel, wherein animals,
including, but not limited to, dogs, cats, birds, fish, reptiles, rabbits,
hamsters or gerbils, are kept, displayed or offered for sale.
POUND — Any establishment for the confinement of cats or dogs or other
animals seized either under the provisions of this chapter or otherwise.
SHELTER — Any establishment where cats, dogs, or other animals are
received, housed and distributed without charge.
SMALL BREEDER — Any person or persons who engage in the business of
breeding cats or dogs for sale, where no more than five cats or five dogs
are handled during the breeding process of each calendar year, except a pet
shop.[Amended 11-29-2016 by Ord. No. 26-16]
§ 98-27. Application for license; fee. [Amended 12-30-1974 by Ord.
No. 62-7439; 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. 10-11]
Application for licenses shall be made to the Township Clerk. Said
application shall include the correct name and address of the applicant;
a description of the nature of the business to be conducted; the address
39.Editor's Note: This ordinance was amended prior to final adoption by Res. No. 366R-74.
§ 98-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-27
1:195
where the business will be conducted, and a description of the building
or buildings in which it will be housed. Upon receipt of said application,
the Clerk shall forward a copy of the same immediately to the Township
Board of Health for its report and recommendation. If the Board of Health
reports that the business is not likely to violate any applicable ordinances,
rules or regulations dealing with public health or prohibiting nuisances, the
Clerk shall issue the license upon payment to the Office of the Municipal
Clerk of a yearly license fee of $100. This license shall expire on the first
day of February of each year and shall be renewed prior to that time. No
application for such a license shall be accepted by the Township Clerk until
such time as the applicant has received variance approval, if required, or
such other approval, if required, from the Zoning Board of Adjustment,
Planning Board or such other board of the Township of Jackson pursuant
to Chapter 244, Land Use and Development Regulations, or such other
provisions of the Jackson Code as may be applicable.
§ 98-28. Conformance with regulations. [Amended 8-12-1985 by
Ord. No. 24-85]
Every licensee shall abide by all applicable state and Township laws,
ordinances, rules and regulations controlling public health and the
prevention of public nuisances. In addition thereto, all licensees shall place
an identification tag on each dog kept on the licensed premises over the age
of three months. The identification tag shall set forth the name and address
of the kennel where the dog is kept. Said identification tag shall remain on
the dog until such dog becomes of licensing age and is licensed according
to this article.
§ 98-28.1. Sale of cats and dogs in kennels and pet shops;
exceptions. [Added 3-22-2016 by Ord. No. 07-16]
§ 98-29. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who or which violates any of the provisions
of this article shall, upon conviction by any court having jurisdiction of the
subject matter, be subject to a fine not to exceed $500 or imprisonment for
a term not to exceed 90 days, or both.
A. A pet shop may offer for sale only those dogs and cats that the pet shop
has obtained from or displays in cooperation with:
(1) An animal care facility; or
(2) An animal rescue organization.
B. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit a shelter, pound or other
establishment from keeping, displaying or selling any cat or dog which
has been seized, rescued or donated.
§ 98-27 JACKSON CODE § 98-29
1:196
ARTICLE IV
Impoundment of Dogs
[Adopted 12-5-1972 by Ord. No. 18-72 (Ch. 51, Part 1, Art. IV, of the
1972 Code)]
§ 98-30. Animal Control Officer. [Amended 10-3-1983 by Ord. No.
50-83; 11-27-2000 by Ord. No. 31-00]
§ 98-31. Certified Animal Control Officers; powers and duties.
[Added 7-12-2004 by Ord. No. 31-04]
§ 98-32. Duty of Animal Control Officer to impound dogs; pound.
[Amended 9-11-2007 by Ord. No. 31-07]
The Animal Control Officer of the Township of Jackson, when in immediate
pursuit of a dog or dogs which he may lawfully seize or impound under the
provisions of this article or under the statutes of the State of New Jersey, is
A. The position of Animal Control Officer is hereby established as a law
enforcement official of the Township. The Animal Control Officer shall
be an employee of the Township and subject to the control and direction
of the Director of the Department of Public Works. The duties of the
Animal Control Officer shall be enforcement of the measures and
provisions for the control of dogs contained in N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.1
through 4:19-15.29 and any amendments thereof, and the provisions of
this chapter, with the exception of Articles III and VI hereof.
B. All Animal Control Officers employed by the Township of Jackson shall
be Certified Animal Control Officers, as defined in N.J.A.C. 8:23A-2.1.
[Added 7-12-2004 by Ord. No. 31-04]
A. A Certified Animal Control Officer of the Township of Jackson who has
been certified as an Animal Cruelty Investigator pursuant to N.J.S.A.
4:19-15.16a et seq. is hereby authorized to investigate and sign
complaints, arrest violators and otherwise act as an officer for
detection, apprehension and arrest of offenders against the animal
control, animal welfare and animal cruelty laws of the State of New
Jersey and ordinances of the Township of Jackson.
B. A Certified Animal Control Officer of the Township of Jackson who has
been certified as an Animal Cruelty Investigator shall have all the
powers and authority set forth in N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.16c.
C. A Certified Animal Control Officer of the Township of Jackson who has
been certified as an Animal Cruelty Investigator who signs a complaint,
issues a summons, makes an arrest, or otherwise acts pursuant to his
authority under N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.16c shall forward within five business
days a copy of that complaint, summons or arrest warrant or report to
the New Jersey Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals and
shall forward a report of any related court action within 30 calendar
days of final disposition.
§ 98-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-32
1:197
hereby authorized to go upon or enter into any premises, but not to enter
an inhabited dwelling house without permission of the owner, to seize such
dog or dogs for impounding, and such entry shall not be deemed a trespass,
except that he may not go upon any premises if the owner thereof or the
owner's representative is present and forbids him to do so. A suitable animal
pound or equivalent facilities shall be provided by the Township of Jackson,
and it shall be the duty of the Animal Control Officer to clean and otherwise
take care of said pound or facility and to feed regularly and give other
necessary care to any and all animals impounded therein.
§ 98-33. Duty to impound vicious dogs and dogs at large. [Amended
9-11-2007 by Ord. No. 31-07]
It shall be the duty of the Animal Control Officer to apprehend and take into
custody and impound, or cause to be taken into custody and impounded, any
vicious dog or any dog found running at large, and to impound such dog in
the municipal pound or other suitable place. A complete registry of all such
dogs so seized shall be made, which shall include the breed, color and sex
of such dog and whether licensed. If licensed, the name and address of the
owner and the number of the license tag shall be recorded.
§ 98-34. Notice of impoundment. [Amended 9-11-2007 by Ord. No.
31-07]
If any dog seized or impounded in accordance with the provisions of this
article shall wear a collar or harness having inscribed thereon or attached
thereto the name and address of any person or a registration tag, or
the owner or person keeping or harboring said dog is known, the Animal
Control Officer shall forthwith serve upon the person whose address is
given on the collar or the owner or person keeping or harboring said dog,
if known, notice in writing stating that the dog has been seized and will be
liable to be disposed of or destroyed if not claimed within seven days after
the service of the notice.
§ 98-35. Impoundment of unrestrained dogs. [Added 10-3-1983 by
Ord. No. 50-83; amended 9-11-2007 by Ord. No. 31-07]
Unrestrained dogs may be taken by the Animal Control Officer and
impounded in the animal shelter and there confined in the manner
prescribed in N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.14. Impounded dogs shall be kept for not less
than seven days unless reclaimed by their owners. If, by a license or by
other means, the owner can be identified, the Animal Control Officer shall,
immediately upon impoundment, notify the owner by telephone or mail of
the impoundment of the dog. Dogs not claimed by their owners within seven
days, or placed in suitable new homes, may be disposed of by methods
prescribed as humane by the American Veterinary Medical Association
and the New Jersey Veterinary Medical Association by the Animal Control
Officer or by a representative delegated by him to exercise that authority.
§ 98-36. Disposition or redemption of dogs; detention fees.
§ 98-32 JACKSON CODE § 98-36
1:198
§ 98-37. Interference with authorized agents.
No person shall hurt, molest or interfere with anyone authorized or
empowered to perform any duty under this article.
§ 98-38. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $500 or by imprisonment for
any term not exceeding 90 days, or both.
A. When any dog has been seized in accordance with the provisions of this
article and has been detained for seven days after such notice, when
notice can be given as set forth in § 98-34, or has been detained for
seven days after seizure when no notice has been given, as set forth in
§ 98-34, and if the owner or person keeping or harboring said dog has
not claimed said dog and paid all expenses incurred by reason of its
detention as hereinafter specified, and if the dog be unlicensed at the
time of seizure and the owner or person keeping or harboring said dog
has not produced a license and registration tag for said dog, the Animal
Control Officer may cause the dog to be destroyed in a manner causing
as little pain as possible. [Amended 9-11-2007 by Ord. No. 31-07]
B. The following charges shall be paid to the Township of Jackson as
expenses incurred by reason of detention in accordance with the
provisions of this section: [Added 10-3-1983 by Ord. No. 50-83;
amended 9-11-2007 by Ord. No. 31-07]
(1) Impounding any dog: $3.
(2) Maintenance per day: $1.
(3) Giving notice: $1.
(4) Redemption of any dog: $10.
The charges specified herein shall be paid to the Township Clerk
of the Township of Jackson, and a receipt shall be delivered to the
person paying such charges, which receipt shall be the authority
for the Animal Control Officer to release the dog to the owner or
person claiming such dog.
C. No dog so impounded shall be sold, given, released or turned over to
any agency, organization, or corporation, whether governmental or
private, for experimentation or other like purposes.
§ 98-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-38
1:199

ARTICLE V
Fencing of Livestock
[Adopted 6-26-1973 by Ord. No. 34-73 (Ch. 59, Art. II, of the 1972
Code)]
§ 98-39. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to protect the health, safety and general
welfare of the citizens of the Township of Jackson as well as to provide
for the safety and health of horses and similar livestock by requiring the
fencing of horses and similar livestock.
§ 98-40. Regulations.
In any zone in the Township of Jackson wherein the keeping of horses,
ponies or other livestock is allowed, the following regulations shall be
complied with:
§ 98-41. Violations and penalties.
For any and every violation of the provisions of this article, the owner of
said premises where such violation has been committed or shall exist or
the tenant of such premises where such violation has been committed or
shall exist or any other person who commits, takes part in, or assists in
such violation or who maintains any building or premises in which any
such violation shall exist shall, for each and every day that such violation
continues, be subject to a fine of not more than $500 or be imprisoned in
the county jail for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both.
A. Construction. In all cases, fences must be provided for the keeping of
horses, ponies or other livestock so as to prevent their escape. Fences
must be constructed of such materials and in such a manner as to
prevent and preclude said escape.
B. Permits.
(1) The application for a building permit for a fence to pen horses or
similar livestock must include, in addition to any other information
required for a building permit, the height, the span between fence
posts, a sketch of the proposed fence, the type of material to be
used and whether same has been treated.
(2) The Building Inspector shall issue a building permit for any such
fence only when the proposed fence shall adequately prevent the
escape of horses.
C. Maintenance. All fences, pens, stables or similar structures must be
adequately maintained in a state of repair to prevent the escape of
horses, ponies or other livestock.
§ 98-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-41
1:201

ARTICLE VI
Harassment of Police Dogs
[Adopted 11-10-1985 by Ord. No. 50-80 (Ch. 51, Part 3, Art. IX, of
the 1972 Code)]
§ 98-42. Prohibitions.
§ 98-43. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of § 98-42 of this article shall be subject
to a fine not to exceed $500 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90
days, or both, in the discretion of the Judge of the Municipal Court.
A. No person shall willfully or maliciously taunt, torment, tease, beat or
strike any dog used by the Police Department of the Township of
Jackson for the performance of the functions or duties of the Police
Department, nor shall such person interfere with or meddle with any
such dog used by said Department or any member thereof in the
performance of the functions or duties of said Department or of such
officer or member.
B. No person shall willfully or maliciously torture, mutilate, injure, disable,
poison or kill any dog used by the Police Department of the Township of
Jackson for the performance of the functions or duties of such
Department, nor shall any person interfere with or meddle with any
such dog used by the said Department or any member thereof for the
performance of any of the functions or duties of said Department or
such officer or member.
§ 98-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-43
1:203

ARTICLE VII
Removal of Dog Feces
[Adopted 11-23-1987 by Ord. No. 38-87 (Ch. 51, Part 4, Art. X, of
the 1972 Code)]
§ 98-44. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to protect the health, safety and welfare of all
those residing within the Township. It is further the purpose of this article
to prevent the needless health hazard caused by dog feces upon public and
certain private properties.
§ 98-45. Prohibited acts.
No person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of any dog shall cause,
suffer or allow such dog to soil defile, defecate on or commit any nuisance
on any common thoroughfare, sidewalk, passageway, bypass, play area,
park or any place where people congregate or walk, or upon any public
property whatsoever or upon any private property without the permission of
the owner of said property. Restrictions in this section shall not apply under
the following conditions:
§ 98-46. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any one or more provisions of this article shall
be subject to a fine of not more than $500 for each separate offense and/
or confinement in the Ocean County Jail for a period of not more than 90
days. In the case of a continuing violation or violations, a fine of not more
than $500 may be assessed for each day that said violation or violations are
not corrected. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
A. The person who owns or harbors the dog shall immediately remove all
feces deposited by such dog by any sanitary method approved by the
local health authority.
B. The feces removed from the aforementioned designated area shall be
disposed of by the person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of
said dog in a sanitary manner approved by the local health authority.
§ 98-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-46
1:205

ARTICLE VIII
Horses and Other Livestock
[Adopted 3-13-1989 by Ord. No. 7-89 (Ch. 67 of the 1972 Code)]
§ 98-47. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to protect the health, safety and general
welfare of the citizens of the Township of Jackson, as well as to provide for
the safety and health of horses and similar livestock.
§ 98-48. Regulations.
In any zone in the Township of Jackson wherein the keeping of horses or
other livestock is allowed, the following regulations shall be complied with:
A. A lot or parcel of at least 45,000 square feet shall be required for the
keeping of horses, ponies or other similar livestock.
B. Within the pasture or field there must be provided a barn or similar
three-sided lean-to with a roof to provide shelter for the horses, ponies
or similar livestock. This barn or similar three-sided lean-to with a roof
must yield a minimum of 80 square feet per horse or pony or animal
unit. This eighty-square-foot shelter minimum requirement per horse,
pony or animal unit is in addition to any other footage required by this
section.
C. Location.
(1) All stables and/or similar three-sided lean-tos with roofs for the
purpose of sheltering horses, ponies or similar livestock shall be
located a minimum of:
(a) Twenty feet from any adjacent property line.
(b) Seventy-five feet from any neighboring dwelling.
(2) Pasture or field fencing may be placed at any point up to the
property line. Said fencing shall be a minimum of 50 feet from a
neighboring dwelling.
D. All pasture or field fences shall be constructed of such material and in
such a manner as to prevent and preclude an escape of livestock. It is
recommended that an Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., approved
electrical fence wire be mounted on the inside of all perimeter fencing.
E. All fences, barns, three-sided lean-tos or similar structures must be
maintained in a state of repair to prevent the escape of horses, ponies
or other livestock.
F. Stables and similar enclosures must be built and maintained to avoid
the creation of offensive odors, fly breeding or other nuisances. Fly
retardants such as flystrips and/or flytraps must be in place and in such
§ 98-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-48
1:207
§ 98-49. Persons presently keeping horses.
Any person, firm or corporation presently using land or premises within the
Township of Jackson for the keeping of horses, ponies or other livestock
shall comply with all the provisions of this article except as follows: Said
person, firm or corporation is exempt from the requirements of § 98-48A,
B and C, provided that such person, firm or corporation complies with all
other ordinances, rules and regulations of the Township of Jackson or any
agency thereof, and provided further that such noncompliance shall not be
restored in the event of abandonment or discontinuance.
§ 98-50. Violations and penalties.
For any and every violation of the provisions of this article, the owner of
said premises where such violation has been committed or shall exist or
the tenant of such premises where such violation has been committed or
shall exist or any other person who commits, takes part in or assists in
such violation or who maintains any building or premises in which any
such violation shall exist shall, for each and every day that such violation
continues, be subject to a fine of not more than $500 or be imprisoned in
the county jail for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both.
condition as to perform adequately from March 1 to and including
October 31.
G. Manure from stabled horses or other livestock may not be stored in the
stable or housing structure used to house said horses or livestock. Any
stockpile or manure shall not exceed 100 square feet and shall be
stored a minimum of 100 feet from the nearest neighboring dwelling.
All stockpiles of manure shall be limed at least once every week.
§ 98-48 JACKSON CODE § 98-50
1:208
ARTICLE IX
Wildlife Feeding
[Adopted 2-28-2005 by Ord. No. 09-05 (Ch. 51, Part 1, Art. V, of the
1972 Code)]
§ 98-51. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the feeding of unconfined wildlife
in any public park or on any other property owned or operated by the
Township of Jackson, so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and
to prescribe penalties for failure to comply.
§ 98-52. Definitions; word usage.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein, unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
FEED — To give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any edible
material with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing wildlife.
Feeding does not include bailing in the legal taking of fish and/or game.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
WILDLIFE — All animals that are not domesticated.
§ 98-53. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall feed, in any public park or on any other property owned
or operated by the Township of Jackson, any wildlife, excluding confined
wildlife (for example, wildlife confined in zoos, parks or rehabilitation
centers, or unconfined wildlife at environmental education centers).
§ 98-54. Enforcement.
§ 98-55. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $100.40
A. This article shall be enforced by the Jackson Township Code
Enforcement Officer or the Jackson Township Animal Control Officer.
B. Any person found to be in violation of this article shall be ordered to
cease the feeding immediately.
§ 98-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-55
1:209
40.Editor’s Note: Former Article X, Feral Cats, adopted 6-9-2009 by Ord. No. 14-09 (Ch. 51,
Part 5, Art. XI, of the 1972 Code), as amended, which immediately followed this section,
was repealed 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 11-12.
§ 98-55 JACKSON CODE § 98-55
1:210
ARTICLE X
Humane and Ethical Animal Rules and Treatment
[Adopted 11-12-2019 by Ord. No. 29-19]
§ 98-56. General provisions.
A. Short title. This article may be cited as the "Humane and Ethical Animal
Rules and Treatment (HEART) Ordinance."
B. Findings.
(1) The Council finds that the Township shall endeavor to protect
animals in the Township. Nothing herein shall be interpreted as
expanding the scope of the Township's liability under the New
Jersey Tort Claims Act41 or Common Law.
(2) The Council further finds that the people of Jackson should treat
animals as more than just lifeless, inanimate chattel property and
recognizes that the relationship between human beings and
animals is a special relationship that improves people's lives and
reflects basic humanitarian beliefs.
C. Legislative purpose and intent.
(1) The focus of this article is the prevention of cruelty, harm,
suffering, abandonment or death of animals.
(2) This article shall be read in conjunction with N.J.S.A. 4:22-15 et seq.
In the event an inconsistency arises between the chapter and the
statute, the statute shall prevail.
D. Definitions. For the purpose of this article, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning:
AMERICAN VETERINARY MEDICAL ASSOCIATION, or AVMA — Notfor-
profit association representing more than 72,000 veterinarians, the
goal of which is improving animal and human health and advancing the
veterinary medical profession.
ANIMAL — Any living nonhuman mammal, bird, reptile, or amphibian
including, but not limited to, bats, companion animals, companion
birds, domestic animals, exotic or wild animals, livestock, pigeons,
poultry, woodchucks, rabbits and skunks. For the purpose of this article,
insects and arachnids are not included in the definition of animals.
CRUELTY — Cruelty shall be defined pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:22-17.
EUTHANASIA — The killing of an animal in a manner commonly
recognized as humane and acceptable by local veterinarians pursuant
to AVMA standards.
41.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 59:1-1 et seq.
§ 98-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-56
1:211
§ 98-57. Prohibited activities.
EXTREME CRUELTY — A person is guilty of extreme cruelty to animals
if a person intentionally or maliciously tortures, mutilates, injures or
kills an animal, or if a person poisons an animal.
LAWFUL JUSTIFICATION — A strictly construed defense to a charge
of cruelty based on an immediate need to defend a threatened person
or animal from an imminent attack by an animal apparently capable of
causing death or serious bodily injury to the threatened individual or
animal.
POULTRY — Any bird that is kept as a pet or any bird that is commonly
used by humans for eggs or meat. Companion birds are not considered
poultry in this article.
VETERINARIAN — A doctor of veterinary medicine licensed to practice
in the State of New Jersey.
A. Cruelty to animals. Nothing herein shall be construed to preclude a
conviction for extreme cruelty under state law.
(1) Cruelty is any act or inaction that causes, is known to cause or is
calculated to cause physical or psychological pain, injury, damage
or harm to an animal.
(2) Any person may be cited for cruelty hereunder whether or not said
person owns the subject animal.
(3) Cruelty is applicable to all animals within the Township limits of
Jackson.
(4) Personal observation of cruelty by a Township official or police
officer is not required, and such officers may issue citations, file
criminal complaints or assist any other person in filing a criminal
complaint if an animal has been treated cruelly. A charge of cruelty
under this article is not a lesser included offense for a charge of
cruelty under state law.
(5) In addition to criminal charges for cruelty, the Township may avail
itself of the remedies of seizure, confiscation and protective
custody provided under this article.
(6) Any person who treats an animal in any way that would lead a
reasonable person to conclude that such animal has been subjected
to harm without lawful justification is guilty of cruelty.
(7) Any charges for medical care paid by the Township for an animal
suspected of being a victim of cruelty may be collected by the
Township through any legal process.
B. Specific activities that constitute cruelty to an animal. Such acts,
including but not limited to, shall constitute cruelty to animals as
follows:
§ 98-56 JACKSON CODE § 98-57
1:212
(1) Any person who acts intentionally, willfully, needlessly, recklessly or
maliciously is guilty of cruelty when engaged or attempting to
engage in the following behavior:
(a) Killing or attempting to kill an animal. Exceptions include:
[1] Humane euthanasia performed by a Veterinarian pursuant
to AVMA standards;
[2] Killing a bird if such bird is poultry owned by that person
and will be used for food;
[3] Killing a rabbit if such rabbit is owned by that person and
will be used for food;
[4] Killing mice, rats, moles or voles that are not a domestic
animal or otherwise claimed as a pet by any person; and
[5] Reasonably necessary taking of animals by a governmental
entity or contractor of a governmental entity for biodisease
management, including, without limitation,
selection of birds to determine the existence of or monitor
the spread of avian flu, or idling eggs.
(b) Failing to provide necessary sustenance, including food and
water, to an animal under that person's custody or control.
(c) Failing to provide adequate shelter.
(d) Poisoning, attempting to poison or allowing an animal access
to poisonous substances such as antifreeze, baiting any animal
with any substance soaked, treated or prepared with any
harmful or poisonous material unless such actions are
undertaken by a licensed professional exterminator.
[1] A person may use poison to kill mice, rats, moles or voles
but only within a person's own enclosed structures.
[2] Except when applied by a licensed exterminator, no poison
may be used outside, even on a person's own property, or
in any way in which a poisoned animal, including mice,
rats, moles or voles can consequently poison other
animals.
(e) Abusing an animal which includes, but is not limited to,
maiming, mistreating, disfiguring, torturing, beating, having
sexual contact with, hurting, burning, scalding or cruelly
setting upon any animal.
(f) Using a prod, stick, electrical shock, chemical, physical force,
starvation, pain or discomfort on an animal in order to make it
perform for entertainment purposes.
§ 98-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-57
1:213
[1] Generally accepted methods of animal training that do not
cause undue physical and emotional suffering, including
the training of livestock, companion animals, guard dogs,
hunting dogs, police dogs and service animals shall not
constitute cruelty.
(g) Using a whip or riding crop in a manner that purposely causes
injury to the animal.
(h) Chaining an animal to a stationary post, pole, or other
immovable object by means of any instrumentality or other
extension device including, but not limited to, a chain, tether,
coil or rope and leaving such animal unattended for more than
one hour in twenty-four-hour period.
(i) Abandonment of an animal. Any person who relinquishes
possession or control of an animal in a location where any
reasonable person would know the animal has little chance of
finding food, potable water, and shelter is guilty of cruelty.
Abandonment also includes dumping or releasing an animal
anywhere or leaving an animal behind when a person moves.
(j) Use of a spring-loaded trap. Spring-loaded traps are absolutely
prohibited in the Township unless used on mice or rats inside a
household or inside a commercial property.
(k) Improper use of a live trap. Any person who leaves an animal in
a live humane trap for more than six daylight hours or 12
nighttime hours.
(l) Overworking an animal.
(m) Overloading as provided for in N.J.S.A. 4:22-17(a)(1).
(n) Driving while overloaded as provided for in N.J.S.A.
4:22-17(a)(1).
(o) Overdriving as provided for in N.J.S.A. 4:22-17(a)(1).
(p) Animal fighting. No person shall promote, stage, hold, manage,
conduct, carry on, train for or attend a game, show, exhibition,
contest or fight in which one or more animals is injuring,
killing, maiming or destroying itself or other animals or
attempting to injure, kill, maim, or destroy other animals or
people.
[1] Any person who attends or observes any animal fight is
vicariously criminally liable under this article, whether or
not that person paid for entry to the event.
[2] The owner of any premises used for animal fighting is in
violation of this article.
§ 98-57 JACKSON CODE § 98-57
1:214
[3] Any person who profits in any manner from an animal
fight, including but not limited to on-site vendors or
purveyors of illegal gambling concerning an animal fight,
is in violation of this article.
[4] Any person who sells, receives, possesses, transports,
loans or gives away any animal used for fighting or animal
fighting paraphernalia is in violation of this article.
[5] No person shall provoke or entice an animal from the
property of its owner for the purpose of engaging the
animal in an animal fight.
(q) Teasing or taunting animals. No person shall tease or taunt any
animal with the intent, purpose or effect of provoking a
reaction from the animal.
(r) Artificially coloring an animal. No person shall dye or
artificially color an animal under the age of 12 weeks or use
any dyes or coloring substance that could be harmful to the
animal.
(s) Failing to report an injury to an animal caused by a motorist. A
motor vehicle operator who strikes or runs down an animal
shall immediately call 911 and provide the facts regarding the
accident and, if possible, the injuries sustained by the animal.
(t) No method of slaughtering or handling in connection with
slaughtering shall be deemed to comply with the public policy
of the Township unless it is humane. Either of the following two
methods of slaughtering and handling are hereby found to be
humane:
[1] In the case of cattle, calves, horses, mules, sheep, swine,
and other livestock, all animals are rendered insensible to
pain by a single blow or gunshot or an electrical, chemical
or other means that is rapid and effective, before being
shackled, hoisted, thrown, cast, or cut; or
[2] By slaughtering in accordance with the ritual
requirements of any recognized faith, by a recognized
practitioner, as protected by Church of the Lukumi Babalu
Aye v. City of Hialeah, 508 U.S. 520, 537, 113 S.Ct. 2217,
124 L. Ed.2d 472 (1993), prescribing a method of
slaughter whereby the animal suffers loss of consciousness
by anemia of the brain caused by the simultaneous and
instantaneous severance of the carotid arteries with a
sharp instrument and handling in connection with such
slaughtering.
C. Exemption of ritual slaughter. Nothing in this chapter shall be
construed to prohibit, abridge, or in any way hinder the religious
§ 98-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-57
1:215
freedom of any person or group. Notwithstanding any other provision
of this chapter, in order to protect freedom of religion, ritual slaughter
and the handling or other preparation of livestock for ritual slaughter
are exempted from the terms of this chapter. For the purposes of this
section the term "ritual slaughter" means slaughter in accordance with
§ 98-57B(1)(t)[2] of this article.
D. Shooting, molesting birds prohibited; exceptions.
(1) Within the municipal limits of the Township of Jackson it shall be
unlawful for any person to kill, trap, hunt, shoot or attempt to
shoot, willfully injure, or maim any bird or wild fowl; or to rob any
bird or wild fowl nest of its eggs, without a license issued by the
State of New Jersey.
(2) Birds congregating in such numbers in a defined area within the
municipality as to constitute a public nuisance or endanger the
health of the public or damage property may be removed by
persons authorized and/or qualified to perform such removal by the
municipality. Feral or wild birds may be deemed a public nuisance,
and as such may be removed by such authorized and/or qualified
persons regardless of number in a particular locality.
(3) Unless otherwise posted, it shall be unlawful for any person other
than an animal Control Officer to feed wild or feral birds on any
public property located within the municipality limits.
(4) Exceptions would include state-organized specific hunts with all
requirements set within such hunt.
E. Exemptions for individuals or entities holding licenses or permits.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter to the contrary, any
person or entity holding the following licenses or permits shall be
exempt from the provisions of this chapter if the provisions of this
chapter are more restrictive than activity or inactivity that is permitted
by the holder of the license or permit:
(1) License or permits from the United States Department of
Agriculture.
(a) Animal welfare act exhibitor.
(2) License or permits from the United States Department of the
Interior.
(a) Depredation permit.
(3) License or permits from the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection.
(a) Exotic and nongame wildlife species possession permit,
zoological holding.
§ 98-57 JACKSON CODE § 98-57
1:216
(b) Exotic and nongame wildlife species possession permit, animal
exhibitor.
(c) Captive game permit.
(d) Depredation control permit.
F. Violations and penalties. Whomever violates any section of this article
for which no penalty is otherwise provided and upon conviction, shall
be deemed guilty of a violation of this article and shall be fined not more
than $500 for each offense, imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or
both, in the discretion of the court. With respect to violations of
§ 98-57D, each offense shall be treated individually as relates to the
number of birds and/or eggs impacted by the offense(s).
§ 98-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-57
1:217
Chapter 103
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Handicapped parking — See Ch. 227.
Permit parking — See Ch. 315.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 372.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 380.
Towers and wreckers — See Ch. 388.
Automobile trailers — See Ch. 400, Art. I.
Abandoned or inoperable vehicles — See Ch.
418.
Unlicensed vehicles — See Ch. 431.
§ 98-57 JACKSON CODE § 98-57
1:218
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 103-1. Definitions.
Whenever any words and phrases are used in this chapter, the meaning
respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases
used herein.
§ 103-2. Repealer.
All former traffic ordinances of the Township of Jackson are hereby
repealed, except that this repeal shall not affect or prevent the prosecution
or punishment of any person for any act done or committed in violation of
any ordinance hereby repealed prior to the taking effect of this chapter.
§ 103-3. Severability.
If any part or parts of this chapter are held to be invalid for any reason,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
chapter.
§ 103-4. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey statute, or
except as specifically provided in some other section of this chapter, every
person convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter or any
supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $50 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
§ 103-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-4
1:219

ARTICLE II
Parking
§ 103-5. Regulations not exclusive.
The provisions of this article imposing a time limit on parking shall not
relieve any person of the duty to observe other and more restrictive
provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles as set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-138, any other New Jersey statute or as
hereinafter provided.
§ 103-6. Parking prohibited at all times.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule I attached to and make a part of this chapter.
§ 103-6.1. Parking, stopping or standing prohibited at all times.
[Added 7-12-1977 by Ord. No. 38-77]
No person shall park, stop or stand a vehicle at any time upon any of the
streets or parts of streets thereof described in Schedule IA, attached to and
made a part of this chapter (§ 103-45.1).
§ 103-7. Parking prohibited during certain hours.
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified in Schedule II
of any day (except Sundays and public holidays) upon any of the streets or
parts of streets described in said Schedule II attached to and made part of
this chapter.
§ 103-8. Stopping or standing prohibited during certain hours.
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle between the hours specified in
Schedule III of any day (except Sundays and public holidays) upon any of
the streets or parts of streets described in said Schedule III attached to and
made part of this chapter.
§ 103-9. Parking time limited.
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit shown in
Schedule IV of any day (except Sundays and public holidays) upon any of the
streets or parts of streets described in Schedule IV attached to and made a
part of this chapter.
§ 103-10. Angle parking.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts thereof
described in Schedule V attached to and made a part of this chapter except
at the angle designated and only within the painted white stall lines.
§ 103-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-10.1
1:221
§ 103-10.1. Handicapped parking. [Added 7-24-1979 by Ord. No.
38-79; amended 4-25-1983 by Ord. No. 27-83; 6-10-1991 by Ord. No.
20-91; 4-27-1992 by Ord. No. 07-92]
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish parking prohibitions
in certain areas that are on private property which is open to the public
or to which the public is invited as is set forth in Schedule VA.
B. This section is enacted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.46, which grants to
the Township of Jackson the authority to establish certain regulations in
order to preserve and safeguard the public health, safety and welfare.
C. The Township shall require that handicapped parking spaces be
provided by those businesses or places open to the public or to which
the public is invited and is open to vehicular traffic and the parking of
vehicles. The handicapped parking spaces required for those
businesses or places are as set forth in Schedule VA.
D. All handicapped parking stalls hereinafter enumerated on Schedule VA
shall be 12 feet wide and shall be signed with R7-8 (reserved parking
sign) and penalty plate. The above signs shall be installed in the
designated parking areas for those persons who have been issued
handicapped parking permits or plates by the Division of Motor
Vehicles, and each sign shall be in conformance with the Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways.
E. Location and number of handicapped parking stalls shall be determined
by the Traffic Safety Officer of the Jackson Township Police Department
and shall be in an area of the parking facility which is most accessible
and approximate to the building or buildings which the facility serves.
In shopping centers or multistore facilities, the handicapped parking
will be located as close as possible to the flagship store and at other
locations determined by the Traffic Officer.
F. No person shall park a motor vehicle in any space on public or private
property appropriately marked for vehicles for the physically
handicapped pursuant to P.L. 1977, c. 202 (N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.5), P.L.
1975, c. 217 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.), or any other applicable law
unless the vehicle is authorized by law to be parked therein and a
handicapped person is either the driver or a passenger in that vehicle.
G. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-207.7, an eligible handicapped person may
request a law enforcement officer to arrange for the removal and
storage of a motor vehicle which is parked unlawfully in a parking space
or zone which is restricted for use by a handicapped person. It shall be
the obligation of the owner of the motor vehicle to pay the reasonable
costs for the removal and for any storage.
H. Parking spaces for handicapped; requirement for snow and ice removal.
[Added 3-23-2010 by Ord. No. 08-10]
§ 103-10.1 JACKSON CODE § 103-10.1
1:222
(1) A person who owns or controls a parking area which is open to the
public or to which the public is invited and which contains special
parking spaces for the persons who have been issued a placard or
wheelchair symbol license plates pursuant to Chapter 227, entitled
"Handicapped Parking," shall be responsible for assuring that
access to these special parking spaces and to curb cuts or other
improvements designed to provide accessibility for handicapped
persons is not obstructed.
(2) If snow or ice is obstructing the special parking space, curb cut or
other improvements designed to provide accessibility for the
handicapped, it shall be removed within 48 hours after the weather
conditions causing the snow or ice ceases.
I. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be
punished by a minimum fine of $200 for the first offense and a
maximum of $500 and/or up to 90 days' community service for
subsequent offenses. [Amended 3-23-2010 by Ord. No. 08-10]
§ 103-10.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-10.1
1:223

ARTICLE III
Truck Exclusions
§ 103-11. Trucks over four tons excluded.
Trucks over four tons' gross weight are hereby excluded from the streets or
parts of streets described in Schedule VI except for the pickup and delivery
of materials on such streets, said Schedule VI being attached to and made a
part of this chapter.
§ 103-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-11
1:225

ARTICLE IV
One-Way Streets
§ 103-12. One-way streets designated.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule VII attached to and
made a part of this chapter are hereby designated as one-way streets in the
direction indicated.
§ 103-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-12
1:227

ARTICLE V
Stop and Yield Intersections
§ 103-13. Through streets designated.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the streets or parts of
streets described in Schedule VIII attached to and made a part of this
chapter are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be
installed on the near-right side of each street intersecting the through
street except where yield signs are provided for in the designations.
§ 103-14. Stop intersections designated.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
in Schedule IX attached to and made a part of this chapter are hereby
designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as provided
therein.
§ 103-15. Yield intersections designated.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
in Schedule X attached to and made a part of this chapter are hereby
designated as yield intersections. Yield signs shall be installed as provided
therein.
§ 103-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-15
1:229

ARTICLE VI
Special Zones and Areas
§ 103-16. Loading zones designated.
The locations described in Schedule XI attached to and made a part of this
chapter are hereby designated as loading zones.
§ 103-17. Taxi stands designated.
The locations described in Schedule XII attached to and made a part of this
chapter are hereby designated as taxi stands.
§ 103-18. Bus stops designated.
The locations described in Schedule XIII attached to and made a part of this
chapter are hereby designated as bus stops.
§ 103-19. Safety zones and traffic islands.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-196,42 the locations described
in Schedule XIV attached to and made a part of this chapter are hereby
designated as safety zones and/or traffic islands.
42.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 39:4-196 was repealed by P.L. 1951, c. 23. See now N.J.S.A.
39:4-196.1 et seq.
§ 103-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-19
1:231

ARTICLE VII
Turn Prohibitions
§ 103-20. U-turns.
No person shall make a U-turn on any of the streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule XV attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 103-21. Turns at intersections.
No person shall make a turn of the kind designated (left, right, all) at any of
the locations described in Schedule XVI attached to and made a part of this
chapter.
§ 103-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-21
1:233

ARTICLE VIII
Emergency No Parking
§ 103-22. Designation of snow emergency no-parking areas: snow
removal. [Amended 3-24-2015 by Ord. No. 07-15]
§ 103-22.1. Parking restrictions during snow removal periods.
[Added 3-24-2015 by Ord. No. 07-15]
§ 103-22.2. Snow and other impediments. [Added 3-24-2015 by Ord.
No. 07-15]
A. When, in the opinion of the Township's Mayor, Emergency Management
Coordinator, Public Works Director and Police Chief of Jackson
Township, the actual or expected precipitation of snow will create
hazardous or dangerous roadway conditions for vehicular or pedestrian
traffic, the Mayor and/or Emergency Management Coordinator shall
have the authority to declare a snow removal emergency.
B. The Mayor and/or Emergency Management Coordinator of Jackson
Township shall declare a snow removal emergency by issuing a media
release to the local radio and cablevision stations, news media and the
Township's Web Page.
C. The Mayor, Emergency Management Coordinator and Chief of Police of
Jackson Township shall declare Emergency Parking Areas to assist the
residents in removing all vehicles from roadways.
D. The snow removal emergency shall continue in full force and effect until
the Mayor and/or Emergency Management Coordinator declares it to
be over by issuing a media release to the local radio and cablevision
stations, news media and Township's Web Page.
E. The Mayor and/or Emergency Management Coordinator, upon issuing a
snow removal emergency, shall issue proclamations declaring and
rescinding said emergency and forward copies to the County Office of
Emergency Management.
A. Residents will have four hours after the snow removal emergency
declaration to move their vehicles from the streets and roads within the
boundaries of Jackson Township.
B. Ticketing and towing of vehicles will commence four hours after the
declaration. Towing before the snow actually starts is necessary to
ensure clear streets and roads for the plows.
C. All costs associated with towing any vehicle will be the responsibility of
the registered owner.
A. All sports-related equipment shall be removed from streets and roads.
B. All trash receptacles shall be removed from the streets and roads.
§ 103-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-22.2
1:235
§ 103-22.3. Enforcement. [Added 3-24-2015 by Ord. No. 07-15]
§ 103-22.4. Violations and penalties. [Added 3-24-2015 by Ord. No.
07-15]
§ 103-23. Posting of signs. [Amended 3-14-1978 by Ord. No. 19-78;
3-24-2015 by Ord. No. 07-15]
§ 103-24. Removal of vehicles.
Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this article shall
be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of
traffic, and any peace officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle.
C. No person, firm or corporation, owner, tenant or occupant of any
premises on any street or road shall throw, place or deposit snow or ice
into or upon and street or road within the boundaries of Jackson
Township.
A. Enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the following
agencies:
(1) Municipal Police Department.
(2) Municipal Code Enforcement Department.
A. Any violation of this article may result, upon conviction, in one or more
of the following penalties:
(1) First offense: $60.
(2) Second offense: $120.
(3) Third offense: $250 Imprisonment not to exceed 90 days or
Community Service not to exceed 90 days
(4) All penalties are at the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge.
A. The Chief of Police, or in his absence the ranking police officer, is
authorized to declare an emergency to enforce no parking upon street
or section of streets when accidents, fires or conditions dictate or
require the avoidance of hazards or other conditions which interfere
with the free flow of traffic.
B. The Chief of Police, or in his absence the ranking police officer, is
authorized to declare no parking upon streets or sections of streets for
the purpose of nonemergency, public celebrations provided that
temporary emergency no-parking signs are displayed.
C. Notification that no-parking signs are being or will be posted shall be
given to the operator or owner of any vehicle which has been parked
prior to the posting of the signs.
§ 103-22.2 JACKSON CODE § 103-24
1:236
The owner shall pay the reasonable costs of the removal and storage which
may result from such removal before regaining possession of the vehicle.
§ 103-25. (Reserved)43
43.Editor’s Note: Former § 103-25, When effective, as amended, was repealed 3-24-2015 by
Ord. No. 07-15.
§ 103-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-25
1:237

ARTICLE IX
Speed Limits
§ 103-26. Limits established.
The speed limits for both directions of traffic along the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule XVIII attached to and made a part of this
chapter is hereby established at the rate of speed indicated.
§ 103-26.1. Park speed limits. [Added 7-27-1987 by Ord. No. 28-87]
§ 103-27. Posting of signs.
Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained as required
by the Commissioner of Transportation and as specified in his authorization
of the above zones.
§ 103-28. When effective.
The speed limits shall become effective upon posting of the proper signs
after approval by the Commissioner of Transportation.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish a ten-miles-per-hour
speed limit within all parks within the Township of Jackson, County of
Ocean, State of New Jersey.
B. Speed limit established. With all municipal parks located within the
Township of Jackson there is hereby established a speed limit of 10
miles per hour. The ten-miles-per-hour speed limit for both directions of
traffic along the entire length of travel is for the following Township
parks as per N.J.S.A. 39:5A-4: [Amended 1-25-1988 by Ord. No.
01-88]
(1) Camp Joy.
(2) Jackson Forest.
(3) Johnson Park.
(4) Woodlane Park.
§ 103-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-28
1:239

ARTICLE X
Traffic Control Signals
§ 103-29. Traffic signals established.
Traffic control signals shall be installed and operated at the intersection of
those streets described in Schedule XIX attached to and made a part of this
chapter.
§ 103-30. Installation of signals.
The traffic signal installation shall be in accordance with the provisions
of an act concerning motor vehicles and traffic regulations, Subtitle 1 of
Title 39 of the Revised Statutes, shall conform to the design, and shall be
maintained in operation, as authorized by the Department of Transportation
of the State of New Jersey.
§ 103-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-30
1:241

ARTICLE XI
No-Passing Zones
§ 103-31. No-passing zones established.
No-passing zones are hereby to be established and maintained along the
streets or parts of streets described in Schedule XX attached to and made a
part of this chapter.
§ 103-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-31
1:243

ARTICLE XII
Lane Use
[Added 2-11-2008 by Ord. No. 07-08]
§ 103-32. Lane use reservations.
§ 103-33. through § 103-42. (Reserved)
A. The lane locations described are designated as "lane use reservations,"
and traffic shall move as indicated:
Intersection Movement
Bennetts Mills Road and
Bates Road
Westbound left lane of Bates Road
reserved for left turn only
B. All signing shall conform to the current Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and N.J.S.A. 39:4-183.27.
C. Unless another penalty is expressly provided for by New Jersey statute,
every person convicted of a violation of this section or any supplement
thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $100 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
§ 103-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-33
1:245

ARTICLE XIII
Trucks; Trailers; Semitrailers; Overnight Parking
§ 103-43. Parking prohibited certain hours.
No person shall cause or permit to be parked any truck, tractor, trailer,
semitrailer or omnibus upon any public street, road or highway in the
Township of Jackson between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
§ 103-44. Posting of signs.
Appropriate and suitable signs stating the prohibitions herein contained
shall be posted at all entrances into the Township of Jackson.
§ 103-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-44
1:247

ARTICLE XIIIA
Traffic Controls for Street and Highway Construction and
Maintenance Operations
[Added 12-27-1993 by Ord. No. 45-93]
§ 103-44.1. Adoption of Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices
for Streets and Highways.
§ 103-44.2. Preconstruction meetings.
It shall be the responsibility of the person, contractor, or public utility (as
required under Section 16:25-9.2 of the New Jersey Administrative Code)
wishing to conduct work on, under or above the roadway to contact the
Traffic Bureau of the Jackson Township Police Department in order to
arrange a preconstruction meeting in order to submit plans for the safe
movement of traffic during such period of construction of work. Any person,
contractor or utility who fails to comply with this section prior to the start
of such work, or whose plans are not approved by the Traffic Bureau of the
Jackson Township Police Department, is in violation of this section.
§ 103-44.3. Traffic directors.
Trained and qualified traffic directors or flagging personnel shall be posted
at all construction or maintenance sites when determined by the Traffic
Bureau of the Jackson Township Police Department that same is necessary
to provide for the safety and expeditious movement of traffic.
A. The Township of Jackson finds and declares that problems of traffic
control occur when traffic must be moved through or around road and
street construction, maintenance operations and utility work, above or
below ground which requires blocking the roadway and obstructing the
normal flow of traffic, and that such obstructions are or can become
dangerous when not properly controlled. In order to better promote the
public health, safety, peace and welfare, it is necessary to establish
controls and regulations directed to the safe and expeditious movement
of traffic through construction and maintenance zones and to provide
safety for the workforces performing these operations.
B. The Township of Jackson, in the County of Ocean, State of New Jersey,
does hereby adopt the current Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices, 1988 Edition, hereafter known as "MUTCD," except as hereby
supplemented and amended, as it controls and regulates whenever
construction, maintenance operations or utility work obstructs the
normal flow of traffic. Any person, contractor or utility who fails to
comply with the provisions of the MUTCD while performing such work
is in violation of this section.
§ 103-44.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-44.4
1:249
§ 103-44.4. Operation requirements.
All construction sites shall have proper and ample guards, barricades, signs
and lights maintained on site to sufficiently warn users of the road, street or
highway of the dangers attendant to the project, from the time the opening,
trench or road construction is started until same is completely restored and
completely reopened to public travel. The type of guard, barricade, sign or
light to be utilized shall be in compliance with specifications or standards
contained in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, 1988 Edition,
or its latest revisions.
§ 103-44.5. Road closing and detours.
Road closing and/or traffic detours shall not be permitted unless approved
by the Traffic Bureau of the Jackson Township Police Department.
§ 103-44.6. Time limits.
There shall be no construction, maintenance operations or utility work on
any roadway in the Township of Jackson before the hour of 8:00 a.m. or after
5:00 p.m., with the exception of emergency work. This time limit may be
adjusted to permit work prior to 8:00 a.m. or after 5:00 p.m. by the Traffic
Safety Office of the Jackson Township Police Department. If it is determined
by the Traffic Safety Office that the construction or maintenance operation
would cause a substantial delay in traffic or cause a safety or health hazard,
the work shall then be permitted only between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
§ 103-44.7. Emergency contact phone numbers.
The person, contractor or utility responsible for the construction site shall
provide the Police Department and Traffic Bureau with at least two
emergency contact twenty-four-hour phone numbers prior to the start of
any work. If for any reason the emergency contact person cannot be
reached or does not respond to a call from the Police Department to correct
a hazardous condition, the Township may respond to correct the hazard.
The reasonable fees for such emergency service shall be charged to the
bonded contractor responsible.
§ 103-44.8. Authority to stop work.
The Traffic Bureau of the Jackson Township Police Department shall have
the authority to stop work, including but not limited to, the backfilling of
open excavations, the removal of equipment and vehicles, the removal of
any stored materials within the roadway, safety hazards or for any violation
of this section.
§ 103-44.9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-23-2010 by Ord.
No. 37-10]
Any person, contractor or utility who commits a violation of this article
shall, upon conviction thereof for a first offense, pay a fine of not less than
§ 103-44.4 JACKSON CODE § 103-44.9
1:250
$100 nor more then $2,000 and/or be imprisoned in the county jail for a
term not exceeding 90 days. A separate offense shall be deemed committed
on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 103-44.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-44.9
1:251

ARTICLE XIV
Schedules
§ 103-45. Schedule I: No Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 103-6, no person shall park a vehicle
at any time upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Bates Road [Added
4-22-2008 by Ord. No.
13-0844]
South From the intersection of Bennetts
Mills Road to a point
approximately 820 feet east
thereof
Chief Showell Drive [Added
7-13-1998 by Ord. No.
19-98; repealed
10-26-1998 by Ord. No.
34-98]
Citadel Drive [Added
7-14-1997 by Ord. No.
11-97; repealed 9-22-1997
by Ord. No. 21-97]
Jackson Drive [Added
7-13-1998 by Ord. No.
19-98]
Both Entire length within the Jackson
Township Municipal Justice
Complex
Johnson Park (interior
driveway) 6-12-2018 by
Ord. No. 13-18
Both Entire length
New Hampshire Street
[Added 7-14-1997 by Ord.
No. 11-97; repealed
9-22-1997 by Ord. No.
21-97]
West Veterans Highway
[Added 12-10-2001 by Ord.
No. 48-01]
South From the westerly curbline of Don
Connor Boulevard to a point 450
feet west of the westerly curbline
of Jackson Drive
§ 103-45.1. Schedule IA: No Parking, Stopping or Standing. [Added
7-12-1977 by Ord. No. 38-77]
In accordance with the provisions of § 103-6.1, no person shall park, stop or
stand a vehicle at any time upon any of the following described streets or
parts of streets:
44.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that every person convicted of a violation of a
provision of the ordinance shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $100 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both, unless another penalty is
expressly provided by New Jersey statute.
§ 103-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-45.1
1:253
Name of Street Side Location
Bennetts Mills Road (County
Road No. 10) [Added
9-8-1986 by Ord. No.
34-86]
South From the westerly curbline of
Cooks Bridge Road to a point 333
feet west thereof
Brewers Bridge Road
[Amended 11-14-1978 by
Ord. No. 55-78]
Both From a point 300 feet south of the
southerly curbline of County Line
Road to its intersection with New
Prospect Road
Jackson Mills — Freehold
Road [Added 12-22-1986 by
Ord. No. 42-86; amended
2-2-1987 by Ord. No.
02-87]
Both From the southerly curbline of
Chambers New Prospect Road to
a point 250 feet south thereof
Manhattan Street [Added
2-26-1996 by Ord. No.
07-96]
Both From a point 200 feet south of the
southerly curbline of Bennetts
Mills Road to a point 200 feet
north of the northerly curbline of
Bennetts Mills Road
New Prospect Road [Added
2-2-1987 by Ord. No.
02-87]
North From the easterly curbline of
Woodlane Road to a distance of
470 feet easterly thereof
§ 103-46. Schedule II: No Parking Certain Hours.
In accordance with the provisions of § 103-7, no person shall park a vehicle
between the hours listed upon any of the following described streets or
parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Citadel Drive Both 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m.
Beginning at a point
50 feet west of Florida
Place easterly to Kings
Court
Citadel Drive
[Added 7-14-1997
by Ord. No. 11-97]
North 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./school days
Beginning at a point
130 feet west of Kings
Court westerly to New
Hampshire Street
§ 103-45.1 JACKSON CODE § 103-46
1:254
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Mitchell Court
[Added 2-11-2002
by Ord. No. 05-02]
Both 7:00 a.m. to 2:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday,
only when Jackson
Township High
School is in session
(parking permitted
during weekends,
holidays and
summer vacation)
Entire length
New Hampshire
Street [Added
7-14-1997 by Ord.
No. 11-97;
amended
9-22-1997 by Ord.
No. 21-97]
East 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./school days
From the northerly
curbline of Citadel
Drive to a point 377
feet northerly thereof
North Hope Chapel
Road [Added
7-24-2008 by Ord.
No. 22-08]
Both 7:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
Between South Cooks
Bridge Road and New
Central Avenue
Susie Lane [Added
2-11-2002 by Ord.
No. 05-02]
Both 7:00 a.m. to 2:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday,
only when Jackson
Township High
School is in session
(parking permitted
during weekends,
holidays and
summer vacation)
Entire length
§ 103-47. Schedule III: No Stopping or Standing.
In accordance with the provisions of § 103-8, no person shall stop or stand a
vehicle between the hours of __________ upon any of the following described
streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 103-48. Schedule IV: Time Limit Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 103-9, no persons shall park a vehicle
for longer than the time limit shown upon any of the following streets or
parts of streets:
§ 103-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-48
1:255
Name of
Street Side Hours
Maximum
Time
(minutes) Location
(Reserved)
§ 103-49. Schedule V: Angle Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 103-10, no person shall park a vehicle
upon any of the following streets or parts of streets except at the angle
indicted:
Name of Street Side Angle Location
(Reserved)
§ 103-49.1. Schedule VA: Handicapped Parking. [Added 6-10-1991
by Ord. No. 20-91; amended 4-27-1992 by Ord. No. 07-92]
In accordance with § 103-10.1, the following areas are designated as
handicapped parking areas:
Property
Number
of Spaces Location
Bus garage [Added
12-12-1994 by Ord. No.
30-94]
1 5th stall on north side of
building
Carl W. Goetz School [Added
12-12-1994 by Ord. No.
30-94]
4 North end, row 1, first 2 stalls;
row 2, first 2 stalls
Christa McAuliffe Middle
School [Added 12-12-1994
by Ord. No. 30-94]
5 Five stalls, east end of building
Cumberland Farms Route
528 at Route 547
1 Adjacent to and east of fire zone
Glory's Market Route 526 at
Route 527
1 Right of front entrance
Great Adventure Route 537 1 Easterly end of Administration
Building
Great Adventure Route 537 1 Westerly end of Administration
Building
Great Adventure Route 537 33 Parking Lot A, 33 spaces
nearest main entrance
Holman Elementary School
[Added 12-12-1994 by
Ord. No. 30-94]
1 In front of school, 12th stall,
north end
§ 103-48 JACKSON CODE § 103-49.1
1:256
Property
Number
of Spaces Location
Jackson Board of Education
Administration Building
[Added 12-12-1994 by
Ord. No. 30-94]
2 Stalls 8 and 9 in front of the
Administration Building
Jackson Library [Added
9-5-1994 by Ord. No.
21-94]
4 1 left of entrance walk; 3 right
of entrance walk
Jackson Memorial High
School [Added 12-12-1994
by Ord. No. 30-94]
11 First row, east side stalls, 14
through 18 from the north end;
third row, east side stalls 1
through 3 from the north end;
fourth row, east end stalls, 1
through 3 from the north end
Jackson Moose Route 528 1 East or left side of front
entrance
Jackson Senior Center
[Added 9-5-1994 by Ord.
No. 21-94]
9 3 left of entrance; 1 right of
entrance; 6 at west side of
parking lot
Jackson Township Municipal
Building [Added 9-5-1994
by Ord. No. 21-94]
3 1 at first space at northwest
corner nearest front entrance; 1
at west rear entrance; 1 at east
rear entrance
Jackson Township Police
Building [Added 9-5-1994
by Ord. No. 21-94]
1 1 west of front entrance at
handicap ramp
Johnson Elementary School
[Added 12-12-1994 by
Ord. No. 30-94]
1 In front of school, 9th stall,
southwest side
Rosenauer Elementary
School [Added 12-12-1994
by Ord. No. 30-94]
1 In front of school, 2nd stall, east
end
Rova Farms Route 571 2 First 2 spaces to left of front
entrance stairs
Switlik School [Added
12-12-1994 by Ord. No.
30-94]
4 Stalls 7 through 10 from east
end, south side
§ 103-50. Schedule VI: Trucks Over Four Tons Excluded.
In accordance with the provisions of § 103-11, trucks over four tons' gross
weight are hereby excluded from the following streets or parts of streets,
except for the pickup and delivery of materials on such streets:
§ 103-49.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-50
1:257
Name of Street Location
60 Acre Boulevard [Added
10-27-1997 by Ord. No. 23-97]
Entire length
Anderson Road [Added
10-27-2003 by Ord. No. 31-03]
Entire length
Andover Road Entire length
Ashford Road [Added 9-22-2003
by Ord. No. 27-03]
Entire length
Beam Avenue [Added 9-26-2005
by Ord. No. 40-05]
Between South Cooks Bridge Road and
Manhattan Street
Bethel Church Road [Added
9-22-2003 by Ord. No. 27-03]
From South New Prospect Road (CR
641) to the Jackson Township
corporate line/Howell Township
corporate line
Brookwood Parkway [Added
9-22-2003 by Ord. No. 27-03]
Entire length
Bryant Drive [Added 9-22-2003
by Ord. No. 27-03]
Entire length
Burke Tavern Road — Anderson
Road [Added 12-23-1985 by
Ord. No. 43-85]
Between Monmouth Road (County
Road 537) and Trenton — Cassville
Road (County Road 571)
Butterfly Road (CR 8) [Added
9-26-2005 by Ord. No. 40-05;
repealed 3-13-2007 by Ord. No.
07-07]
Buttonwood Drive [Added
10-27-2003 by Ord. No. 31-03]
Entire length
Castle Avenue [Added 9-26-2005
by Ord. No. 40-05]
Between South Cooks Bridge Road and
Manhattan Street
Citadel Drive [Added 9-22-2003
by Ord. No. 27-03]
From South New Prospect Road (CR
641) to Brookwood Parkway
Cooks Bridge Road (County Road
54) [Added 12-23-1985 by Ord.
No. 43-85]
Between Bennetts Mills Road (County
Road 636) and West County Line Road
(County Road 526)
Coventry Road [Added
12-23-1985 by Ord. No. 43-85]
Entire length
East Bird Village Road [Added
9-26-2005 by Ord. No. 40-05]
Entire length (both legs)
East Fish Road [Added
10-11-2011 by Ord. No. 33-11]
Entire length (from Cedar Swamp
Road to East Pleasant Grove Road)
Georgian Boulevard [Added
9-26-2005 by Ord. No. 40-05]
Between Bennetts Mills Road (CR 636)
and Manhattan Street
§ 103-50 JACKSON CODE § 103-50
1:258
Name of Street Location
Goldweber Avenue [Added
9-26-2005 by Ord. No. 40-05]
Between Bennetts Mills Road (CR 636)
and Manhattan Street
Grand Avenue [Added
12-23-1985 by Ord. No. 43-85]
Entire length
Grand Boulevard [Added
10-27-2003 by Ord. No. 31-03]
Entire length
Grawtown Road [Added
4-9-1990 by Ord. No. 16-90]
Entire length
Harmony Road [Added
12-23-1985 by Ord. No. 43-85]
Between West County Line Road
(County Road 526) and Jackson
Mills — Freehold Road (County Road
638)
Idaho Place [Added 9-22-2003
by Ord. No. 27-03]
Entire length
Iris Drive Entire length
Laurelton Avenue [Added
9-26-2005 by Ord. No. 40-05]
Between South Cooks Bridge Road and
Manhattan Street
Leesville Road [Added
12-23-1985 by Ord. No. 43-85]
Entire length
Louisiana Parkway [Added
9-22-2003 by Ord. No. 27-03]
Entire length
Manhattan Street [Added
9-26-2005 by Ord. No. 40-05]
Entire length
Melody Lane [Added 8-26-2014
by Ord. No. 14-14]
Entire length
Nature Boulevard [Added
10-27-1997 by Ord. No. 23-97]
Within the 60 Acre Reserve residential
community
Oak Drive [Added 8-26-2014 by
Ord. No. 14-14]
Entire length
Ocean Avenue [Added 9-26-2005
by Ord. No. 40-05]
Between South Cooks Bridge Road and
Manhattan Street
Patterson Road [Added
10-27-2003 by Ord. No. 31-03]
Entire length
Pleasant Grove Road [Added
11-24-1986 by Ord. No. 40-86]
Entire length
Puskin Road [Added 9-26-2005
by Ord. No. 40-05]
Entire length
Ross Lane [Added 9-26-2005 by
Ord. No. 40-05]
Entire length
Steuben Lane [Added 8-26-2014
by Ord. No. 14-14]
Entire length
§ 103-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-50
1:259
Name of Street Location
Stump Tavern Road (CR 42)
[Added 9-26-2005 by Ord. No.
40-05; repealed 3-13-2007 by
Ord. No. 07-07]
Sunnybrook Road [Added
9-26-2005 by Ord. No. 40-05]
Entire length
Thompson Bridge Road (CR 4)
[Added 9-26-2005 by Ord. No.
40-05; repealed 3-13-2007 by
Ord. No. 07-07]
Valley Road [Added 9-22-2003
by Ord. No. 27-03]
Entire length
West Bird Village Road [Added
9-26-2005 by Ord. No. 40-05]
Entire length
Winterberry Boulevard [Added
10-27-2003 by Ord. No. 31-03]
Entire length
§ 103-51. Schedule VII: One-Way Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 103-12, the following described
streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as one-way streets in the
direction indicated:
Name of Street Direction Location
Andover Road [Added
11-13-1979 by Ord. No.
50-79]
West From New Prospect Road to
Aldrich Road
§ 103-52. Schedule VIII: Through Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 103-13, the following described
streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as through streets. Stop
signs shall be installed on the near-right side of each street intersecting
the through street except where yield signs are provided for in the
designations.
Name of Street Location
Andover Road [Added 3-27-1989
by Ord. No. 09-89]
Between New Prospect Road (County
Road 9) and Susan Drive
Beam Avenue [Added 7-28-1986
by Ord. No. 26-86]
Between Cooks Bridge Road and
Tilford Street
Brewers Lane [Added
10-17-1983 by Ord. No. 55-83;
amended 3-12-1984 by Ord.
No. 11-84]
From its intersection with Bethel
Church Road to its northerly terminus
§ 103-50 JACKSON CODE § 103-52
1:260
Name of Street Location
Buckingham Drive [Added
8-28-1979 by Ord. No. 45-79]
Between Yorkshire Drive and Brewers
Bridge Road
Cambridge Drive [Added
7-28-1986 by Ord. No. 26-86]
Between Buckingham Drive and
Buckingham Place
Castle Avenue [Added 7-28-1986
by Ord. No. 26-86]
Between Cooks Bridge Road and
Tilford Street
Connecticut Concourse
East — Connecticut Concourse
West [Added 12-28-1976 by
Ord. No. 63-76]
Entire length
Cooks Bridge Road Commencing in the southerly line of
Bennetts Mills — VanHiseville Road
and terminating in the northerly line of
Route No. 547
Cooks Bridge Road Commencing on the southerly side of
Ocean County Road No. 526 and
terminating in the northerly line of the
Bennetts Mills — VanHiseville Road at
its intersection with said Cooks Bridge
Road
Drexel Drive [Added 4-15-1985
by Ord. No. 08-85]
Between Villanova Drive and Lehigh
Boulevard
Georgian Boulevard [Added
12-27-1982 by Ord. No. 64-82]
From Tilford Street to Pinehill Road
Laurelton Avenue [Added
7-28-1986 by Ord. No. 26-86]
Between Cooks Bridge Road and
Tilford Street
Lawrence Street [Added
3-27-1989 by Ord. No. 09-89]
Between Susan Drive and Ralph Place
Lehigh Boulevard [Added
4-15-1985 by Ord. No. 08-85]
Between West County Line Road
(County Road 526) and Villanova Drive
Neal Street [Added 3-27-1989
by Ord. No. 09-89]
Between Susan Drive and Andover
Road
North Lakeside Drive [Added
12-27-2001 by Ord. No. 52-01]
Entire length
Susan Drive — Salem Lane
[Added 3-27-1989 by Ord. No.
09-89]
Between Jackson Mills — Hyson Road
(County Road 12) and Andover Road
Tilford Street [Added 7-28-1986
by Ord. No. 26-86]
Between Georgian Boulevard and its
northerly terminus
Villanova Drive [Added
4-15-1985 by Ord. No. 08-85]
Between West County Line Road
(County Road 526) and Drexel Drive
§ 103-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-52
1:261
Name of Street Location
Winchester Drive [Added
7-28-1986 by Ord. No. 26-86]
Between Buckingham Drive and
Chelsea Road
Woodlane Road — Forest Drive
[Added 12-28-1976 by Ord. No.
63-76]
Between New Prospect Road and
Aldrich Road
§ 103-53. Schedule IX: Stop Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 103-14, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as stop intersections:
Stop Sign(s) on At Intersection of
Bennett Street [Added
12-27-1982 by Ord. No. 64-82]
Bennett Street and Goldweber Avenue
Chelsea Road [Added 7-28-1986
by Ord. No. 28-86]
Chelsea Road and Birmingham Drive
Crescent Avenue and Oakwood
Avenue [Added 1-25-1988 by
Ord. No. 02-88]
Crescent Avenue
Cypress Avenue [Added
2-24-1976 by Ord. No. 07-76]
Cypress Avenue and Elm Street
Cypress Avenue [Added
2-24-1976 by Ord. No. 07-76]
Cypress Avenue and Lakeview Drive
Cypress Avenue [Added
2-24-1976 by Ord. No. 07-76]
Cypress Avenue and Poplar Street
Deer Lane [Added 3-27-1989 by
Ord. No. 09-89]
Deer Lane and Harfield Drive
Dunbarton Road [Added
3-12-1984 by Ord. No. 11-84]
Dunbarton Road and Ashford Road
East Dickens Court — West
Dickens Court [Added 4-27-1998
by Ord. No. 10-98]
East Dickens Court — West Dickens
Court and Dunhill Road
Elm Street [Added 2-24-1976 by
Ord. No. 07-76]
Elm Street and Lakeview Drive
Elm Street [Added 2-24-1976 by
Ord. No. 07-76]
Elm Street and Maple Street
Fox Drive [Added 3-27-1989 by
Ord. No. 09-89]
Fox Drive and Harfield Drive
Friar Court [Added 8-28-1979
by Ord. No. 45-79]
Friar Court and Oxford Road
Gibson Lane and Marc Lane
[Added 3-12-1984 by Ord. No.
11-84]
Gibson Lane
§ 103-52 JACKSON CODE § 103-53
1:262
Stop Sign(s) on At Intersection of
Holly Street [Added 2-24-1976
by Ord. No. 07-76]
Holly Street and Elm Street
Holly Street [Added 2-24-1976
by Ord. No. 07-76]
Holly Street and Lakeview Drive
Iris Drive [Added 1-25-1988 by
Ord. No. 02-88]
Iris Drive and Citadel Drive
Iris Drive [Added 1-25-1988 by
Ord. No. 02-88]
Iris Drive and Oak Drive
Lakeview Drive (northerly
approach) [Added 2-24-1976 by
Ord. No. 07-76]
Lakeview Drive (northerly approach)
and Lakeview Drive (easterly
approach)
Lawrence Street [Added
3-27-1989 by Ord. No. 09-89]
Lawrence Street and Ralph Place
Liverpool Court [Added
7-28-1986 by Ord. No. 28-86]
Liverpool Court and Chelsea Road
Mark Place [Added 3-27-1989
by Ord. No. 09-89]
Mark Place and Ralph Place
New Jersey Avenue and Wyoming
Drive [Added 9-23-1985 by Ord.
No. 31-85]
New Jersey Avenue
New Mexico Street [Added
12-28-1976 by Ord. No. 63-76]
New Mexico Street and Vermont
Avenue
New Prospect Road service road
[Added 4-13-1987 by Ord. No.
14-87]
New Prospect Road service road and
New Mexico Street
Oak Drive [Added 1-25-1988 by
Ord. No. 02-88]
Oak Drive and Melody Lane
Oak Drive (for eastbound traffic
only) [Added 1-25-1988 by Ord.
No. 02-88]
Oak Drive and Steuben Lane
Oxford Road [Added 8-28-1979
by Ord. No. 45-79]
Oxford Road and Yorkshire Drive
Pfister Road [Added 8-27-2001
by Ord. No. 40-01]
Pfister Road and Sapphire Drive
Purple Ash Court [Added
4-27-1998 by Ord. No. 10-98]
Purple Ash Court and East Scarlet Oak
Court
Red Cedar Court [Added
12-21-1989 by Ord. No. 50-89]
Red Cedar Court and Red Cedar Run
Red Cedar Run [Added
12-21-1989 by Ord. No. 50-89]
Red Cedar Run and Georgia Street
§ 103-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-53
1:263
Stop Sign(s) on At Intersection of
Rhode Island Avenue [Added
12-28-1976 by Ord. No. 63-76]
Rhode Island Avenue and Pennsylvania
Avenue
Trenton Street [Added
4-13-1987 by Ord. No. 14-87]
Trenton Street and New Prospect
Road service road
Trenton Street [Added
9-23-1985 by Ord. No. 31-85]
Trenton Street and Vermont Avenue
Woodside Avenue [Added
12-27-2001 by Ord. No. 52-01]
Woodside Avenue and Ridgedale
Avenue
§ 103-54. Schedule X: Yield Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 103-15, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as yield intersections, and yield signs
having sides 36 inches in length shall be installed as follows:
Yield Sign on At Intersection of
Lehigh Boulevard [Added
4-15-1985 by Ord. No. 08-85]
Villanova Drive
§ 103-55. Schedule XI: Loading Zones.
In accordance with the provisions of § 103-16, the following described
locations are hereby designated as loading zones:
Name of Street Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 103-56. Schedule XII: Taxi Stands.
In accordance with the provisions of § 103-17, the following described
locations are hereby designated as taxi stands:
Name of Street Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 103-57. Schedule XIII: Bus Stops.
In accordance with the provisions of § 103-18, the following described
locations are hereby designated as bus stops:
Name of Street Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 103-58. Schedule XIV: Safety Zones and Traffic Islands.
In accordance with the provisions of § 103-19, the following described
locations are hereby designated as safety zones and/or traffic islands:
§ 103-53 JACKSON CODE § 103-58
1:264
Designation and Location Purpose
(Reserved)
§ 103-59. Schedule XV: U-Turn Prohibitions.
In accordance with the provisions of § 103-20, no person shall make a Uturn
at any of the following locations:
Name of Street Location
(Reserved)
§ 103-60. Schedule XVI: Prohibited Turns at Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 103-21, no person shall make a turn
of the kind designated below at any of the following locations:
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel
Prohibited
Turn At Intersection of
Bennetts Mills Road (CR
No. 10) and the exit
driveway of Bank
Shopping Plaza [Added
4-22-2002 by Ord. No.
11-02; amended
9-9-2002 by Ord. No.
37-02]
South Left Southbound from the
driveway of the
Commerce Bank
Shopping Plaza to
westbound onto
Bennetts Mills Road
(CR No. 10)
Bennetts Mills Road (CR
No. 10) and the exit
driveway of Bennetts
Mills Shopping Plaza
[Added 4-22-2002 by
Ord. No. 11-02]
North Left Northbound from the
driveway of Bennetts
Mills Plaza to
eastbound onto
Bennetts Mills Road
(CR No. 10)
Hope Chapel Road (CR
No. 3) and the exit
driveway of Wawa
Shopping Plaza [Added
9-13-2016 by Ord. No.
20-16]
South Left From the driveway of
Wawa Shopping Plaza
southbound onto Hope
Chapel Road (CR No.
3)
§ 103-61. (Reserved)45
§ 103-62. Schedule XVIII: Speed Limits.
Pursuant to the provisions of § 103-26, the following speed limits are hereby
established for the streets or parts of streets listed below:
45.Editor’s Note: Former § 103-61, Schedule XVII: Snow Emergency No-Parking Areas, was
repealed 3-24-2015 by Ord. No. 07-15.
§ 103-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-62
1:265
A. Twenty-five miles per hour.
Name of Street Location
Adelphia Drive [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Alabama Court [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Alan Terrace [Added 2-28-1994
by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Alaska Avenue [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Albany Avenue [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Andover Road [Added 2-28-1994
by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Annapolis Place [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Arizona Avenue [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Arkansas Drive [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Aspen Court [Added 12-9-1996
by Ord. No. 24-96]
Entire length
Atlanta Avenue [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Banyon Court [Added 12-9-1996
by Ord. No. 24-96]
Entire length
Basso Street [Added 5-13-1996
by Ord. No. 13-96]
Entire length
Beacon Street [Added 2-28-1994
by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Beam Avenue [Added 2-28-1994
by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Beech Court [Added 12-9-1996
by Ord. No. 24-96]
Entire length
Berkshire Avenue [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Birch Drive [Added 2-28-1994
by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Bittersweet Drive [Added
12-9-1996 by Ord. No. 24-96]
Entire length
§ 103-62 JACKSON CODE § 103-62
1:266
Name of Street Location
Brookwood Parkway [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Bruce Terrace [Added 2-28-1994
by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Bryant Drive [Added 2-28-1994
by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Buckingham Drive [Added
6-2-1980 by Ord. No. 24-80;
amended 5-12-1986 by Ord.
No. 15-86; 2-28-1994 by Ord.
No. 03-94]
Entire length
Buttonwood Drive [Added
12-9-1996 by Ord. No. 24-96]
Entire length
California Drive [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Cambridge Drive [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Carriage Court [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Castle Avenue [Added 2-28-1994
by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Chelsea Road [Added 2-28-1994
by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Christian Way [Added 9-8-1997
by Ord. No. 18-97]
Entire length
Citadel Court [Added 2-28-1994
by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Citadel Drive [Added 2-28-1994
by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length (Lafayette Park and
Brookwood I and II)
Colony Court [Added 2-28-1994
by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Colorado Drive [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Columbia Court [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Cornell Court [Added 2-28-1994
by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Cottonwood Drive [Added
12-9-1996 by Ord. No. 24-96]
Entire length
Culpepper Court [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
§ 103-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-62
1:267
Name of Street Location
Dartmouth Drive [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Dawn Cypress Lane [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Deer Lane [Added 2-28-1994 by
Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Delaware Trail [Added
6-10-1991 by Ord. No. 24-91]
Entire length
Detroit Court [Added 2-28-1994
by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Dina Place [Added 2-28-1994 by
Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Dogwood Drive [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Dorothy Lane [Added 3-28-1988
by Ord. No. 07-88]
Entire length
Dover Street [Added 2-28-1994
by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Drew Court [Added 2-28-1994
by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Drexel Drive [Added 2-28-1994
by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Dunhill Road [Added 4-27-1998
by Ord. No. 10-98]
Entire length
East Connecticut Concourse
[Added 2-28-1994 by Ord. No.
03-94]
Entire length
East Dickens Court [Added
4-27-1998 by Ord. No. 10-98]
Entire length
East Scarlet Oak Court [Added
4-27-1998 by Ord. No. 10-98]
Entire length
Emory Court [Added 2-28-1994
by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Everett Drive [Added 2-28-1994
by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Fir Court [Added 2-28-1994 by
Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Fish Road [Added 4-28-1986 by
Ord. No. 14-86]
Between Bennetts Mills Road and
Beam Avenue
Florida Place [Added 2-28-1994
by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
§ 103-62 JACKSON CODE § 103-62
1:268
Name of Street Location
Fordham Road [Amended
5-20-1985 by Ord. No. 14-85;
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Forest Drive [Added 2-28-1994
by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Fox Drive [Added 2-28-1994 by
Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Friar Court [Added 2-28-1994
by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
George Street [Added
12-21-1989 by Ord. No. 50-89]
Entire length
Georgian Boulevard [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Goldweber Avenue [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Hampton Drive [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Harfield Drive [Added 2-28-1994
by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Hartford Road [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Hawaii Road [Added 2-28-1994
by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Hemlock Court [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Idaho Place [Added 2-28-1994
by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Illinois Avenue [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Indiana Avenue [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Iowa Court [Added 2-28-1994 by
Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Iris Drive [Added 2-28-1994 by
Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Ironwood Court [Added
12-9-1996 by Ord. No. 24-96]
Entire length
Jordan Avenue [Added
5-13-1996 by Ord. No. 13-96]
Entire length
Juniper Lane [Added 2-28-1994
by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
§ 103-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-62
1:269
Name of Street Location
Kansas Drive [Added 2-28-1994
by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Kentucky Court [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Kings Court [Added 2-28-1994
by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Laurelton Avenue [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Lawrence Street [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Lehigh Boulevard [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Liverpool Court [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
London Drive [Added 2-28-1994
by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Louisiana Parkway [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Magnolia Drive [Added 9-5-1994
by Ord. No. 22-94]
Entire length
Main Place [Added 2-28-1994 by
Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Maplewood Place [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Marginal Road [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Mark Place [Added 2-28-1994
by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Maryland Drive [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Marymount Court [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
May Boulevard [Added 9-5-1994
by Ord. No. 22-94]
Entire length
Melody Lane [Added 2-28-1994
by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Metedeconk Trail — Lenape Trail
[Added 6-10-1991 by Ord. No.
24-91]
Entire length
Miami Road [Added 2-28-1994
by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
§ 103-62 JACKSON CODE § 103-62
1:270
Name of Street Location
Michigan Court [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Minnesota Drive [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Missouri Street [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Montana Drive [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Murdock Place [Added 9-5-1994
by Ord. No. 22-94]
Entire length
Neal Street [Added 2-28-1994
by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Nebraska Drive [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Nevada Court [Added 2-28-1994
by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
New Castle Court [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
New Hampshire Street [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
New Jersey Avenue [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
New Mexico Street [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
New York Court [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
North Carolina Drive [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
North Dakota Court [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Oak Drive [Added 2-28-1994 by
Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Ocean Avenue [Added 2-28-1994
by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Ohio Court [Added 2-28-1994 by
Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Oklahoma Drive [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Ollie Burke Road [Added
3-28-1988 by Ord. No. 07-88]
Between Lakehurst Road and
1,950 feet north of Lakehurst
Road
§ 103-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-62
1:271
Name of Street Location
Oregon Avenue [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Oxford Drive [Added 2-28-1994
by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Park Avenue [Added 8-24-1987
by Ord. No. 31-87]
Entire length
Paul Street [Added 8-24-1987 by
Ord. No. 31-87]
Entire length
Pennsylvania Drive [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Persimmon Drive [Added
12-9-1996 by Ord. No. 24-96]
Entire length
Pine Hill Road [Added 2-28-1994
by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Princeton Drive [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Purple Ash Court [Added
4-27-1998 by Ord. No. 10-98]
Entire length
Quail Road [Added 2-28-1994 by
Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Quincy Drive [Added 2-28-1994
by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Ralph Place [Added 2-28-1994
by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Red Cedar Run [Added
12-21-1989 by Ord. No. 50-89]
Entire length
Redwood Place [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Rhode Island Drive [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Robert Terrace [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Ross Lane [Amended 1-25-1988
by Ord. No. 03-88]
Entire length
Rutgers Road [Added 2-28-1994
by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Rutherford Court [Added
4-27-1998 by Ord. No. 10-98]
Entire length
Salem Lane [Added 2-28-1994
by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
§ 103-62 JACKSON CODE § 103-62
1:272
Name of Street Location
Sandcastle Court [Added
12-9-1996 by Ord. No. 24-96]
Entire length
Shaw Court [Added 2-28-1994
by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
South Carolina Street [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
South Dakota Avenue [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Spruce Terrace [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Steuben Lane [Added 2-28-1994
by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Steven Place [Added 2-28-1994
by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Sugar Maple Court [Added
12-9-1996 by Ord. No. 24-96]
Entire length
Sugar Pine Drive [Added
12-9-1996 by Ord. No. 24-96]
Entire length
Susan Drive [Added 2-28-1994
by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Sycamore Place [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Texas Drive [Added 2-28-1994
by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Tilford Street [Added 2-28-1994
by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Timber Court [Added 2-28-1994
by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Trenton Street [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Trinity Place [Added 2-28-1994
by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Tulip Court [Added 2-28-1994
by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Upper Pennsylvania Avenue
[Added 2-28-1994 by Ord. No.
03-94]
Entire length
Utah Court [Added 2-28-1994 by
Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Utica Court [Added 2-28-1994
by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
§ 103-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-62
1:273
Name of Street Location
Valley Road [Added 2-28-1994
by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Vassar Court [Added 2-28-1994
by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Vath Street [Added 5-13-1996
by Ord. No. 13-96]
Entire length
Vermont Avenue [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Villanova Drive [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Washington Court [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
West Connecticut Concourse
[Added 2-28-1994 by Ord. No.
03-94]
Entire length
West Dickens Court [Added
4-27-1998 by Ord. No. 10-98]
Entire length
Westminster Drive [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
West Virginia Avenue [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Willow Drive [Added 9-5-1994
by Ord. No. 22-94]
Entire length
Winchester Drive [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Windsor Court [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Winterberry Boulevard [Added
12-9-1996 by Ord. No. 24-96]
Entire length
Wisconsin Drive [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Woodlane Road [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Woodlane Road — Forest Drive
[Added 10-27-1986 by Ord. No.
37-86]
Entire length
Wyoming Avenue [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Xavier Drive [Added 2-28-1994
by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
§ 103-62 JACKSON CODE § 103-62
1:274
Name of Street Location
Yale Court [Added 2-28-1994 by
Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
York Circle [Added 2-28-1994 by
Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
Yorkshire Drive [Added
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 03-94]
Entire length
B. Thirty miles per hour.
Name of Street Location
Clearstream Road [Added
8-24-1987 by Ord. No. 31-87;
amended 11-9-1987 by Ord.
No. 37-87]
Entire length
Crescent Avenue [Added
10-27-1986 by Ord. No. 37-86]
Entire length
Eltone Road [Added 8-24-1987
by Ord. No. 31-87]
Between Jackson Mills — Freehold
Road and 6,380 feet west of
Jackson Mills — Freehold Road
Henry Street [Added 10-27-1986
by Ord. No. 37-86]
Entire length
Indiero Road [Added 3-13-1985
by Ord. No. 02-85]
Entire length
New Central Avenue [Added
5-14-2019 by Ord. No. 12-19]
From South Cooks Bridge Road to
North Hope Chapel Road
C. Thirty-five miles per hour.
Name of Street Location
Brewers Bridge Road [Added
7-12-1982 by Ord. No. 28-82;
amended 5-12-1986 by Ord.
No. 20-86; 3-9-1998 by Ord.
No. 8-98]
Between Bridge Court and 500
feet south of Nature Boulevard
Brewers Bridge Road [Added
3-9-1998 by Ord. No. 8-98]
Between West County Line Road
(County Road 526) and Prospect
Road
Burke Tavern Road [Added
3-18-1985 by Ord. No. 03-85]
From Trenton — Cassville Road
(County Road No. 571) to a point
3,950 feet east of Reed Road
Cook Road [Added 8-11-1986 by
Ord. No. 32-86; amended
8-14-1989 by Ord. No. 25-89]
Entire length
§ 103-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-62
1:275
Name of Street Location
Fish Road [Added 12-16-1985
by Ord. No. 37A-85]
Between Frank Applegate Road
and Bennetts Mills Road
Gail Chambers Road [Added
9-26-1994 by Ord. No. 23-94]
Entire length
Green Valley Road [Added
5-12-1986 by Ord. No. 15-86]
Entire length
Patterson Road [Added
1-25-1988 by Ord. No. 03-88;
amended 11-22-1993 by Ord.
No. 40-93]
From Route 571 to Route 526
Pfister Road [Added 8-11-1986
by Ord. No. 32-86; amended
8-14-1989 by Ord. No. 25-89]
Entire length
Pleasant Grove Road [Added
7-28-1986 by Ord. No. 27-86;
amended 2-2-1987 by Ord. No.
01-87]
From Cedar Swamp Road (County
Road 527) to Fish Road
Reed Road [Added 9-9-1991 by
Ord. No. 35-91]
From Burke — Tavern Road to
Route 571
Sam's Road [Added 11-22-1993
by Ord. No. 39-93]
Entire length
D. Forty miles per hour.
Name of Street Location
Bethel Church Road [Added
11-10-1980 by Ord. No. 49-80]
Entire length
Chambers New Prospect Road
[Added 12-13-1982 by Ord. No.
57-82]
Between 3,320 feet north of
Jackson Mills — Hyson Road and
Jackson Mills Road
Fish Road [Added 12-16-1985
by Ord. No. 37A-85]
Between Cedar Swamp Road
(County Road 527) and Frank
Applegate Road
Grawtown Road [Added
7-8-1996 by Ord. No. 15-96]
Between Whitesville Road and
5,000 feet north of Whitesville
Road
Wright Debow Road [Added
10-21-1985 by Ord. No. 34-85]
Between County Road 526 and
2,600 feet south of Monmouth
Road (County Road 537)
E. Forty-five miles per hour.
§ 103-62 JACKSON CODE § 103-62
1:276
§ 103-63. Schedule XIX: Traffic Control Signals.
Pursuant to § 103-29, traffic control signals shall be installed at the
following described intersections:
Intersection
(Reserved)
§ 103-64. Schedule XX: No-Passing Zones.
Pursuant to § 103-31, no-passing zones are hereby established and shall be
maintained upon the following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street Sketch Dated Sketch Number
Brewers Bridge Road [Added
12-23-1991 by Ord. No. 44-91]
11-29-1989 NPZ 3395
Brookwood Parkway [Added
4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 10-89]
— —
Clearstream Road [Added
12-27-1989 by Ord. No. 51-89]
— —
Name of Street Location
Brewers Bridge Road [Added
7-12-1982 by Ord. No. 28-82;
amended 5-12-1986 by Ord.
No. 20-86; 3-9-1998 by Ord.
No. 8-98]
Between Cooks Bridge Road and
550 feet south of Green Valley
Road
Brewers Bridge Road [Added
3-9-1998 by Ord. No. 8-98]
Between 500 feet south of Nature
Boulevard and West County Line
Road (County Road 526)
Burke Tavern — Anderson Road
[Added 9-28-1987 by Ord. No.
35-87]
Between County Road 537,
Monmouth Road, and County
Road 571, Trenton — Cassville
Road
Grawtown Road [Added
7-8-1996 by Ord. No. 15-96]
Between 5,000 feet north of
Whitesville Road and East
Veterans Highway
Lakehurst — Legler Road [Added
4-12-1982 by Ord. No. 16-82]
Entire length
F. (Reserved)
G. School zones. A twenty-five-miles-per-hour speed limit is established in
the Brookwood Elementary School Zone along New Hampshire Street
and Citadel Drive, during recess or while children are going to or
leaving school, during opening or closing hours.
§ 103-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-64
1:277
Name of Street Sketch Dated Sketch Number
Dorothy's Lane [Added 8-23-2004 by
Ord. No. 36-04]
6-10-2004 —
East Fish Road (entire length) [Added
10-11-2011 by Ord. No. 34-11]
— —
Forest Drive [Added 4-10-1989 by
Ord. No. 10-89]
— —
Grawtown Road [Added 12-27-1993
by Ord. No. 49-93]
11-9-1993 NPZ UTSCH08B
Green Valley Road [Added
12-27-1989 by Ord. No. 51-89]
— —
Jackson Pines Road [Added
4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 10-89]
— —
Lakehurst Avenue [Added 8-23-2004
by Ord. No. 36-04]
6-1-2004 —
Leming Road [Added 4-10-1989 by
Ord. No. 10-89]
— —
Miller Road [Added 9-11-1989 by
Ord. No. 33-89; amended
8-23-2004 by Ord. No. 36-04]
6-10-2004 —
New Central Avenue [Added
8-23-2004 by Ord. No. 36-04]
6-10-2004
Ollie Burke Road [Added 8-23-2004
by Ord. No. 36-04]
6-2-2004
Park Avenue [Added 4-10-1989 by
Ord. No. 10-89]
2-17-1989 NPZ 3376
Patterson Road [Added 9-25-1989 by
Ord. No. 35-89]
— —
Paul Road [Added 4-10-1989 by Ord.
No. 10-89]
— —
West Fish Road (entire length) [Added
10-11-2011 by Ord. No. 34-11]
— —
Whitecomb Street — Ridge Avenue
[Added 9-11-1989 by Ord. No.
33-89]
— —
Woodlane Road [Added 4-10-1989 by
Ord. No. 10-89]
— —
§ 103-64 JACKSON CODE § 103-64
1:278
ARTICLE XV
Luxury Mobile Park
[Added 6-22-1987 by Ord. No. 21-87]
§ 103-65. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to comply with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:5-1
to require the enforcement of certain motor vehicle and traffic regulations
within the Luxury Mobile Park pursuant to the request of the owner thereof.
§ 103-66. Authorization.
The within article hereby authorizes the enforcement of the provisions of
Subtitle 1, Title 39, of the New Jersey Revised Statutes within the Luxury
Mobile Park otherwise known as Block 29, Lot 12, Jackson Township, New
Jersey.
§ 103-67. Enforcement area.
The areas upon which enforcement of Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the New
Jersey Revised Statutes is to take place is set forth on the attached map
delineating said road and street areas. Copies of said map and the within
article are on file and available for inspection in the Jackson Township
Clerk's Office during normal business hours, said office located at Route
528, Jackson, New Jersey.
§ 103-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-67
1:279

ARTICLE XVI
Bennetts Mills Shopping Plaza
[Added 9-11-1989 by Ord. No. 31-89]
§ 103-68. Applicability.
The provisions of Subtitle 1, Title 39, of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey
be and they are hereby made applicable to the semipublic and private roads,
streets or driveways within and leading to and from the Bennetts Mills
Shopping Plaza located in the Township of Jackson, County of Ocean, New
Jersey.
§ 103-69. Parking prohibited; exceptions.
No person shall park a vehicle except where stalls are provided.
§ 103-70. Stop intersections.
The stop intersections are only those that are shown on the attached site
plan.46
§ 103-71. Handicapped parking.
The handicapped parking regulations are only those that are shown on the
attached site plan.47
§ 103-72. Lane use.
The lane use regulations are only those shown the attached site plan.48
§ 103-73. Speed limits.
The speed limits for both directions of traffic along all roads shall be 10
miles per hour.
§ 103-74. Regulatory and warning signs.
Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above-designated speed limits authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
§ 103-75. Tow-away zones.
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area
or pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard, may
be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
46.Editor's Note: Said site plan is on file in the Township offices.
47.Editor's Note: Said site plan is on file in the Township offices.
48.Editor's Note: Said site plan is on file in the Township offices.
§ 103-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-75
1:281

ARTICLE XVII
Romeo's Plaza
[Added 9-11-1989 by Ord. No. 32-89]
§ 103-76. Applicability.
The provisions of Subtitle 1, Title 39, of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey
be and they are hereby made applicable to the semipublic and private roads,
streets or driveways within and leading to and from Romeo's Plaza located
in the Township of Jackson, County of Ocean, New Jersey.
§ 103-77. Parking prohibited; exceptions.
No person shall park a vehicle except where stalls are provided.
§ 103-78. Handicapped parking.
The handicapped parking regulations are only those that are shown on the
attached site plan.49
§ 103-79. Lane use.
The lane use regulations are only those shown on the attached site plan.50
§ 103-80. Speed limits.
The speed limits for both directions of traffic along all roads shall be 10
miles per hour.
§ 103-81. Regulatory and warning signs.
Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above-designated speed limits authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
§ 103-82. Tow-away zones.
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area
or pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard, may
be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
49.Editor's Note: Said site plan is on file in the Township offices.
50.Editor's Note: Said site plan is on file in the Township offices.
§ 103-76 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-82
1:283

ARTICLE XVIII
Crystal Brook
[Added 6-11-1990 by Ord. No. 37-90]
§ 103-83. Applicability.
The provisions of Subtitle 1, Title 39, of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey
shall be made applicable to the semipublic roads, streets, driveways and
parking lots at Crystal Brook located in the Township of Jackson, County of
Ocean.
§ 103-84. Parking permitted in designated areas only.
All vehicles must park only in designated areas and between the lines
provided.
§ 103-85. Through streets.
The following streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as through
streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the near-right side of each street
intersecting the through street.
Name of Street Location
Meli Boulevard From Bennetts Mills Road (County
Road 636) to its terminus
§ 103-86. Restricted parking.
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle any time upon any of the following
described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Meli Boulevard Both Entire length
§ 103-87. Speed limits.
§ 103-88. Lane use.
Traffic shall move only as indicated on the site plan on Meli Boulevard at
Bennetts Mills Road.51
A. The speed limits for both directions of travel on all roadways shall be 25
mph.
B. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above-designated speed limits authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
51.Editor's Note: Said site plan is on file in the Township offices.
§ 103-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-89
1:285
§ 103-89. Tow-away zones.
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area
or pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard, may
be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
§ 103-90. Signage.
All signs, posts, bolts, or other necessary materials shall be installed and
paid for by the applicant. Work shall be checked by the Police Department
to insure installations meet state and federal specifications, and all signing
shall conform to the current Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
§ 103-91. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey statute, every
person convicted of a violation of this article or any supplement thereto
shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $1,000 or imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
§ 103-89 JACKSON CODE § 103-91
1:286
ARTICLE XIX
Three Pence Brook Condominium
[Adopted 10-29-1990 by Ord. No. 57-90]
§ 103-92. Applicability.
The provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:1-1 et seq. shall apply to the semipublic or
private roads, streets, driveways, trails, terraces, bridle paths, parking
areas, or other roadways open to or used by the public, tenants, employees
and members of Three Pence Brook Condominium.
§ 103-93. Parking permitted in designated areas only.
All vehicles must park only in designated areas and between the lines
provided.
§ 103-94. Handicapped parking.
All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on the site plan and signed with
R7-8 (reserved parking sign and penalty plate) in the designated parking
areas for persons who have been issued the handicapped parking permits
by the Division of Motor Vehicles.
§ 103-95. Through streets.
The following streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as through
streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the near-right side of each street
intersecting the through street.
Name of Street Location
Shilling Way Entire length from Bennetts Mills — Hyson
Road to its terminus
Three Pence Road Entire length from Bennetts Mills — Hyson
Road to its terminus
§ 103-96. Speed limits.
A. The speed limits for both directions of traffic in the parking lots shall be
15 mph.
B. The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following roads are:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Colonial Court 15 Entire length
Forge Court 15 Entire length
Heritage Terrace 15 Entire length
Independence Court 15 Entire length
§ 103-92 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-96
1:287
§ 103-97. Tow-away zones.
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area
or pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard, may
be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
§ 103-98. Restricted parking.
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle at any time upon any of the following
described roadways or parts of roadways:
Name of Street Side Location
Colonial Court Both Entire length
Forge Court Both Entire length
Heritage Terrace Both Entire length
Independence Court Both Entire length
Liberty Place Both Entire length
Pool Drive Both Entire length
Revere Court Both Entire length
Road A Both Entire length
Shilling Way Both Entire length
Three Pence Lane Both Entire length
§ 103-99. Signage.
All signs, posts, bolts, or other necessary materials be installed and paid for
by the applicant. Work shall be checked by the Police Department to ensure
that the installations meet state and federal specifications, and all signing
shall conform to the current Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Liberty Place 15 Entire length
Pool Drive 15 Entire length
Revere Court 15 Entire length
Road A 15 Entire length
Shilling Way 15 Entire length
Three Pence Lane 15 Entire length
C. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above-designated speed limits authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
§ 103-96 JACKSON CODE § 103-100
1:288
§ 103-100. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey statute, every
person convicted of a violation of this article or any supplement thereto
shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $100 or imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
§ 103-100 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-100
1:289

ARTICLE XX
60 Acre Reserve Condominium Complex
[Added 11-18-1991 by Ord. No. 42-91]
§ 103-101. Applicability.
The provisions of Subtitle 1, Title 39, of the Revised Statutes of New
Jersey shall be made applicable to semipublic roads, streets, driveways
and parking lots at 60 Acre Reserve Condominium Complex located in
the Township of Jackson, Ocean County, New Jersey, and the regulations
hereinafter as set forth shall be enforceable.
§ 103-102. No stopping or standing.
The following streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as no
stopping or standing: all roadways in the complex.
§ 103-103. Parking permitted in designated areas only.
All vehicles in parking lots and courts must park only in designated areas
and between the lines provided.
§ 103-104. Handicapped parking.
All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on the attached site plan and signed
with R7-8 (reserved parking sign and penalty plate) in the designated
parking areas for persons who have been issued the handicapped parking
permits by the Division of Motor Vehicles.
§ 103-105. Stop intersections.
The following street or parts of streets are hereby designated as stop
intersections. Stop signs shall be installed on the near-right side of each
street as shown on attached site plan.52
§ 103-106. One-way streets.
The following streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as one-way
streets and are shown on the attached site plan.53
§ 103-107. Bike routes.
The following streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as a route
for bikes: the entire length of 60 Acre Boulevard as shown on the attached
site plan.54
52.Editor's Note: Said site plan is on file in the Township offices.
53.Editor's Note: Said site plan is on file in the Township offices.
54.Editor's Note: Said site plan is on file in the Township offices.
§ 103-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-108
1:291
§ 103-108. No-passing zones.
The following streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as nopassing
zones:
Name of Street Location
Nature Boulevard Entire length within 60 Acre Complex
Sixty Acre Boulevard Entire length
§ 103-109. Speed limits.
§ 103-110. Tow-away zones.
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area
or pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard, may
be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
§ 103-111. Signage.
All signs, posts, or other necessary materials shall be installed and paid
for by the Condominium Association. Work shall be checked by the Police
Department to insure installations meet state and federal specifications,
and all signing shall conform to the current Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices.
§ 103-112. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey statute, every
person convicted of a violation of this article or any supplement thereto
shall be liable to a penalty in accordance with Title 39 of the State of New
Jersey or Township ordinances, where applicable.
A. The speed limits for both directions of traffic in the parking lots and
courts shall be 15 mph.
B. The speed limit for both directions of travel on the following road is:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
60 Acre Boulevard 25 Entire length
C. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above-designated speed limits authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
§ 103-108 JACKSON CODE § 103-112
1:292
ARTICLE XXI
Greenbriar at Winding Ways Phase I
[Added 6-9-1997 by Ord. No. 09-97]
§ 103-113. Applicability.
The provisions of Subtitle 1, Title 39, of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey
shall be made applicable to the semipublic roads, streets, driveways and
parking lots at the Greenbriar at Winding Ways Phase I located in the
Township of Jackson, County of Ocean.
§ 103-114. General parking.
§ 103-115. Through streets.
The following streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as through
streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the near-right side of each street
intersecting the through street except where yield signs are provided for in
the designation.
Name of Street Location
North Baker Drive Entire length
South Avon Drive Entire length
South Baker Drive Entire length
Thatcher Court [Repealed
12-17-2019 by Ord. No. 31-19]
A. All vehicles must park in designated areas and between the lines
provided.
B. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts
of streets described below:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Community Center Both All Entire length
Thatcher Boulevard
[Added 12-17-2019
by Ord. No. 31-19]
Both All Entire length
Thatcher Court Both All Entire length
C. Handicapped parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on the
attached site plan and signed with the R7-8 and R7-8P (reserved
parking sign and penalty plate) in the designated parking areas for
persons who have been issued the handicapped parking permits by the
Division of Motor Vehicles.
§ 103-113 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-115.1
1:293
§ 103-115.1. Multi-way stop intersections. [Added 12-17-2019 by
Ord. No. 31-19]
The following described intersections are hereby designated as multi-way
stop intersections (stop signs shall be installed per MUTCD regulations as
provided herein):
Intersection
Thatcher Boulevard and North Avon Drive and South Avon Drive
§ 103-116. One-way streets.
The following streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as one-way
streets:
Name of Street Direction Location
Community Center Drive East Entire length
Entrance to Lot B North Entire length
West exit from Lot B South Entire length
§ 103-117. Speed limits.
§ 103-118. Tow-away zones.
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area
or pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard, may
be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
A. The speed limit for both directions of traffic in the parking lot(s) shall be
15 mph.
B. The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following roadways
are:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
All other roads 15 Entire length
North Baker Drive 25 Entire length
South Avon Drive 25 Entire length
South Baker Drive 25 Entire length
Thatcher Boulevard
[Added 12-17-2019
by Ord. No. 31-19]
25 Entire length
Thatcher Court 25 Entire length
§ 103-115.1 JACKSON CODE § 103-119
1:294
§ 103-119. Signage.
All signs, posts, or other necessary materials shall be installed and paid
for by the applicant. All signing shall conform to the current Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and N.J.S.A.
39:4-183.27.
§ 103-120. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey statute, every
person convicted of a violation of this article or any supplement thereto
shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $100 or imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
§ 103-119 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-120
1:295

ARTICLE XXII
Old Mill Estates
[Added 6-25-2001 by Ord. No. 23-01]
§ 103-121. Applicability.
The provisions of Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey
shall be made applicable to the semipublic roads, streets, driveways and
parking lots at the Old Mill Estates located in the Township of Jackson,
County of Ocean, and the following regulations shall be enforceable.
§ 103-122. Through streets and stop intersections.
§ 103-123. Speed limits.
A. Through streets. The following streets or parts of streets are hereby
designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the nearright
side of each street intersecting the through street except where
yield signs are provided for the designation.
Name of Street Location
MacKenzie Drive Between Matthews Lane and the southerly
terminus of MacKenzie Drive
Matthews Lane Beginning at a point 50 feet north of
Murray Drive and the southerly terminus
of Matthews Lane
B. Stop intersections. The following described intersections are hereby
designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided herein.
Intersection Stop Sign(s) on
Edinburgh Court and
Scotland Drive
Edinburgh Court
MacKenzie Drive and
Matthews Lane
MacKenzie Drive
Scotland Drive and Hyson
Road
Scotland Drive
A. The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following roadways
are:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
All roads 25 Entire length
§ 103-121 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-123
1:297
§ 103-124. Tow-away zones.
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area
or pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard, may
be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
§ 103-125. Signage.
All signs, posts, or other necessary materials shall be installed and paid
for by the applicant. All signing shall conform to the current Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and N.J.S.A.
39:4-183.27.
§ 103-126. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey statute, every
person convicted of a violation of this article or any supplement thereto
shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $50 or imprisonment for a term
not exceeding 15 days, or both.
B. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above-designated speed limits authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
§ 103-123 JACKSON CODE § 103-126
1:298
ARTICLE XXIII
North Branch Estates
[Added 1-28-2002 by Ord. No. 01-02]
§ 103-127. Applicability.
The provisions of Subtitle 1, Title 39, of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey
shall be made applicable to the semipublic roads, streets, driveways and
parking lots at North Branch Estates located in the Township of Jackson,
County of Ocean.
§ 103-128. Stop intersections.
The following described intersections are hereby designated as stop
intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as provided herein.
Intersection Stop Sign(s) on
Mitchell Court and Don Connor
Boulevard
Mitchell Court
§ 103-129. Speed limits.
§ 103-130. Tow-away zones.
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area
or pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard, may
be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
§ 103-131. Signage.
All signs, posts, or other necessary materials shall be installed and paid
for by the applicant. All signing shall conform to the current Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and N.J.S.A.
39:4-183.27.
A. The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following roadways
are:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Mitchell Court 20 Entire length
Susie Court 25 Entire length
B. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above-designated speed limits authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
§ 103-127 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-132
1:299
§ 103-132. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided for by New Jersey statute,
every person convicted of a violation of this article or any supplement
thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $100 or imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
§ 103-132 JACKSON CODE § 103-132
1:300
ARTICLE XXIV
The Vineyards at Anderson Run
[Added 1-28-2002 by Ord. No. 02-02]
§ 103-133. Applicability.
The provisions of Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey
shall be made applicable to the semipublic roads, streets, driveways and
parking lots at The Vineyards at Anderson Run located in the Township of
Jackson, County of Ocean.
§ 103-134. Through streets and stop intersections.
§ 103-135. Speed limits.
§ 103-136. Tow-away zones.
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area
A. Through streets. The following streets or parts of streets are hereby
designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the nearright
side of each street intersecting the through street except where
yield signs are provided for in the designation.
Name of Street Location
Erin Drive Entire length
B. Stop intersections. The following described intersections are hereby
designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided herein.
Intersection Stop Sign(s) on
Erin Drive and Anderson Road Erin Drive
Peacock Lane and Anderson
Road
Peacock Lane
A. The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following roadways
are:
Name of Roadway
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Erin Drive 25 Entire length
Peacock Lane 25 Entire length
B. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above-designated speed limits authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
§ 103-133 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-136
1:301
or pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard, may
be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
§ 103-137. Signage.
All signs, posts, or other necessary materials shall be installed and paid
for by the applicant. All signing shall conform to the current Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and N.J.S.A.
39:4-183.27.
§ 103-138. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided for by New Jersey statute,
every person convicted of a violation of this article or any supplement
thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $100 or imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
§ 103-136 JACKSON CODE § 103-138
1:302
ARTICLE XXV
The Vineyards at Butterfly Run
[Added 1-28-2002 by Ord. No. 03-02]
§ 103-139. Applicability.
The provisions of Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey
shall be made applicable to the semipublic roads, streets, driveways and
parking lots at The Vineyards at Butterfly Run located in the Township of
Jackson, County of Ocean.
§ 103-140. Through streets and stop intersections.
§ 103-141. Speed limits.
§ 103-142. Tow-away zones.
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area
or pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard, may
be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
A. Through streets. The following streets or parts of streets are hereby
designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the nearright
side of each street intersecting the through street except where
yield signs are provided for in the designation.
Name of Street Location
Olena Drive Entire length
Sienna Drive Entire length
B. Stop intersections. The following described intersections are herby
designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided herein.
Intersection Stop Sign(s) on
Olena Drive and Emma Lane Olena Drive
A. The speed limit for both directions of travel on the following roadways
are:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
All drives and lanes 20 Entire length
B. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above-designated speed limits authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
§ 103-139 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-143
1:303
§ 103-143. Signage.
All signs, posts, or other necessary materials shall be installed and paid
for by the applicant. All signing shall conform to the current Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and N.J.S.A.
39:4-183.27.
§ 103-144. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided for by New Jersey statute,
every person convicted of a violation of this article or any supplement
thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $100 or imprisonment
of a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
§ 103-143 JACKSON CODE § 103-144
1:304
ARTICLE XXVI
The Vineyards at Diamond Ridge
[Added 1-28-2002 by Ord. No. 04-02]
§ 103-145. Applicability.
The provisions of Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey
shall be made applicable to the semipublic roads, streets, driveways and
parking lots at The Vineyards at Diamond Ridge located in the Township of
Jackson, County of Ocean.
§ 103-146. Stop intersections.
The following described intersections are hereby designated as stop
intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as provided herein.
Intersection Stop Sign(s) on
Tuscany Drive and Diamond Road Tuscany Drive
Tuscany Drive and Diamond Road
(south intersect)
Tuscany Drive
§ 103-147. Speed limits.
§ 103-148. Tow-away zones.
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area
or pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard, may
be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
§ 103-149. Signage.
All signs, posts, or other necessary materials shall be installed and paid
for by the applicant. All signing shall conform to the current Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and N.J.S.A.
39:4-183.27.
A. The speed limit for both directions of travel on the following roadways:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Tuscany Drive 20 Entire length
B. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above-designated speed limits authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
§ 103-145 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-150
1:305
§ 103-150. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided for by New Jersey Statue,
every person convicted of a violation of this article or any supplement
thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $100 or imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
§ 103-150 JACKSON CODE § 103-150
1:306
ARTICLE XXVII
Grande Autumn
[Added 2-25-2002 by Ord. No. 07-02]
§ 103-151. Applicability.
The provisions of Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey
shall be made applicable to the semipublic roads, streets, driveways and
parking lots at Grande Autumn located in the Township of Jackson, County
of Ocean.
§ 103-152. General parking.
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts
of streets described below, except in areas covered by other parking
restrictions:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Cardinal Drive South All Entire length
Harvey Jones Drive East All Entire length
Nighthawk Lane East All Entire length
§ 103-153. Stop intersections.
The following described intersections are herby designated as stop
intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as provided herein.
Intersection Stop Sign(s) on
Harvey Jones Drive and Diamond
Road
Harvey Jones Drive
Nighthawk Lane and Diamond
Road
Nighthawk Lane
§ 103-154. Speed limits.
A. The speed limits for both directions of travel on the roadways are:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Cardinal Drive 25 Entire length
Harvey Jones Drive 25 Entire length
Nighthawk Lane 25 Entire length
B. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above-designated speed limits authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
§ 103-151 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-155
1:307
§ 103-155. Tow-away zones.
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area
or pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard, may
be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
§ 103-155 JACKSON CODE § 103-155
1:308
ARTICLE XXVIII
Sparrow Court
[Added 2-25-2002 by Ord. No. 07-02]
§ 103-156. Applicability.
The provisions of Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey
shall be made applicable to the semipublic roads, streets, driveways and
parking lots at Sparrow Court located in the Township of Jackson, County of
Ocean.
§ 103-157. General parking.
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts
of streets described below, except in areas covered by other parking
restrictions:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Nighthawk Lane East All As indicated on site plan55
Sparrow Court North All As indicated on site plan56
§ 103-158. Speed limits.
§ 103-159. Tow-away zones.
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area
or pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard, may
be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
§ 103-160. Stop intersections.
The following described intersections are hereby designated as stop
intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as provided herein.
A. The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following roadways
are:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Nighthawk Lane 25 Entire length
Sparrow Court 25 Entire length
B. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above-designated speed limits authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
55.Editor's Note: Said site plan is on file in the Township offices.
56.Editor's Note: Said site plan is on file in the Township offices.
§ 103-156 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-160
1:309
Intersection Stop Sign(s) on
Nighthawk Lane and Diamond
Road
Nighthawk Lane
§ 103-160 JACKSON CODE § 103-160
1:310
ARTICLE XXIX
Smith's Run
[Added 2-25-2002 by Ord. No. 07-02]
§ 103-161. Applicability.
The provisions of Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey
shall be made applicable to the semipublic roads, streets, driveways and
parking lots at Smith's Run located in the Township of Jackson, County of
Ocean.
§ 103-162. General parking.
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the parts of streets
described below, except in areas covered by other parking restrictions:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Bluejay Court East All Entire length
Cardinal Drive South All Entire length
Harvey Jones Drive East All Entire length
§ 103-163. Through streets and stop intersections.
The following streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as through
streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the near-right side of each street
intersecting the through street except where yield signs are provided for in
the designation.
Name of Street Location
Cardinal Drive Entire length
§ 103-164. Speed limits.
A. The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following roadways
are:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Bluejay Court 25 Entire length
Cardinal Road 25 Entire length
Harvey Jones Drive 25 Entire length
B. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above-designated speed limits authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
§ 103-161 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-165
1:311
§ 103-165. Tow-away zones.
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area
or pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard, may
be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
§ 103-165 JACKSON CODE § 103-165
1:312
ARTICLE XXX
Smith's Run Amended
[Added 2-25-2002 by Ord. No. 07-02]
§ 103-166. Applicability.
The provisions of Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey
shall be made applicable to the semipublic roads, streets, driveways and
parking lots at Smith's Run Amended located in the Township of Jackson,
County of Ocean.
§ 103-167. General parking.
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the parts of streets
described below, except in areas covered by other parking restrictions:
Name of Street Side Hours Locations
Goldfinch Road West All Entire length
Kingfisher Court East All Entire length
Magpie Court South All Entire length
Meadowlark Court South All Entire length
Sandpiper Court North All Entire length
Starling Court South All Entire length
Sunbird Court South All Entire length
§ 103-168. Through streets and stop intersections.
§ 103-169. Speed limits.
A. Through streets. The following streets or parts of streets are hereby
designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the nearright
side of each street intersecting the through street except where
yield signs are provided for in the designation.
Name of Street Location
Goldfinch Road Entire length
B. Stop intersections. The following described intersections are hereby
designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided herein.
Intersection Stop Sign(s) on
Goldfinch Road and West Pleasant
Grove Road
Goldfinch Road
Sandpiper Court and Kingfisher
Court
Sandpiper Court
§ 103-166 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-169
1:313
§ 103-170. Tow-away zones.
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area
or pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard, may
be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
§ 103-171. Signage.
All signs, posts, or other necessary materials shall be installed and paid
for by the applicant. All signing shall conform to the current Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and N.J.S.A.
39:4-183.27.
§ 103-172. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided for by New Jersey statute,
every person convicted of a violation of this article or any supplement
thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $100 or imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
A. The speeds limit for both directions of travel on the following roadways
are:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
All roads and courts 25 Entire length
B. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above-designated speed limits authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
§ 103-169 JACKSON CODE § 103-172
1:314
ARTICLE XXXI
Prospect Pointe
[Added 3-25-2002 by Ord. No. 12-02]
§ 103-173. Applicability.
The provisions of Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey
shall be made applicable to the semipublic roads, streets, driveways and
parking lots at Prospect Pointe located in the Township of Jackson, County
of Ocean.
§ 103-174. General parking.
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the parts of streets
described below, except in areas covered by other parking restrictions:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Prospect Pointe
Boulevard
Both All Entire length
§ 103-175. Stop intersections.
The following described intersections are hereby designated as stop
intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as provided herein.
Intersection Stop Sign(s) on
Prospect Pointe Boulevard and Pointe
Circle
Prospect Pointe Boulevard
§ 103-176. Speed limits.
§ 103-177. Tow-away zones.
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area
or pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard, may
be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
A. The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following roadways
are:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Pointe Circle 25 Entire length
B. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above-designated speed limits authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
§ 103-173 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-178
1:315
§ 103-178. Signage.
All signs, posts or other necessary materials shall be installed and paid
for by the applicant. All signing shall conform to the current Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and N.J.S.A.
39:4-183.27.
§ 103-179. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided for by New Jersey Statue,
every person convicted of a violation of this article or any supplement
thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $100 or imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
§ 103-178 JACKSON CODE § 103-179
1:316
ARTICLE XXXII
Monterey Estates
[Added 4-8-2002 by Ord. No. 16-02]
§ 103-180. Applicability.
The provisions of Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey
shall be made applicable to the semipublic roads, streets, driveways and
parking lots at Monterey Estates located in the Township of Jackson, County
of Ocean.
§ 103-181. Speed limits.
§ 103-182. Tow-away zones.
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area
or pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard, may
be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
§ 103-183. Signage.
All signs, posts, or other necessary materials shall be installed and paid
for by the applicant. All signing shall conform to the current Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and N.J.S.A.
39:4-183.27.
§ 103-184. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided for by New Jersey statute,
every person convicted of a violation of this article or any supplement
thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $100 or imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
A. The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following roadways
are:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Monterey Court 25 Entire length
B. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above-designated speed limits authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
§ 103-180 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-184
1:317

ARTICLE XXXIII
Serendipity Pond
[Added 4-8-2002 by Ord. No. 17-02]
§ 103-185. Applicability.
The provisions of Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey
shall be made applicable to the semipublic roads, streets, driveways and
parking lots at Serendipity Pond located in the Township of Jackson, County
of Ocean.
§ 103-186. Stop intersections.
The following described intersections are hereby designated as stop
intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as provided herein.
Intersection Stop Sign(s) on
Serendipity Drive and (northerly intersect)
Farmingdale Road
Serendipity Drive (northerly
intersect)
Serendipity Drive (southerly intersect) and
Farmingdale Road
Serendipity Drive (southerly
intersect)
§ 103-187. Speed limits.
§ 103-188. Tow-away zones.
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area
or pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard, may
be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
§ 103-189. Signage.
All signs, posts or other necessary materials shall be installed and paid
for by the applicant. All signing shall conform to the current Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and N.J.S.A.
39:4-183.27.
A. The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following roadways
are:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Serendipity Drive 25 Entire length
B. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above-designated speed limits authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
§ 103-185 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-190
1:319
§ 103-190. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided for by New Jersey statute,
every person convicted of a violation of this article or any supplement
thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $100 or imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
§ 103-190 JACKSON CODE § 103-190
1:320
ARTICLE XXXIV
Legacy at Green Hills
[Added 4-22-2002 by Ord. No. 18-02]
§ 103-191. Applicability.
The provisions of Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey
shall be made applicable to the semipublic roads, streets, driveways and
parking lots at the Legacy at Green Hills located in the Township of Jackson,
County of Ocean.
§ 103-192. Stop intersections.
The following described intersections are hereby designated as stop
intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as provided herein.
Intersection Stop Sign(s) on
Palamino Drive and Phoenix Court Palamino Drive
Phoenix Court and Palamino Drive Phoenix Court
§ 103-193. Speed limits.
§ 103-194. Tow-away zones.
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area
or pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard, may
be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
§ 103-195. Signage.
All signs, posts, or other necessary materials be installed and paid for by
the applicant. All signing shall conform to the current Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and N.J.S.A.
39:4-183.27.
A. The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following roadways
are:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Palamino Drive 25 Entire length
Phoenix Court 25 Entire length
B. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above-designated speed limits authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
§ 103-191 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-196
1:321
§ 103-196. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided for by New Jersey statute,
every person convicted of a violation of this article or any supplement
thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $100 or imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
§ 103-196 JACKSON CODE § 103-196
1:322
ARTICLE XXXV
Green Hill Farm
[Added 4-22-2002 by Ord. No. 19-02]
§ 103-197. Applicability.
The provisions of Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey
shall be made applicable to the semipublic roads, streets, driveways and
parking lots at Green Hill Farm located in the Township of Jackson, County
of Ocean.
§ 103-198. Through streets.
The following streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as through
streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the near-right side of each street
intersecting the through street except where yield signs are provided for in
the designation.
Name of Street Location
Summerhill Avenue Entire length
§ 103-199. Speed limits.
§ 103-200. Tow-away zones.
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area
or pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard, may
be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
§ 103-201. Signage.
All signs, posts or other necessary materials shall be installed and paid
for by the applicant. All signing shall conform to the current Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and N.J.S.A.
39:4-183.27.
A. The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following roadways
are:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Springbrook Avenue 25 Entire length
Summerhill Avenue 25 Entire length
Winter Way 25 Entire length
B. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above-designated speed limits authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
§ 103-197 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-202
1:323
§ 103-202. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided for by New Jersey Statue,
every person convicted of a violation of this article or any supplement
thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $100 or imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
§ 103-202 JACKSON CODE § 103-202
1:324
ARTICLE XXXVI
Tall Timbers
[Added 6-24-2002 by Ord. No. 31-02]
§ 103-203. Applicability.
The provisions of Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey
shall be made applicable to the semipublic roads, streets, driveways and
parking lots at Tall Timbers located in the Township of Jackson, County of
Ocean.
§ 103-204. Stop intersections.
The following described intersections are hereby designated as stop
intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as provided herein.
Intersection Stop Sign(s) on
Applewood Court (east intersect) and
Meadowood Road
Applewood Court (east
intersect)
Meadowood Road and Applewood Court
(east intersect)
Meadowood Road
§ 103-205. Speed limits.
The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following roadways are:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Applewood Court 25 Entire length
Meadowood Road 25 Entire length
§ 103-206. Tow-away zones.
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area
or pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard, may
be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
§ 103-207. Signage.
All signs, posts, or other necessary materials shall be installed and paid
for by the applicant. All signing shall conform to the current Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and N.J.S.A.
39:4-183.27.
§ 103-208. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided for by New Jersey statute,
every person convicted of a violation of this article or any supplement
§ 103-203 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-208
1:325
thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $100 or imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
§ 103-208 JACKSON CODE § 103-208
1:326
ARTICLE XXXVII
Hallmark Court
[Added 11-12-2002 by Ord. No. 48-02]
§ 103-209. Applicability.
The provisions of Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey
shall be made applicable to the semipublic roads, streets, driveways and
parking lots at Hallmark Court located in the Township of Jackson, County
of Ocean.
§ 103-210. General parking.
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts
of streets described below, except in areas covered by other parking
restrictions:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Hallmark Court culde-
sac
All All Entire length
§ 103-211. Speed limits.
§ 103-212. Tow-away zones.
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area
or pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard, may
be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
§ 103-213. Signage.
All signs, posts, or other necessary materials shall be installed and paid
for by the applicant. All signing shall conform to the current Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and N.J.S.A.
39:4-183.27.
A. The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following roadways
are:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Hallmark Court 25 Entire length
B. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above-designated speed limits authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
§ 103-209 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-214
1:327
§ 103-214. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided for by New Jersey statute,
every person convicted of a violation of this article or any supplement
thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $100 or imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
§ 103-214 JACKSON CODE § 103-214
1:328
ARTICLE XXXVIII
Westlake Estates
[Added 1-27-2003 by Ord. No. 01-03]
§ 103-215. Applicability.
The provisions of Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey
shall be made applicable to the semipublic roads, streets, driveways and
parking lots at Westlake Estates, located in the Township of Jackson, County
of Ocean, and the following regulations shall be enforceable.
§ 103-216. General parking.
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts
of streets described below, except in areas covered by other parking
restrictions:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Cranberry Court All All Entire cul-de-sac
Westlake Court All All Entire cul-de-sac
§ 103-217. Stop intersections.
The following described intersections are hereby designated as stop
intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as provided herein.
Intersection Stop Sign(s) on
Cranberry Court and Westlake Court Cranberry Court
§ 103-218. Speed limits.
§ 103-219. Tow-away zones.
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area
or pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard, may
be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
A. The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following roadways
are:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Cranberry Court 25 Entire length
Westlake Court 25 Entire length
B. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above-designated speed limits authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
§ 103-215 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-220
1:329
§ 103-220. Signage.
All signs, posts or other necessary materials shall be installed and paid
for by the applicant. All signing shall conform to the current Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and N.J.S.A.
39:4-183.27.
§ 103-221. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided for by New Jersey statute,
every person convicted of a violation of this article or any supplement
thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $100 or imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
§ 103-220 JACKSON CODE § 103-221
1:330
ARTICLE XXXIX
Municipal Justice Complex
[Added 10-28-2002 by Ord. No. 45-02; amended 4-14-2003 by Ord.
No. 05-03]
§ 103-222. Applicability.
Various traffic regulations shall be made applicable to the semipublic roads,
streets, driveways and parking lots at the Municipal Justice Complex
located in the Township of Jackson, County of Ocean, and the following
regulations shall be enforceable.
§ 103-223. General parking.
§ 103-224. Reserved parking.
All vehicles that are granted specialty parking in this section such as police
vehicles, ambulances, teachers, etc., must be properly identified, and the
reserved parking spaces must be shown on the site plan.58
§ 103-225. Through streets.
The following streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as through
streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the near-right side of each street
intersecting the through street except where yield signs are provided for in
the designation.
Name of Street Location
Aisle A Entire length
Chief Showell Drive North Entire length
Chief Showell Drive South Entire length
A. All vehicles must park in designated areas and between the lines
provided.
B. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts
of streets described below, except in areas covered by other parking
restrictions:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
All roads and aisles Both All As indicated on site plan57
C. Handicapped parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on the
site plan and signed with R7-8 and R7-8P (reserved parking sign and
penalty plate) in the designated parking areas for persons who have
been issued the handicapped parking permit by the Division of Motor
Vehicles.
57.Editor's Note: Said site plan is on file in the Township offices.
58.Editor's Note: Said site plan is on file in the Township offices.
§ 103-222 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-225
1:331
Name of Street Location
Jackson Drive Entire length
Road D Entire length
§ 103-226. Stop intersections.
The following described intersections are hereby designated as stop
intersections:
Intersection Stop Sign(s) on
Aisle K and emergency access road
[Added 8-23-2004 by Ord. No.
35-04]
Aisle K
Aisle N and Aisle O Aisle N
§ 103-227. One-way streets.
The following described streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as
one-way streets in the direction indicated:
Name of Street Direction Location
Sally-Port Drive South Entire length
§ 103-228. Speed limits.
§ 103-229. Tow-away zones.
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area
or pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard, may
be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
A. The speed limit for both directions of traffic in the parking lot(s) shall be
15 mph.
B. The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following roadways
are:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
All roads and aisles 15 Entire length
C. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above-designated speed limits authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
§ 103-225 JACKSON CODE § 103-230
1:332
§ 103-230. Loading zones.
The locations described are hereby designated as loading zones. No person
shall park a vehicle in said location during the times indicated other than
for the loading or unloading of goods and materials.
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Aisle H West All As indicated on site plan59
Chief Showell Drive
North
West All As indicated on site plan60
§ 103-231. Mid-block crosswalks.
The locations described are hereby established as mid-block crosswalks:
Name of Street Location
Aisles A, I, and J As indicated on site plan61
Chief Showell Drive North As indicated on site plan62
Chief Showell Drive South As indicated on site plan63
Jackson Drive As indicated on site plan64
§ 103-232. Authorized vehicles only.
The following streets or parts of streets shall be designated as use for
authorized vehicles only. No vehicle other than an authorized vehicle shall
enter upon the below roadways:
Name of Street Location
Emergency access road [Added
8-23-2004 by Ord. No. 35-04]
Entire length
Sally-Port Drive Entire length
§ 103-233. No-passing zones.
The following described streets or parts of streets shall be designated as
no-passing zones. Street center lines shall be striped double yellow.
Name of Street Location
Jackson Drive Entire length
Road D Entire length
59.Editor's Note: Said site plan is on file in the Township offices.
60.Editor's Note: Said site plan is on file in the Township offices.
61.Editor's Note: Said site plan is on file in the Township offices.
62.Editor's Note: Said site plan is on file in the Township offices.
63.Editor's Note: Said site plan is on file in the Township offices.
64.Editor's Note: Said site plan is on file in the Township offices.
§ 103-230 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-234
1:333
§ 103-234. Signage.
All signs, posts, or other necessary materials shall be installed and paid
for by the applicant. All signing shall conform to the current Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and N.J.S.A.
39:4-183.27.
§ 103-235. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided for by New Jersey statute,
every person convicted of a violation of this article or any supplement
thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $100 or imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
§ 103-234 JACKSON CODE § 103-235
1:334
ARTICLE XL
Bridgewater Crossing
[Added 4-28-2003 by Ord. No. 08-03]
§ 103-236. Applicability.
The provisions of Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey
shall be made applicable to the semipublic roads, streets, driveways and
parking lots at Bridgewater Crossing located in the Township of Jackson,
County of Ocean, and the following regulations shall be enforceable.
§ 103-237. General parking.
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts
of streets described below, except in areas covered by other parking
restrictions:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Bridgewater Crossing Both All As indicated on site
plan65
§ 103-238. Stop intersections.
The following described intersections are hereby designated as stop
intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as provided herein.
Intersection Stop Sign(s) on
Bridgewater Court and
Bridgewater Court (southerly leg)
Bridgewater Court (southerly leg), as
indicated on site plan66
§ 103-239. Speed limits.
A. The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following roadways
are:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Bridgewater Court 25 Entire length
B. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above-designated speed limits authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
65.Editor's Note: Said site plan is on file in the Township offices.
66.Editor's Note: Said site plan is on file in the Township offices.
§ 103-236 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-240
1:335
§ 103-240. Tow-away zones.
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area
or pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard, may
be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
§ 103-241. Signage.
All signs, posts, or other necessary materials shall be installed and paid
for by the applicant. All signing shall conform to the current Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and N.J.S.A.
39:4-183.27.
§ 103-242. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided for by New Jersey statute,
every person convicted of a violation of this article or any supplement
thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $100 or imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
§ 103-240 JACKSON CODE § 103-242
1:336
ARTICLE XLI
Jackson Green Apartment Complex
[Added 4-28-2003 by Ord. No. 09-03]
§ 103-243. Applicability.
The provisions of Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New
Jersey shall be made applicable to the semipublic roads, streets, driveways
and parking lots at Jackson Green Apartments located in the Township
of Jackson, County of Ocean, and the following regulations shall be
enforceable.
§ 103-244. General parking.
§ 103-245. Through streets and stop intersections.
A. All vehicles must park in designated areas and between the lines
provided.
B. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts
of streets described below, except in areas covered by other parking
restrictions:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Justin Way Both All As indicated on site plan67
Justin Way Court Both All As indicated on site plan68
Naomi Way Both All As indicated on site plan69
C. Handicapped parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on the
attached site plan and signed with the R7-8 and R7-8P (reserved
parking sign and penalty plate) in the designated parking areas for
persons who have been issued the handicapped parking permit by the
Division of Motor Vehicles.
A. Through streets. The following streets or parts of streets are hereby
designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the nearright
side of each street intersecting the through street except where
yield signs are provided for in the designation.
Name of Street Location
Justin Way Entire length
B. Stop intersections. The following described intersections are hereby
designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided herein.
67.Editor's Note: Said site plan is on file in the Township offices.
68.Editor's Note: Said site plan is on file in the Township offices.
69.Editor's Note: Said site plan is on file in the Township offices.
§ 103-243 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-245
1:337
§ 103-246. Speed limits.
§ 103-247. Tow-away zones.
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area
or pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard, may
be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
§ 103-248. Signage.
All signs, posts, or other necessary materials shall be installed and paid
for by the applicant. All signing shall conform to the current Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and N.J.S.A.
39:4-183.27.
§ 103-249. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided for by New Jersey statute,
every person convicted of a violation of this article or any supplement
thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $50 or imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
Intersection Stop Sign(s) on
Justin Way and Naomi Way at the
northern intersect
Justin Way
A. The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following roadways
are:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Justin Way 25 Entire length
Justin Way Court 25 Entire length
Naomi Way 25 Entire length
B. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above-designated speed limits authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
§ 103-245 JACKSON CODE § 103-249
1:338
ARTICLE XLII
Premier at Whispering Hills
[Added 6-30-2003 by Ord. No. 16-03]
§ 103-250. Applicability.
The provisions of Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey
shall be made applicable to the semipublic roads, streets, driveways and
parking lots at the Premier at Whispering Hills located in the Township
of Jackson, County of Ocean, and the following regulations shall be
enforceable.
§ 103-251. General parking.
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts
of streets described below, except in areas covered by other parking
restrictions:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Mill Pond Road All All Center traffic island of cul-desac
as indicated on site plan70
Short Hills
Boulevard
All All From its intersection with
Leesville Road to a point 100
feet southerly therefrom as
indicated on site plan71
Short Hills
Boulevard
All All From its intersection with Mill
Pond Road to a point 100 feet
northerly therefrom as
indicated on site plan72
§ 103-252. Through streets and stop intersections.
A. Through street. The following streets or parts of streets are hereby
designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the nearright
side of each street intersecting the through street except where
yield signs are provided for in the designation.
Name of Street Location
Mill Pond Road Entire length
Short Hills Boulevard Entire length
B. Stop intersections. The following described intersections are hereby
designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided herein.
70.Editor's Note: Said site plan is on file in the Township offices.
71.Editor's Note: Said site plan is on file in the Township offices.
72.Editor's Note: Said site plan is on file in the Township offices.
§ 103-250 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-252
1:339
§ 103-253. Speed limits.
§ 103-254. Tow-away zones.
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area
or pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard, may
be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
§ 103-255. Signage.
All signs, posts, or other necessary materials shall be installed and paid
for by the applicant. All signing shall conform to the current Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and N.J.S.A.
39:4-183.27.
§ 103-256. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided for by New Jersey statute,
every person convicted of a violation of this article or any supplement
thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $50 or imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
Intersection Stop Sign(s) on
Short Hills Boulevard and
Leesville Road
Short Hills Boulevard
A. The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following roadways
are:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Cedarview Avenue 25 Entire length
Mill Pond Road 25 Entire length
Overlook Drive 25 Within the limits of the Premier
of Whispering Hills
Round Hill Road 25 Entire length
Sheldon Drive 25 Within the limits of the Premier
of Whispering Hills
Short Hills Boulevard 25 Entire length
B. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above-designated speed limits authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
§ 103-252 JACKSON CODE § 103-256
1:340
ARTICLE XLIII
Friars Chase Development
[Added 11-10-2003 by Ord. No. 38-03]
§ 103-257. Applicability.
The provisions of Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New
Jersey shall be made applicable to the semipublic roads, streets, driveways
and parking lots at the Friars Chase Development located in the Township
of Jackson, County of Ocean, and the following regulations shall be
enforceable.
§ 103-258. General parking.
(Reserved)
§ 103-259. Through streets and stop intersections.
§ 103-260. Speed limits.
A. Through streets. The following streets or parts of streets are hereby
designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the nearright
side of each street intersecting the through street except where
yield signs are provided for in the designation.
Name of Street Location
Sherwood Court Entire length
B. Stop intersections. The following described intersections are hereby
designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided herein.
Intersection Stop Sign(s) on
Sherwood Court and Leesville
Road
Sherwood Court
A. The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following roadways
are:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Arrowshead Circle 25 Entire length
Canterbury Court 25 Entire length
Sherwood Court 25 Entire length
B. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above-designated speed limits authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
§ 103-257 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-261
1:341
§ 103-261. Tow-away zones.
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area
or pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard, may
be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
§ 103-262. Signage.
All signs, posts, or other necessary materials shall be installed and paid
for by the applicant. All signing shall conform to the current Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and N.J.S.A.
39:4-183.27.
§ 103-263. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided for by New Jersey statute,
every person convicted of a violation of this article or any supplement
thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $50 or imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
§ 103-261 JACKSON CODE § 103-263
1:342
ARTICLE XLIV
Nicole Court
[Added 1-26-2004 by Ord. No. 03-04]
§ 103-264. Applicability.
The provisions of Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey
shall be made applicable to the semipublic roads, streets, driveways and
parking lots at Nicole Court, located in the Township of Jackson, County of
Ocean, and the following regulations shall be enforceable.
§ 103-265. General parking.
§ 103-266. Speed limits.
§ 103-267. Tow-away zones.
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area
or pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard, may
be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
§ 103-268. Signage.
All signs, posts, or other necessary materials shall be installed and paid
for by the applicant. All signing shall conform to the current Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and N.J.S.A.
39:4-183.27.
A. All vehicles must park in designated areas and between the lines
provided.
B. Handicapped parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on the
attached site plan and signed with R78-8 and R7-8P (reserved parking
sign and penalty plate) in the designated parking areas for persons who
have been issued the handicapped parking permit by the Division of
Motor Vehicles.
A. The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following roadways
are:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Nicole Court 25 Entire length
B. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above-designated speed limits authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
§ 103-264 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-269
1:343
§ 103-269. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided for by New Jersey statute,
every person convicted of a violation of this article or any supplement
thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $50 or imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
§ 103-269 JACKSON CODE § 103-269
1:344
ARTICLE XLV
Diamond Estates
[Added 6-14-2004 by Ord. No. 25-04]
§ 103-270. Applicability.
The provisions of Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New
Jersey be made applicable to the semipublic roads, streets, driveways and
parking lots at Diamond Estates, located in the Township of Jackson, County
of Ocean, and the following regulations shall be enforceable.
§ 103-271. Stop intersections.
The following described intersections are hereby designated as stop
intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as provided herein.
Intersection Stop Sign(s) on
Sunshine Way and Diamond Road Sunshine Way
§ 103-272. Speed limits.
§ 103-273. Tow-away zones.
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area
or pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard, may
be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
§ 103-274. Signage.
All signs, posts, or other necessary materials shall be installed and paid
for by the applicant. All signing shall conform to the current Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and N.J.S.A.
39:4-183.27.
§ 103-275. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided for by New Jersey statute,
every person convicted of a violation of this article or any supplement
A. The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following roadways
are:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Sunshine Way 25 Entire length
B. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to affect
the above-designated speed limits authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
§ 103-270 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-275
1:345
thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $100 or imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
§ 103-275 JACKSON CODE § 103-275
1:346
ARTICLE XLVI
Bella Terra Life Care Facility and Kathleen Associations Office
Building
[Added 1-24-2005 by Ord. No. 01-05]
§ 103-276. Applicability.
The provisions of Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey
shall be made applicable to the semipublic roads, streets, driveways and
parking lots at Bella Terra Life Care Facility and the Kathleen Associates
Office Building located in the Township of Jackson, County of Ocean, and
the following regulations shall be enforceable.
§ 103-277. General parking.
§ 103-278. Through streets and stop intersections.
A. All vehicles must park in designated areas and between the lines
provided.
B. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts
of streets described below, except in areas covered by other parking
restrictions:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Circle A Both All As indicated on site plan73
Circle B Both All As indicated on site plan74
Road A Both All As indicated on site plan75
Road B Both All As indicated on site plan76
Road C East All As indicated on site plan77
Road D Both All As indicated on site plan78
C. Handicapped parking. All stalls shall be twelve-foot wide as shown on
the site plan and signed with the R7-8 and R7-8P (Reserved Parking
Sign and Penalty Plate), in the designated parking areas for persons
who have been issued the Handicapped Parking Permit by the Division
of Motor Vehicles.
A. Through streets. The following described intersections are hereby
designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the nearright
side of each street intersecting the through street except where
yield signs are provided for the designation.
73.Editor's Note: Said site plan is on file in the Township offices.
74.Editor's Note: Said site plan is on file in the Township offices.
75.Editor's Note: Said site plan is on file in the Township offices.
76.Editor's Note: Said site plan is on file in the Township offices.
77.Editor's Note: Said site plan is on file in the Township offices.
78.Editor's Note: Said site plan is on file in the Township offices.
§ 103-276 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-278
1:347
§ 103-279. One-way streets.
The following described streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as
one-way streets in the direction indicated:
Name of Street Direction Location
Circle A Counterclockwise From Kathleen Drive (south
intersect) to Kathleen Drive
(north intersect)
Circle B Counterclockwise From Road A (east intersect) to
Road A (west intersect)
§ 103-280. Speed limits.
Name of Street Location
Kathleen Drive — Circle A Between West County Line Road
(CR No. 526) and Kathleen Drive
(north intersect)
Road A Entire length
B. Stop intersections. The following described intersections are hereby
designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided herein.
Intersection Stop Sign(s) on
Kathleen Drive and West County
Line Road (CR No. 526)
Kathleen Drive
A. The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following roadways
are:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Aisle A 15 Entire length
Aisle B 15 Entire length
Circle A 15 Entire length
Circle B 15 Entire length
Kathleen Drive 25 Entire length
Road A 15 Entire length
Road B 15 Entire length
Road C 15 Entire length
Road D 15 Entire length
§ 103-278 JACKSON CODE § 103-280
1:348
§ 103-281. Tow-away zones.
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area
or pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard, may
be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
§ 103-282. Loading zones.
The locations described are hereby designated as loading zones. No person
shall park a vehicle in said location during the times indicated other than
for the loading or unloading of goods and materials.
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Aisle A South All As indicated on site plan79
Road B South All As indicated on site plan80
§ 103-283. Signage.
All signs, posts, or other necessary materials shall be installed and paid
for by the applicant. All signing shall conform to the current Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and N.J.S.A.
39:4-183.27.
§ 103-284. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided for by New Jersey statute,
every person convicted of a violation of this article or any supplement
thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $100 or imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
B. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above-designated speed limits authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
79.Editor's Note: Said site plan is on file in the Township offices.
80.Editor's Note: Said site plan is on file in the Township offices.
§ 103-280 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-284
1:349

ARTICLE XLVII
Woodmere Estates
[Added 9-12-2006 by Ord. No. 19-06]
§ 103-285. Applicability.
The provisions of Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey
be made applicable to the semipublic roads, streets, driveways and parking
lots at Woodmere Estates located in the Township of Jackson, County of
Ocean, and the following regulations shall be enforceable.
§ 103-286. General parking.
§ 103-287. Through streets.
The following streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as through
streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the near-right side of each street
intersecting the through street except where yield signs are provided for in
the designation.
Name of Street Limits
Conor Road Entire length
§ 103-288. Speed limits.
A. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the parts of streets
described below, except in areas covered by other parking restrictions:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Pole Brook Road North All As indicated on site plan81
Suter Court West All As indicated on site plan82
A. The speed limit for both directions of travel on the following roadways
are:
Name of Roadway
Speed Limit
(mph) Limits
All roads 25 Entire length
B. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above-designated speed limits authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
81.Editor's Note: Said site plan is on file in the Township offices.
82.Editor's Note: Said site plan is on file in the Township offices.
§ 103-285 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-289
1:351
§ 103-289. Tow-away zones.
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading zones, oil fills, and grassy area
or pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard, may
be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
§ 103-290. Signage.
All signs, posts, or other necessary materials shall be installed and paid
for by the applicant. All signing shall conform to the current Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and N.J.S.A.
39:4-183.27.
§ 103-291. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided for by New Jersey statute,
every person convicted of a violation of this article or any supplement
thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $100 or imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
§ 103-289 JACKSON CODE § 103-291
1:352
ARTICLE XLVIII
Hampshire Hills (Phase I)
[Added 9-12-2006 by Ord. No. 20-06]
§ 103-292. Applicability.
The provisions of Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey
shall be made applicable to the semipublic roads, streets, driveways and
parking lots at Hampshire Hills (Phase I) located in the Township of Jackson,
County of Ocean, and the following regulations shall be enforceable.
§ 103-293. Through streets and stop intersections.
§ 103-294. Speed limits.
A. Through streets. The following streets or parts of streets are hereby
designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the nearright
side of each street intersecting the through street except where
yield signs are provided for in the designation.
Name of Street Limits
Hampshire Boulevard Bartley Road (CR No. 641) and
Picadilly Drive
Picadilly Drive Between County Line Road (CR No.
526) to the northerly curbline of
Hastings Court
B. Stop intersections. The following described intersections are hereby
designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided herein.
Intersection Stop Sign(s) on
Chiswick Court and Lancaster
Way
Chiswick Court
Chiswick Drive and Lancaster Way Chiswick Drive
Kensington Court and
Scarborough Drive
Kensington Court
Scarborough Drive and Hastings
Court
Scarborough Drive
Sussex Place and Knightsbridge
Place
Sussex Place
A. The speed limit for both directions of traffic for all roads within
Hampshire Hills shall be 25 miles per hour.
§ 103-292 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-294
1:353
§ 103-295. Tow-away zones.
Any vehicle parked or standing so as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading zones, oil fills, and grassy area
and pedestrian walkways, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard,
may be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
§ 103-296. Signage.
All signs, posts, or other necessary materials shall be installed and paid
for by the applicant. All signing shall conform to the current Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and N.J.S.A.
39:4-183.27.
§ 103-297. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided for by New Jersey statute,
every person convicted of a violation of this article or any supplement
thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $100 or imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
Name of Roadway
Speed Limit
(mph) Limits
All roads 25 Entire length
B. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above-designated speed limits authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
§ 103-294 JACKSON CODE § 103-297
1:354
ARTICLE XLIX
Premier at Cedar Knolls
[Added 12-12-2006 by Ord. No. 29-06]
§ 103-298. Applicability.
The provisions of Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey
shall be made applicable to the semipublic roads, streets, driveways and
parking lots at Premier at Cedar Knolls located in the Township of Jackson,
County of Ocean, and the following regulations shall be enforceable.
§ 103-299. Stop intersections.
The following described intersections are hereby designated as stop
intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as provided herein.
Intersection Stop Sign(s) on
Cedar Knoll Road and Barley Road Cedar Knoll Road
§ 103-300. Speed limits.
§ 103-301. Tow-away zones.
Any vehicle parked or standing so as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading zones, oil fills, and grassy area
and pedestrian walkways, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard,
may be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
§ 103-302. Signage.
All signs, posts, or other necessary materials shall be installed and paid
for by the applicant. All signing shall conform to the current Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and N.J.S.A.
39:4-183.27.
§ 103-303. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided for by New Jersey statute,
every person convicted of a violation of this article or any supplement
A. The speed limit for both directions of travel on the following roadways
is:
Name of Roadway
Speed Limit
(mph) Limits
Cedar Knoll Road 25 Entire length
B. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above-designated speed limits authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
§ 103-298 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-303
1:355
thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $100 or imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
§ 103-303 JACKSON CODE § 103-303
1:356
ARTICLE L
Whispering Hills
[Added 12-12-2006 by Ord. No. 30-06]
§ 103-304. Applicability.
The provisions of Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey
shall be made applicable to the semipublic roads, streets, driveways and
parking lots at Whispering Hills located in the Township of Jackson, County
of Ocean, and the following regulations shall be enforceable.
§ 103-305. Through streets.
The following streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as through
streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the near-right side of each street
intersecting the through street except where yield signs are provided for in
the designation.
Name of Street Limits
Overlook Drive Entire length within the corporate
limits of Whispering Hills
§ 103-306. Speed limits.
§ 103-307. Tow-away zones.
Any vehicle parked or standing so as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading zones, oil fills, and grassy area
and pedestrian walkways, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard,
may be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
§ 103-308. Signage.
All signs, posts, or other necessary materials shall be installed and paid
for by the applicant. All signing shall conform to the current Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and N.J.S.A.
39:4-183.27.
A. The speed limit for both directions of travel on the following roadways
is:
Name of Roadway
Speed Limit
(mph) Limits
Overlook Drive 25 Entire length within corporate
limits of Whispering Hills
B. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above-designated speed limits authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
§ 103-304 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-309
1:357
§ 103-309. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided for by New Jersey statute,
every person convicted of a violation of this article or any supplement
thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $100 or imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
§ 103-309 JACKSON CODE § 103-309
1:358
ARTICLE LI
Ross Lane Estates
[Added 12-12-2006 by Ord. No. 31-06]
§ 103-310. Applicability.
The provisions of Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New
Jersey shall be made applicable to the semipublic roads, streets, driveways
and parking lots at Ross Lane Estates located in the Township of Jackson,
County of Ocean, and the following regulations shall be enforceable.
§ 103-311. Stop intersections.
The following described intersections are hereby designated as stop
intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as provided herein.
Intersection Stop Sign(s) on
Overlook Drive and Freehold Road Overlook Drive
§ 103-312. Speed limits.
§ 103-313. Tow-away zones.
Any vehicle parked or standing so as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading zones, oil fills, and grassy area
and pedestrian walkways, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard,
may be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
§ 103-314. Signage.
All signs, posts, or other necessary materials shall be installed and paid
for by the applicant. All signing shall conform to the current Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and N.J.S.A.
39:4-183.27.
A. The speed limit for both directions of travel on the following roadways
is:
Name of Roadway
Speed Limit
(mph) Limits
Overlook Drive 25 Entire length within corporate
limits of Ross Lane Estates
B. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above-designated speed limits authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
§ 103-310 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-315
1:359
§ 103-315. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided for by New Jersey statute,
every person convicted of a violation of this article or any supplement
thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $100 or imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
§ 103-315 JACKSON CODE § 103-315
1:360
ARTICLE LII
Fox Hollow East
[Added 2-13-2007 by Ord. No. 03-07]
§ 103-316. Applicability.
The provisions of Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey
shall be made applicable to the semipublic roads, streets, driveways and
parking lots at Fox Hollow East located in the Township of Jackson, County
of Ocean, and the following regulations shall be enforceable.
§ 103-317. General parking.
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the parts of streets
described below, except in areas covered by other parking restrictions:
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
Meadow Run Court Both All As indicated on site plan83
§ 103-318. Stop intersections.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
are hereby designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided therein.
Intersection Stop Sign(s) on
Meadow Run Court and Gail Chambers
Road
Meadow Run Court
§ 103-319. Speed limits.
§ 103-320. Tow-away zones.
Any vehicle parked or standing so as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading zones, oil fills, and grassy area
A. The speed limit for both directions of travel on the following roadways
is:
Name of Roadway
Speed Limit
(mph) Limits
Meadow Run Court 25 Entire length
B. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above-designated speed limits authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
83.Editor's Note: Said site plan is on file in the Township offices.
§ 103-316 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-320
1:361
and pedestrian walkways, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard,
may be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
§ 103-321. Signage.
All signs, posts, or other necessary materials shall be installed and paid
for by the applicant. All signing shall conform to the current Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and N.J.S.A.
39:4-183.27.
§ 103-322. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided for by New Jersey statute,
every person convicted of a violation of this article or any supplement
thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $100 or imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
§ 103-320 JACKSON CODE § 103-322
1:362
ARTICLE LIII
Royal Woods II
[Added 3-9-2010 by Ord. No. 04-10]
§ 103-323. Applicability.
The provisions of Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey
are made applicable to the semipublic roads, streets, driveways and parking
lots at Royal Woods II located in the Township of Jackson, County of Ocean,
and the following regulations shall be enforceable.
§ 103-324. Through streets.
§ 103-325. Stop intersections.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
are hereby designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided therein.
Name of Street Stop Sign(s) on
Olivia Way and Royal Woods Court Royal Woods Court
§ 103-326. Speed limits.
A. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the streets or parts of
streets described are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs
shall be installed on the near-right side of each street intersecting the
through street except where yield signs are provided for in the
designation.
B. The following streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as
through streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the near-right side of
each street intersecting the through street except where yield signs are
provided for in the designation.
Name of Street Limits
Olivia Way Entire length
A. The speed limit for both directions of travel on the following roadways
is:
Name of Roadway
Speed Limit
(mph) Limits
Olivia Way 25 Entire length
Royal Woods Court 25 Entire length
B. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above designated speed limits authorized by the Jackson Township
§ 103-323 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-326
1:363
§ 103-327. Tow-away zones.
Any vehicle parked or standing so as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area
pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard may be
removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
§ 103-328. Signage.
All signs, posts, or other necessary materials shall be installed and paid
for by the applicant. All signing shall conform to the current Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and N.J.S.A.
39:4-183.27.
§ 103-329. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided for by the New Jersey statutes,
every person convicted of a violation of this article or any supplement
thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $100 or imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
Police Department in conjunction with the State of New Jersey
Department of Transportation.
§ 103-326 JACKSON CODE § 103-329
1:364
ARTICLE LIV
Royal Wood Estates
[Added 3-23-2010 by Ord. No. 12-10]
§ 103-330. Applicability.
The provisions of Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey
are made applicable to the semipublic roads, streets, driveways and parking
lots at Royal Woods Estates located in the Township of Jackson, County of
Ocean, and the following regulations shall be enforceable.
§ 103-331. General parking.
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts
of streets described below, except in areas covered by other parking
restrictions:
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
Rachel Court cul-de-sac
(northerly terminus)
All All As indicated on site plan84
§ 103-332. Stop intersections.
The following described intersections are hereby designated as stop
intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as provided herein.
Intersection Stop Sign(s) on
North Boston Road and Rachel
Court
Rachel Court
§ 103-333. Speed limits.
§ 103-334. Tow-away zones.
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow
of traffic, entrances or exitways, loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area
A. The speed limit for both directions of travel on the following roadways
is:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Limits
Rachel Court 25 Entire length
B. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above designated speed limits authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
84.Editor's Note: Said site plan is on file in the Township offices.
§ 103-330 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-334
1:365
pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard may be
removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
§ 103-335. Signage.
All signs, posts, or other necessary materials shall be installed and paid
for by the applicant. All signing shall conform to the current Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and N.J.S.A.
39:4-183.27.
§ 103-336. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by the New Jersey statutes,
every person convicted of a violation of this article or any supplement
thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $100 or imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
§ 103-334 JACKSON CODE § 103-336
1:366
ARTICLE LV
Unregistered Vehicles
[Added 6-28-2011 by Ord. No. 22-11]
§ 103-337. Storage or abandonment prohibited.
No person shall store or abandon or permit the storage or abandonment
of any motor vehicle which is unregistered or which has a suspended
registration out of doors upon any public or private parking lots in any zone
in the Township or in any public parking spaces along the streets of the
Township which are open to the public or to which the public is invited,
whether the lot is owned by the government or any private or business
entity.
§ 103-338. Exemptions.
§ 103-339. Enforcement.
Whenever any abandoned or unregistered vehicle is found in violation of
the provisions of this article, any member of the Police Department is
authorized to issue a summons to any person deemed to be in violation. In
addition, any member of the Police Department is authorized to immediately
remove or cause to be removed and impound such motor vehicle without
the necessity of prior notification.
§ 103-340. Payment of fees; violations and penalties.
A. The provisions of this article shall not apply to a vehicle on the premises
of a private residence or other private property to which the public is
not invited.
B. The provisions of this article shall not apply to unregistered motor
vehicles that are exempt from registration under Title 39 of the New
Jersey statutes, for example vehicles stored on the lot of a car
dealership, or motor vehicle repair establishments or vehicles held in
an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a lawful place
and manner by the Township.
A. The expense of removal and storage of the vehicle shall be borne by the
owner of the vehicle, except that in the case of a leased vehicle, the
expense is to be borne by the lessee.
B. Violators pursuant to this article are subject to a fine of $100.
§ 103-337 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-340
1:367

ARTICLE LVI
Engine Braking
[Added 7-26-2016 by Ord. No. 15-16]
§ 103-341. Engine braking prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any motor vehicle to use or operate,
or cause to be used or operated, at any time, and on any road, within the
Township of Jackson, any mechanical exhaust or decompression device, also
known as "engine braking." "Engine braking," as used herein, shall mean
the use or operation of any mechanical exhaust device designed to aid
in the braking, decompression or deceleration of any motor vehicle which
results in loud or unusual noise from such vehicle and shall include engine
compression brakes.
§ 103-342. Exceptions.
The provisions of this section shall not apply to the practice of engine
braking in the following situations:
§ 103-343. Posting of signs.
The Township of Jackson is hereby authorized to post, at any reasonable
location within the Township, signs that indicate the prohibition of engine
braking pursuant to this section.
§ 103-344. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided for by the New Jersey statute,
every person convicted of a violation of this article or any supplement
thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $2,000 or imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
A. Where conventional vehicle brakes have failed, resulting in an
emergency making necessary the use of engine braking; or
B. Emergency equipment being used for emergency purposes.
§ 103-341 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-344
1:369
Chapter 107
BACKGROUND CHECKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Personnel policies and procedures — See Ch.
50.
Public use of buildings and facilities — See
Ch. 121.
Registration of criminal offenders — See Ch.
166.
§ 103-344 JACKSON CODE § 103-344
1:370
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 107-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BACKGROUND CHECK — Includes criminal history checks conducted by
state agencies, under state regulations, and checks of convictions
conducted by privately contracted entities utilizing commercial databases.
DISQUALIFYING RECORD — Any record of a person which would be
disqualifying under N.J.S.A. 15A:3A-3, or a determination by a private entity
(e.g., National Center for Safety Initiatives) that a person has convictions
for crimes cited on the Recommended Guidelines established by the
National Council of Youth Sports, or other nationally recognized criteria for
evaluating criminal histories in youth-related sports.
NONPROFIT YOUTH-SERVING ORGANIZATION(S) — A corporation,
association or other organization established pursuant to Title 15 of the
Revised Statutes, Title 15A of the New Jersey Statutes or other law of
the state, but excluding public and nonpublic schools, and which provides
recreational, cultural, charitable, social, or other activities or services for
persons younger than 18 years of age, and is exempt from federal income
taxes, as defined within N.J.A.C. 13:59-1.1 and any amendments thereto.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Jackson.
VOLUNTEER COACH AND OFFICIALS — Any person involved with
coaching or supervising participants in a nonprofit youth-serving
organization, whether the title is coach, manager, or another title consistent
with these terms; any person who may officiate or act as referee or umpire
by such organization in Jackson Township; any member of any board
governing such organization.
§ 107-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 107-1
1:371

ARTICLE II
Nonprofit Youth-Serving Organizations
§ 107-2. Information and documentation to be provided to
Township.
A. Any nonprofit youth-serving organization (hereinafter "organization")
which intends to or currently does utilize Township-owned property,
real or personal, for activities of the organization, shall be required to
submit to the Township Administrator, or his or her designee, the
following information and/or documentation for each and every
volunteer coach and official of the organization who recruits, interacts
or in any other way communicates with or contacts persons younger
than 18 years of age in the Township:
(1) A copy of a government-issued photo identification card or
document.
(2) Home address.
(3) Date of birth.
(4) Home phone number.
(5) Occupation and employer.
(6) Written consent for the organization to conduct a background
check, which includes the right to review sex offender registries
and criminal history records.
B. In addition to the information required in Subsection A above, the
organization shall provide an affidavit from an official of the
organization that the persons whose names have been provided to the
Township in Subsection A above were subjected to a background check
and did not have disqualifying records, or if a person had a disqualifying
record, the organization has conducted a review or appeal under its
own policies and procedures and the organization has determined that
the person should be qualified and his or her name should be submitted
to the Township.
C. The organization shall execute an agreement with the Township
whereby the organization acknowledges that the acceptance of the
affidavit(s) above do not indicate approval or acceptance of the policies,
procedures, review or appeal processes of the organization by the
Township. Said agreement shall also state that the organization agrees
to indemnify fully, save and hold harmless the Township, its officers and
employees, from and against all losses, damages, claims, liabilities and
causes of action of every kind, or character and nature, as well as costs
and fees, including reasonable attorneys' fees connected therewith, and
the expense of investigation thereof, based upon or arising out of
damages or injuries to third persons or their property caused by the
§ 107-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 107-2
1:373
§ 107-3. Time for submission of information and documentation;
ongoing obligation.
Organizations which intend to or currently utilize Township-owned property,
real or personal, for activities of the organization shall be required to
submit the information and documentation of the volunteer coaches and
officials as described in § 107-2 immediately upon the effective date of this
chapter and annually thereafter. Said organizations shall have a continuing
obligation to submit additional information to the Township immediately as
such volunteer coaches and officials are employed or intended to be utilized
by said organization.
§ 107-4. Failure to comply.
§ 107-5. Limitations on access and use of information.
Any records submitted to the Township shall be restricted as to access
as authorized by federal or state statute, rule or regulations, executive
order, administrative code, local ordinance or resolution regarding personal
information and obtaining and disseminating of criminal history record
information obtained under this chapter.
§ 107-6. Violations and penalties.
acts of the organization, or any volunteer coach or official acting on
behalf of the organization.
A. No person will be permitted to act as a volunteer coach or official in the
Township until the organization submits the information and
documentation delineated within § 107-2 to the Township
Administrator.
B. Any prospective or current volunteer coach or official of an organization
who refuses to comply with the requirements of this chapter shall be
prohibited by the organization from participating in any activity or
event of the organization which provides services to the Township,
utilizes Township-owned property, real or personal, and recruits,
interacts, or in any other way communicates with or contacts persons
younger than 18 years of age in the Township.
A. It shall be a violation of this chapter for an organization to allow any
volunteer coach or official to participate in any capacity at any event or
activity of the organization utilizing Township-owned property, real or
personal, if said volunteer coach or official has failed to submit the
required information and documentation pursuant to § 107-2 or has a
disqualifying record which was not subsequently appealed to the
organization with a favorable outcome.
B. It shall be a violation of this chapter if an organization fails to satisfy
any of the requirements of this chapter, including, but not limited to,
§ 107-2 JACKSON CODE § 107-6
1:374
executing the agreement required in § 107-2C and updating
information pursuant to § 107-3.
C. If the Township determines that this chapter has been violated, the
organization shall be immediately barred from utilizing Townshipowned
property, real and personal, for any events and activities of the
organization for a period of two years from the date of the violation.
Upon the expiration of two years, the organization may petition the
Township for reinstatement upon a showing of satisfaction of all
requirements of this chapter.
§ 107-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 107-6
1:375
Chapter 115
BRUSH, WEEDS, TRASH AND DEBRIS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garbage, rubbish and waste material — See
Ch. 216.
Land use and development regulations — See
Ch. 244.
Littering — See Ch. 262.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 372.
Tree removal — See Ch. 405.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 474.
§ 115-1. Unlawful acts.
It shall be unlawful for any owner or tenant of any land in this municipality
to do any of the following things:
§ 115-2. Height requirement at roadways and intersections.
Where it shall be necessary and expedient for the preservation of the public
safety, the owner or tenant of lands lying within the Township of Jackson
shall keep and maintain all trees, brush, hedges and other plant life growing
within 10 feet of any roadway within the Township of Jackson and within 25
feet of the intersection of any two such roadways cut to a height of not more
than 2 1/2 feet above the ground.
A. Permit such land to be covered with or contain brush, weeds, dead and
dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious growths, filth, garbage, manure,
trash, refuse or debris, or any combination of said items, which would
either tend to start a fire, increase the intensity of a fire already started
when it shall reach said land, cause poisoning or irritation to human
beings from the obnoxious growths, or cause or tend to cause an
unhealthy or obnoxious condition on said land or adjacent property.
B. Permit such land to be covered with or contain refuse or debris
resulting from the construction, demolition or neglect of a building,
which refuse or debris has remained on the land for more than 30 days
after completion of the construction work, the demolition, or after the
loose boards, shingles or other materials have fallen off a building, and
where such refuse or debris is inimical to the preservation of the public
health, safety or general welfare of the people of Jackson Township, or
which refuse or debris may constitute a fire hazard.
C. Permit to be stored or placed on his unenclosed land old lumber, metal,
machines or parts of machines, junk, paper, clothes, glass or refuse or
any combination of them, which is either a fire hazard, retains stagnant
water, emits foul or obnoxious odor or which is dangerous to a person,
including a child, being or coming upon said land.
§ 107-6 JACKSON CODE § 115-3
1:376
§ 115-3. Failure to comply; violations and penalties.
Any owner or tenant of lands who shall not remove the same or cause the
same to be reduced to the condition as set forth in this chapter within 10
days after receipt of written notice from the Superintendent of Public Works
of the Township of Jackson to do so shall be guilty of a violation of this
chapter and, upon conviction by a court of competent jurisdiction, shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed $500 or imprisonment for a term not to
exceed 90 days, or both.
§ 115-4. Removal by Township; costs and charges.
In the event that an owner or tenant of lands does not remove or reduce
the condition as set forth in this chapter upon receipt of notice to do so
as set forth in § 115-3 of this chapter, the Superintendent of Public Works
of the Township of Jackson may, after the expiration of a period of 10 days
from the receipt of such notice by said owner or tenant, cause said condition
to be removed or reduced. The Superintendent of Public Works shall then
certify the cost of such removal or reduction to the Township Committee,
which shall examine the certificate and, if found correct, shall cause the
cost as shown thereon to be charged against said lands and premises or, in
the event that such costs are deemed excessive, shall cause the reasonable
cost thereof to be charged against said lands. The amount so charged shall
forthwith become a lien upon such lands and premises and shall be added
to and become and form a part of the real estate taxes next to be assessed
and levied upon such lands and premises, the same to bear interest at the
same rate as other taxes, and shall be collected and enforced by the same
officers and in the same manner as taxes.
Chapter 121
BUILDINGS AND FACILITIES, PUBLIC USE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation facilities — See Ch. 304. Trespassing on public property — See Ch.
412.
§ 115-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 115-4
1:377

ARTICLE I
Conditions for Use
§ 121-1. Findings; purpose.
§ 121-2. Permission required.
Any civic-oriented or nonprofit organization based within the Township
of Jackson shall be allowed to use any municipally owned building or
facility, subject to the organization's compliance with all applicable state
and federal laws and regulations, upon obtaining permission from the
Township Committee.
§ 121-3. Procedure for obtaining permission.
Any civic-oriented or nonprofit organization seeking to use a building or
facility owned by the Township of Jackson shall:
§ 121-4. Condition for granting permission.
Any application by a qualified community organization for the use of a
municipally owned building or facility shall be granted only if the proposed
use would not interfere with the primary purpose for which the building or
facility exists.
A. The Township Committee recognizes that all public buildings and
facilities owned by the municipal government have been built and
maintained by public funds and, therefore, should be made available for
the use and enjoyment of all Jackson Township residents.
B. The Township Committee further recognizes that the use of buildings
and facilities owned by the municipal government by civic-oriented and
nonprofit community organizations for various meetings and functions
is beneficial to the overall good of the Township of Jackson and,
therefore, hereby declares its enthusiastic support for said use of such
buildings in accordance with the procedures and regulations outlined in
this article.
A. Submit, at least 30 days in advance of the anticipated meeting date, a
letter of application to the office of the Township Clerk on the group's
official letterhead stating the proposed date, time and purpose of the
meeting for which the building or facility is being requested, as well as
the specific building or facility, or portion thereof, being requested.
B. Submit to the office of the Township Clerk a list of the names and
addresses of those officers or persons in charge of the organization who
shall be individually responsible for the care and use of the Townshipowned
building or facility, as well as any equipment, supplies or
furniture located therein.
C. Submit to the office of the Township Clerk a completed application for a
permit to use the municipal building or facility.
§ 121-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 121-5
1:379
§ 121-5. Fees.
The Township Committee, in its sole judgment and discretion and in
consideration of such factors as the number of people and duration of the
proposed use, shall have the option of imposing, by resolution, reasonable
fees for the use of municipally owned buildings and facilities to cover
costs for administrative, maintenance, custodial or any other similar such
expenses that may be associated with the use.
§ 121-6. Maintenance requirements.
Any organization using municipally owned buildings and facilities in
accordance with this chapter shall keep such premises in good repair and
shall be responsible for ensuring that the premises are left in a clean
condition and that any personal property brought in by the organization is
removed after the completion of the meeting or function.
§ 121-7. Liability insurance.
The Township Committee may, as a condition of use, require any
organization applying to use a municipally owned building or facility to
provide a certificate of liability insurance with the Township as a named
insured, in such form as may be required by the office of the Township
Attorney.
§ 121-8. Smoking prohibited. [Amended 12-9-2002 by Ord. No.
51-02]
A. Smoking is prohibited on all Township-owned property at all times.
B. Violations and penalties.
(1) Any person who violates this section shall appear before the
Jackson Township Municipal Court and shall be subject to
punishment as follows:
(a) First offense: up to 15 hours of community service at a place
designated by the Municipal Court.
(b) Second offense: up to 30 hours of community service in a place
designated by the Municipal Court and/or a fine up to $100.
(c) Third and subsequent offense: up to 50 hours of community
service in a place designated by the Municipal Court and/or a
fine up to $250.
(2) Community service may include participation in a nonsmoking
educational or support program approved by the Municipal Court.
§ 121-5 JACKSON CODE § 121-9
1:380
§ 121-9. Additional rules and regulations.
The Township Committee may, from time to time, make additional rules and
regulations by resolution governing the use of municipally owned buildings
and facilities.
§ 121-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 121-9
1:381

ARTICLE II
Township Stage Permit
[Added 6-27-2017 by Ord. No. 11-17]
§ 121-10. Permission required.
The Township of Jackson owns a thirty-two-foot-long stage primarily used
for Township events but which is available for use only by registered
501(c)(3) nonprofit corporations on dates during which no Township events
are planned. Such nonprofit corporations may utilize the stage, which is
maintained, constructed and deconstructed by the Department of Public
Works, subject to the organization's compliance with the requirements of
this article.
§ 121-11. Permit application requirements.
Any nonprofit organization seeking to use the stage shall submit, at least
30 days in advance of the requested date(s), a completed permit for use of
stage to the Department of Public Works.
§ 121-12. Fee.
The fee for the use of the stage by nonprofit corporations shall be $1,500
per day.
§ 121-13. Liability insurance.
It is required for any organization applying for use of the stage to provide
a certificate of liability insurance with the Township as a named insured,
in such form as may be required by the office of the Township Attorney
and insuring against loss by any such claim, suit, judgment, execution or
demand in the minimum amounts of $1,000,000 for bodily injury or death
to any one person; $1,000,000 for property damage resulting from any one
accident; $1,000,000 for all other types of liability. Such coverage shall be
written by a company or companies authorized and qualified to do business
in the State of New Jersey.
§ 121-14. Additional rules and regulations.
The Township Council may, from time to time, make additional rules and
regulations by resolution governing the use of the stage.
§ 121-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 121-14
1:383
Chapter 127
BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES, MOVING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unsafe buildings and structures — See Ch.
133.
Commercial building standards — See Ch.
139.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 162.
Housing standards — See Ch. 233.
Land use and development regulations — See
Ch. 244.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 372.
§ 127-1. Permit requirements. [Amended 10-12-2010 by Ord. No.
21-10]
No person shall move any building or other structure within the Township
of Jackson without first making application to the following departments:
§ 127-2. Fees. [Amended 10-12-2010 by Ord. No. 21-10]
A. Municipal Clerk.
B. Jackson Police Department.
C. Building Department.
A. The transport fee for the removal or moving of a building or structure
from one location within the Township of Jackson to a different location
within the Township of Jackson shall be $100, payable to the Township
of Jackson and submitted to the office of the Municipal Clerk.
B. The transport fee for the removal or moving of a building or structure
from another municipality or territorial jurisdiction to within the limits
of the Township of Jackson shall be $100, payable to the Township of
Jackson and submitted to the office of the Municipal Clerk.
C. The transport fee for the removal or moving of a building or structure
from a location outside the Township of Jackson to a location within the
territorial limits of the Township of Jackson shall be $100, payable to
the Township of Jackson and submitted to the office of the Municipal
Clerk.
D. The fee for the moving of a building or structure on any road, highway
or street in the Township of Jackson shall be in accordance with the
rates set for extra duty assignments performed by the Jackson
Township Police Department. Application is made directly to the Police
Department for the assigned fee.
§ 121-14 JACKSON CODE § 127-2
1:384
§ 127-3. Restoration of property to natural grade.
Whenever a building or structure has been removed from within the
Township of Jackson, the owner of the property from which it has been
removed shall, within 10 days thereafter, remove or cause to be removed
any residue, such as foundations, slabs, pipes or other things protruding
above the ground, and fill in any holes or depressions left and restore the
property to its natural grade.
§ 127-4. Bond requirements. [Amended 10-12-2010 by Ord. No.
21-10]
Any person securing authorization for the removal or moving of a building
or structure over, upon or across a public street, road or highway in the
Township of Jackson, in addition to the above-prescribed fees, shall file
with the Clerk of the Township of Jackson a bond with good and sufficient
sureties to the Township of Jackson as obligee, in the sum of $50,000,
conditioned upon the proper removal of said building or structure without
damage to the public streets, sidewalks, curbs or other public property, and
saving the Township of Jackson and said public of said Township harmless
from any and all damage that may be caused to any property or person by
reason of the removal or moving of said building or structure, and agreeing
to reimburse the Township of Jackson for any moneys expended by it or by
its public for repairs or damages. No approval shall be issued until such
bond shall be filed as aforesaid.
§ 127-5. Insurance requirements. [Amended 10-12-2010 by Ord. No.
21-10]
In addition, any application to remove or move a building or structure over,
upon or across a public street within the Township of Jackson shall file a
certificate of public liability insurance in the sum of $300,000.
§ 127-6. Notice to Police Department.
No building, structure or dwelling shall be moved over, upon or across a
public street in the Township of Jackson unless notice of intention to remove
or move a building or structure over, upon or across a public street is given
to the Jackson Township Police Department not less than 24 hours prior to
the time of the said moving.
§ 127-7. Exception to bond requirements.
No bond shall be required for the moving of any building or structure from
a location on one parcel to another location on the same parcel, provided
that the public streets, roads or highways within the Township of Jackson
are not used to accomplish said move.
E. All required permits for the removal of an existing footing and
foundation or the installation of a new system will require permits from
the Building Department.
§ 127-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-8
1:385
§ 127-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-5-1972 by Ord. No.
34-72]
Any person or persons, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, pay a penalty of not more than
$500 or be imprisoned for a term not to exceed 90 days, or both.
Chapter 133
BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES, UNSAFE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Moving of buildings and structures — See Ch.
127.
Commercial building standards — See Ch.
139.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 162.
Housing standards — See Ch. 233.
§ 133-1. Legislative findings.
It is hereby found and declared that the existence or occupation of any
building or buildings or parts thereof in the Township of Jackson which are
so old, dilapidated or have become so out of repair as to be dangerous,
unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human habitation or occupancy
is inimical to the welfare of the residents of Jackson and dangerous and
injurious to the health and safety of the people of Jackson, and that a public
necessity exists for the repair, closing or demolition of such building or
buildings or parts thereof.
§ 133-2. Definitions.
The words "governing body," "public authority," "public officer," "owner,"
"parties in interest" and "building," whenever used or referred to in this
chapter, shall have the meanings and be defined as set forth in N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.4.
§ 133-3. Compliance required.
No owner or parties in interest shall continue the existence, use or
occupancy of any building or buildings or parts of buildings in violation of
the findings and declarations of § 133-1 hereof.
§ 133-4. Appointment of public officer.
The public officer hereby designated and appointed to exercise the powers
prescribed by this chapter shall be the Construction Official of the State
Uniform Construction Code enforcing agency, or his designee.
§ 127-8 JACKSON CODE § 133-5
1:386
§ 133-5. Service of complaint; notice of hearing. [Amended
10-12-2010 by Ord. No. 22-10]
Whenever a petition shall be filed with the public officer by a public
authority or by at least five residents of the municipality charging that
any building is unfit for human habitation, or whenever it appears to the
public officer that any building is unfit for human habitation or occupancy
or use, the public officer shall, if his preliminary investigation discloses a
basis for such charges, and after exhausting all means through the Uniform
Construction Code, shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner of
and parties in interest in such building a complaint stating the charges in
that respect and containing a notice that a hearing will be held before the
public officer or his designated agent at a place therein fixed not less than
seven days nor more than 30 days after the serving of said complaint, that
the owner and parties in interest shall be given the right to file an answer
to the complaint and to appear in person or otherwise give testimony at
the place and time fixed in the complaint and that the rules of evidence
prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings
before the public officer or his designated agent.
§ 133-6. Order for repair or removal.
If, after such notice and hearing, the public officer determines that the
building or buildings under consideration are unfit for human habitation or
occupancy or use, he shall state, in writing, his findings of fact in support of
such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owners
thereof and parties in interest an order:
§ 133-7. Repair or closing by Township.
A. Requiring the repair, alteration or improvement of said building to be
made by the owner within a reasonable time which time shall be set
forth in the order, or, at the option of the owner, to vacate or have said
building vacated and closed within the time set forth in the order; and
B. If the building is in such a condition as to make it dangerous to the
health and safety of persons on or near the premises and the owner fails
to repair, alter or improve said building within the time specified in the
order, then the owner shall be required to remove or demolish said
building within a reasonable time as specified in said order of removal.
A. If the owner fails to comply with an order to alter, repair or improve or,
at the option of the owner, to vacate and close the building, the public
officer may cause such building to be repaired, altered or improved or
to be vacated and closed; thereupon, the public officer may cause to be
posted on the main entrance of any building so closed a placard with
the following words: "This building is unfit for human habitation; the
use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful."
B. If an actual and immediate danger to life is posed by the threatened
collapse of any fire-damaged or other structurally unsafe building, the
§ 133-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-7
1:387
§ 133-8. Removal by Township.
If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the
building, the public officer may cause such building to be removed or
demolished or may contract for the removal or demolition thereof after
advertisement for the receipt of bids therefor.
§ 133-9. Determination of costs; lien.
The amount of the cost of the filing of legal papers, expert witness fees,
search fees and advertising charges incurred in the course of any
proceedings taken under this chapter determined in favor of the
municipality, and the cost of such repairs, alterations or improvements or
vacating and closing or removal or demolition, if any, or the amount of the
balance thereof remaining after deduction of the sum, if any, realized from
the sale of materials derived from such building or from any contract for
removal or demolition thereof, shall be a municipal lien against the real
property upon which such cost was incurred. If the building is removed or
demolished by the public officer, he shall sell the materials of such building.
There shall be credited against the cost of the removal or demolition thereof
the proceeds of any sale of such materials or any sum derived from any
contract for the removal or demolition of the building. If there are no such
credits or if the sum total of such costs exceeds the total of such credits,
a detailed statement of the aforesaid costs and the amount so due shall
be filed with the public officer or other custodian of the records of tax
liens, and a copy thereof shall be forthwith forwarded to the owner by
registered mail. If the total of the credits exceeds such costs, the balance
remaining shall be deposited in the Superior Court by the public officer,
shall be secured in such manner as may be directed by such Court and
shall be disbursed according to the order or judgment of the Court to
the persons found to be entitled thereto by final order or judgment of the
Court; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be construed
to impair or limit in any way the power of the municipality to define and
declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement, by summary
proceedings or otherwise. Any owner or party in interest may, within 30
days from the date of the filing of the lien certificate, proceed in a summary
manner in the Superior Court to contest the reasonableness of the amount
or the accuracy of the costs set forth in the municipal lien certificate.
§ 133-10. Conditions warranting finding of unfitness for habitation.
The public officer may determine that a building is unfit for human
habitation or occupancy or use if he finds that conditions exist in such
building which are dangerous or injurious to the health or safety of the
occupants of such building, the occupants of neighboring buildings or other
residents of such municipality; such conditions shall be deemed to include
public officer may, after taking such measures as may be necessary to
make such building temporarily safe, seek a judgment and summary
proceedings for the demolition thereof.
§ 133-7 JACKSON CODE § 133-10
1:388
the following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing): defects
therein increasing the hazards of fire, accident or other calamities; lack
of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities; dilapidation; disrepair;
structural defects; uncleanliness; or failure to comply with the requirements
of the building code or the certificate of occupancy.
§ 133-11. Method of service of complaints or orders.
Complaints or orders issued by the public officer pursuant to this chapter
shall be served upon persons either personally or by registered mail, but
if the whereabouts of such persons is unknown and the same cannot be
ascertained by the public officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence, and
the public officer or his legal agent shall make an affidavit to that effect,
then the serving of such complaint or order upon such persons may be
made by publishing the same once in a newspaper printed and published
in the municipality or, in the absence of such newspaper, in one printed
and published in the county and circulating in the municipality in which
the buildings are located. A copy of such complaint or order shall be duly
recorded or lodged for record with the County Clerk of Ocean County.
§ 133-12. Powers of public officer.
The public officer is hereby authorized to exercise such powers as shall
be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and
provisions of this chapter, including the following powers in addition to
others herein granted:
§ 133-13. Advertisement for bids.
Any action taken using revenues derived from the local property tax shall be
taken only after advertisement for and receipt of bids therefor, unless the
action is necessary to prevent imminent danger to life, limb or property.
A. To investigate the building conditions in the municipality in order to
determine which buildings therein are unfit for human habitation or
occupancy or use.
B. To administer oaths, affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence.
C. To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations,
provided that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the
least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession.
D. To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees as
he deems necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter.
E. To delegate any of his functions and powers under this chapter to such
officers and agents as he may designate.
§ 133-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-14
1:389
§ 133-14. Construal of provisions.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to impair or limit in any way
the power of the municipality to define and declare nuisances and to cause
the removal or abatement, by summary proceedings or otherwise, nor is
anything in this chapter intended to limit the authority of the enforcing
agency or Construction Official under the State Uniform Construction Code
Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.) or any rules or regulations adopted
thereunder.
§ 133-15. Appeals from orders of public officer.
Any person aggrieved by any order issued by a public officer under this
chapter may, within 30 days after the posting and service of such order,
bring an action for injunctive relief to restrain the public officer from
carrying out the provisions of the order and for any other appropriate relief.
The Court may proceed in the action in a summary action or otherwise.
The remedy herein provided shall be exclusive, and no person affected by
an order of the public officer shall be entitled to recover any damages for
action taken pursuant thereto or because of noncompliance by any person
with any order of the public officer.
§ 133-16. Property Maintenance Board.
The Township Committee may establish a board, to be known as the
"Property Maintenance Board," to undertake the duties set forth herein
as the designated agent of the public officer. Such Property Maintenance
Board shall consist of five members, who shall be appointed by the
Township Committee to serve for a term of one year.
Chapter 139
BUILDING STANDARDS, COMMERCIAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Moving of buildings and structures — See Ch.
127.
Unsafe buildings and structures — See Ch.
133.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 162.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 204.
Garbage, rubbish and waste material — See
Ch. 216.
Land use and development regulations — See
Ch. 244.
§ 139-1. Purpose.
The provisions of this chapter shall constitute the standards to guide the
Commercial Building Inspector or his agents in determining the fitness of a
building or occupancy and if the building or occupancy has lawfully existed.
§ 133-14 JACKSON CODE § 139-2
1:390
§ 139-2. Title.
The said code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the "Commercial Building Standards of New Jersey."
§ 139-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY — The department, branch or agency of
this municipality which is authorized by the adopting ordinance to
administer the provisions of this code.
BUILDING — A structure enclosed with exterior walls or fire walls, built,
erected and framed of component structural parts, designed for the housing
shelter, enclosure and support of individual, animals or property of any
kind. When used herein, "building" and "structure" shall be interchangeable
except where the context clearly indicates otherwise.
CERTIFICATE OF CONTINUED OCCUPANCY — Indicating that as a result
of a general inspection of the visible parts of the building, no violations
have been determined to have occurred and no unsafe conditions have been
found, and that the existing use of the building has heretofore lawfully
existed.
CHANGE OF USE — A change from one use to another use in a building or
tenancy or portion thereof.
COMMERCIAL — Of or connected with commerce, made or done for sale or
profit.
EQUIPMENT — Plumbing, heating, electrical, ventilating, air conditioning,
refrigerating and fire prevention/suppression equipment, and elevators,
dumbwaiters, escalators, boilers, pressure vessels and other mechanical
facilities or installations which are related to building services.
GARBAGE — The animal and vegetable and other organic waste resulting
from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
INFESTATIONS — The presence, within or around a building, of any insects,
rodents or other pests.
INSPECTION — To look at carefully; to examine or review officially.
INSPECTOR — One who inspects; official examiner.
MAINTENANCE — The replacement or mending of existing work with
equivalent materials for the purpose of safety, healthfulness and upkeep of
the structure and the adherence to such other standards of upkeep as are
required in the interest of public safety, health and welfare.
OCCUPANT — Any person or persons in actual possession of and occupying
a building, including the owner.
§ 139-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 139-3
1:391
OWNER — Any person properly authorized to exercise powers of or for
an owner of property for purposes of its purchase, sale, use, occupancy or
maintenance.
PRIOR APPROVALS — The necessary certifications or approvals issued,
which are conditions precedent to the issuance of a continuous certificate
of occupancy, as the case may be. Prior approvals shall include, but not be
limited to, the following:
RUBBISH — Includes all combustible and noncombustible waste material,
except garbage.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction for
occupancy, use or ornamentation, whether installed on, above, or below the
surface of a parcel of land.
USE GROUP — The classification of an occupancy.
UTILITIES — Includes electric, gas, heating, water and sewerage services
and equipment therefor.
VACATE — To make vacant.
§ 139-4. Water supply.
Every commercial structure shall be provided with a safe supply of potable
water meeting the standards as set forth in Potable Water Standards as
published by the New Jersey State Department of Health. The source of
such water supply shall be approved by the New Jersey Department of
Health and/or the Ocean County Health Department and pursuant to the
adopted National Standard Plumbing Code as referenced in Section 7.21.5,
entitled "Substitution and Omission of Fixtures." The minimum rate of flow
of hot or cold water issuing from a faucet or fixture shall be in compliance
of the adopted code enforced by the Building Department.
§ 139-5. Facilities.
Every commercial building or occupancy shall provide the following
facilities:
A. Letter from the property owner approving an occupancy.
B. Zoning.
C. Water certification.
D. Sewer certification.
E. Ocean County Health (retail activities).
F. State Health (wholesale activities).
A. Every water closet and lavatory for each structure or occupancy shall
be accessible from within the building without passing through any
other structure or occupancy.
§ 139-3 JACKSON CODE § 139-5
1:392
§ 139-6. Waste materials.
Garbage or other organic waste shall be stored in watertight receptacles of
metal or other approved material. Such receptacles shall be provided with
tight-fitting covers.
§ 139-7. Lighting.
Every commercial building or occupancy shall have and shall have
maintained the approved lighting approved at the time the certificate of
occupancy was issued.
§ 139-8. Ventilation.
Every commercial building or occupancy shall have maintained the
approved ventilation approved at the time the certificate of occupancy was
issued.
§ 139-9. Heating equipment.
Every commercial building or occupancy shall have and shall have
maintained the approved heating equipment approved at the time the
certificate of occupancy was issued. Every heating appliance, except for
electrical, shall be properly vented to a chimney or flue leading to the
outdoors.
§ 139-10. Egress.
Every commercial building or occupancy shall have and shall have
maintained a safe and unobstructed means of egress. Such means of egress
shall lead to a safe and open space at ground level accessible to a street or
approved area.
§ 139-11. Elevators.
Every commercial building or occupancy having an elevator, dumbwaiter,
etc., shall have an annual certification performed by the authorized
authority. Said certification shall be posted and a copy shall be made
available at the time of the inspection.
B. Every plumbing fixture shall be connected to water and sewer systems
approved by the Ocean County Board of Health or the Jackson Township
Municipal Utilities Authority and shall be maintained in good working
condition.
C. Every commercial structure or occupancy shall have water-heating
facilities which are installed and maintained in good and safe working
condition, connected with the hot- water lines required and capable of
delivering water at a minimum temperature that is in compliance with
the adopted code enforced by the Building Department.
§ 139-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 139-12
1:393
§ 139-12. Fire-protection equipment.
§ 139-13. Maintenance standards.
Every commercial building or occupancy shall comply with the following
maintenance standards, as appropriate:
A. Every commercial building or occupancy having fire-protection
equipment shall have an annual certification performed on its fire
alarm, fire extinguishers and sprinkler system by a licensed agency.
Said certification shall be posted, and a copy shall be provided at the
time of the inspection.
B. Every commercial building or occupancy having a kitchen suppression
system shall have a six-month certification performed by a licensed
agency. Said certification shall be posted, and a copy shall be provided
at the time of the inspection.
A. Every foundation, floor, wall, ceiling, door, window, roof or other part of
a building or occupancy shall be kept in good repair and capable of the
use intended by its design, and any exterior part or parts thereof
subject to corrosion or deterioration shall be kept well maintained.
B. Every inside and outside stairway and appurtenance thereto shall be
maintained in a sound condition and in good repair for its intended use
and capable of supporting the load that normal use may cause to be
placed thereto. Every stairway having three or more steps shall be
properly bannistered and safely balustraded as approved when issued a
certificate of occupancy.
C. Every roof, wall, window, exterior door and hatchway shall be free from
holes or leaks that would permit the entrance of water within a dwelling
or be a cause of dampness.
D. Every foundation, floor and wall of a dwelling shall be free from chronic
dampness.
E. Every commercial building or occupancy shall be free from rodents,
vermin and insects. The Ocean County Board of Health may require
rodent or vermin extermination and rodentproofing and
verminproofing.
F. All exterior wiring and lighting shall be in good and operating
condition.
G. All egress and ingress walkways shall be in a safe condition.
H. All associated outbuildings shall be in a safe condition.
I. All common areas shall be inspected for safe and operable condition
(which shall include but not be limited to, boiler rooms, furnace rooms,
storage areas and laundry rooms).
§ 139-12 JACKSON CODE § 139-14
1:394
§ 139-14. Certificate of occupancy.
§ 139-15. Responsibilities of owners and occupants.
The owners and occupants of commercial structures shall have the
following responsibilities and duties:
A. Each commercial building or occupancy shall have been approved and
issued a certificate of occupancy by the Building Department prior to
application for a continuous certificate of occupancy.
B. All terms of the original certificate of occupancy must be met, which
includes the use group, occupant load and live load. If an application
proposes any deviations from the original floor plan that impact the
means of egress, occupant load, live load or dead load, the submission
of a certification prepared by a licensed architect verifying the
occupancy is required. [Amended 1-31-2020 by Ord. No. 01-20]
C. All prior approvals must be submitted with the application for a
continuous certificate of occupancy.
A. No owner or occupant shall cause any services, facilities, equipment or
utilities which are required under this code to be removed from, shut off
or disconnected in any occupied commercial structure, except for such
temporary interruption as may be necessary while actual repairs or
alterations are in the process or during temporary emergencies when
discontinuance of service is authorized by the Construction Official and/
or the Fire Official of the appropriate fire district.
B. The owner of a commercial structure located in an area found by the
Inspector(s) to be infested by rats, insects or other vermin shall carry
out such rat stoppage, vermin proofing or other means of preventing
infestations of said structure as may be required by the Ocean County
Board of Health.
C. No owner shall occupy or lease to an occupant any vacant structure or
part thereof unless it is clean and sanitary.
D. Every owner of a commercial structure shall be responsible for
maintaining in a clean and sanitary condition the common areas of the
structure or premises thereof.
E. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, unless otherwise provided for
under lease agreement, to provide for the orderly maintenance of the
premises. The storage of objects or materials not covered in
Subsections G and H of this section or not otherwise prohibited by
municipal ordinance shall be done in an orderly manner so as to not
constitute a health, safety or fire hazard.
F. Every occupant of a commercial structure shall keep in a clean and
sanitary condition that part of the structure which he occupies and
controls.
§ 139-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 139-15
1:395
§ 139-16. Position of Commercial Building Inspector created.
There is hereby created the position of the Commercial Building Inspector
of the Township. The appointee shall be the Construction Official and
assisted by members of his staff.
§ 139-17. Powers and duties of Commercial Building Inspector.
The Commercial Building Inspector is hereby authorized and empowered
to exercise all powers as may be necessary to carry out and effectuate the
purpose and provisions of this chapter, including the following, in addition
to other powers herein granted:
G. Every occupant of a commercial structure shall dispose of all his/her
garbage and any other organic waste which might provide food for
rodents by placing it in the garbage disposal facilities or garbage
storage receptacles required by § 139-6 of this chapter.
H. Every occupant of a commercial structure shall dispose of his/her
rubbish in a clean, sanitary manner by placing it in the rubbish
containers required by § 139-6 of this chapter.
I. Every occupant of a commercial structure shall be responsible, unless
provided for otherwise under a lease agreement, for the periodic
removal of all garbage and rubbish from the premises each week in
accordance with such regulations of this municipality for the collection
of garbage and rubbish.
J. Every occupant of a commercial structure shall keep all plumbing
fixtures therein in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be
responsible for the exercise of reasonable care in the proper use and
operation thereof.
K. In the absence of a contract or agreement to the contrary, the owner
shall be obliged to provide heat wherever heating facilities are under
the control of the owner or whenever two or more occupancies are
heated by a common facility.
L. The owner shall be responsible for compliance with provisions of this
chapter not specified as the responsibility of the occupants.
M. The owner or occupant shall verify that the proposed occupancy is not a
change of use prior to taking occupancy. Verification shall be made
either through consultation with a licensed architect or verification by
the Construction Code Official or his designee. [Added 1-31-2020 by
Ord. No. 01-20]
A. To inspect commercial structures and/or occupancies of the Township
to determine if a continuous certificate of occupancy should be issued.
B. To administer oaths, affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence.
§ 139-15 JACKSON CODE § 139-17
1:396
§ 139-18. Search warrants.
The Commercial Building Inspector or his agents, upon affidavit, shall apply
to the Judge of the Municipal Court of the Township for a search warrant
setting forth factually the actual conditions and circumstances that provide
a reasonable basis for believing that a nuisance or violation of this chapter
exists on the premises, and if the Municipal Judge is satisfied as to the
matter set forth in the affidavit, he/she may authorize the issuance of a
search warrant permitting access to and inspection of that part of the
premises on which the nuisance or violation may exist. A search warrant
may also be issued for the routine, periodic inspection of all commercial
structures in a given area based upon possible cause, such as passage of
time since the last inspection, the nature of the buildings and structures
involved, observation of deterioration of the general area and the like.
§ 139-19. Continuous certificate of occupancy.
§ 139-20. Reinspection of premises; fees.
Any reinspection of the subject premises caused by lack of compliance with
the provisions of this chapter shall require a fee of $50 for each inspector
(building, electrical, fire or plumbing) to be paid prior to the reinspection.
C. To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations,
provided that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the
least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession.
D. If a notice of violation and orders to terminate have not been complied
with, the Commercial Building Inspector, in addition to any other
available remedies likely to bring about compliance, may request the
legal counsel of the municipality, or of the joint enforcement agency, to
institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain,
correct, or abate such violation or to require the removal or termination
of the unlawful use of the building or structure in violation of the
provisions of this chapter or of the order or direction made pursuant
thereto.
E. To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees as
he deems necessary to carry out the purpose of this chapter.
A. No person shall occupy as owner or occupant or rent to another for
occupancy any commercial structure or unit, for the purposes of
conducting business therein, which does not conform to the provisions
of this chapter as the standard to be used in determining whether a
commercial structure or occupancy is in compliance with its use group,
safe, sanitary and fit for occupancy.
B. The fee to be charged for a continuous certificate of occupancy will be
the sum of $200. This amount will be for each occupancy rented/leased
or resale inspected by the Commercial Building Inspector.
§ 139-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 139-21
1:397
§ 139-21. Service of notice.
Service of notice may be made by personal delivery or by leaving a copy at
the structure or occupancy with a competent member of employment or at
the usual place of abode of such person or by regular and certified mail.
§ 139-22. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions
of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by fine not to exceed
$2,000 or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed
90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment; and each violation of any
of the provisions of this chapter, and each day the same is violated, shall
be deemed and taken to be a separate and distinct offense. The Township
of Jackson may, at its discretion, seek injunctive relief from a court of
competent jurisdiction of the State of New Jersey.
Chapter 145
CAMPGROUNDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 162.
Land use and development regulations — See
Ch. 244.
Mobile homes and trailers — See Ch. 285.
Parks and recreation facilities — See Ch. 304.
Trailers and campsites — See Ch. 400.
Private campgrounds — See Ch. 456.
§ 145-1. License required.
Within the limits of the Township of Jackson, in the County of Ocean, no
person, firm or corporation shall conduct or carry on the business of the
operation of a campgrounds, or work in, occupy or, directly or indirectly in
any manner whatsoever, utilize any place or premises in which is conducted
or carried on a campgrounds, unless and until there shall be granted by
the governing body of said Township, in accordance with the terms of
this chapter, and shall be in force and effect, a license to conduct said
campgrounds for the place and premises in or at which the same shall be
conducted and carried on.
§ 145-2. Application for license; fee.
An application for a license shall be made to the Township Clerk in triplicate
on a form provided for such application by the Township Clerk. An
application must be accompanied by payment to the Township Clerk of
$500 as an application fee, except as otherwise provided, which fee is
nonreturnable unless application is not accepted as provided for
hereinafter. The application will not be accepted by the Township Clerk if
§ 139-21 JACKSON CODE § 145-2
1:398
the limit of licenses, permits and applications has been met as provided
hereinafter. If applicant has not been granted a permit as provided for
hereinafter within one year of the date of its application, then said
application will be deemed to be abandoned and of no further force and
effect.
§ 145-3. Prerequisite to consideration of application.
An application for a license shall only be considered by the Township
Committee after the applicant has received the following approvals and
permits and has complied with Subsection E of this section:
§ 145-4. Investigation by Police Department.
The Police Department of the Township of Jackson shall use the information
required under § 145-3E to aid it in acquiring additional information
concerning the background and good moral character of the aforesaid
stockholders, officers, directors or principals of any applicant. Report of
such information acquired by the Police Department shall be submitted
to the Township Committee and shall be used as a basis for determining
A. Applicant has been issued a special use permit, pursuant to Ordinance
No. 19-6485 of the Township of Jackson, its amendments and
supplements, by the Board of Adjustment.
B. Applicant has secured approvals of the Jackson Township Board of
Health and the Municipal Utilities Authority for the proposed provision
of water supply systems and facilities and sanitary sewerage systems
and has complied with any applicable rules and regulations of the State
Board of Health.
C. Applicant has received Planning Board approval for the site plan of the
proposed campgrounds in accordance with the standards as hereinafter
provided.
D. Applicant has complied with all other applicable ordinances of the
Township of Jackson and statutes of the State of New Jersey.
E. Information required:
(1) Applicant, if a corporation, has submitted to the Township
Committee the following: names and addresses of all stockholders
in such corporation; names and addresses for the preceding five
years of all officers and directors of such corporation; corporate
status report and franchise tax report; or
(2) Applicant, if not a corporation but trading under a trade name, has
submitted a list of all principals, together with their addresses for
the preceding five years.
85.Editor's Note: See now Ch. 244, Land Use and Development Regulations.
§ 145-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-4
1:399
whether consideration of such application would be in the best interests of
the Township of Jackson.
§ 145-5. Hearing; approval.
When the requirements of § 145-3 herein have been complied with,
applicant shall so notify the Township Committee in writing and shall be
granted a hearing by the Township Committee within 60 days of such
notification. The Township Committee shall base its decision on the
application on whether or not applicant has complied with the applicable
provisions of this chapter, and shall not approve any application until the
documents submitted in support of the application have been reviewed
and approved by both the Township Engineer and the Township Attorney.
Approval by the Township Committee shall entitle the applicant to a permit,
said permit to be issued by the Township Clerk. Such approval shall be given
at an open meeting and shall be by resolution.
§ 145-6. Location restrictions. [Amended 8-28-1979 by Ord. No.
43-79]
No permit for a campground shall be issued except for a location in a zone
in which the campgrounds are permitted pursuant to Chapter 244 and for
which a conditional use approval has been granted, or at a location for
which a special reasons variance has been granted, and no license for a
campground shall be granted except where such conditional use approval or
special reasons variance has been granted for such location, or at a location
to which the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-68 (nonconforming uses) apply.
§ 145-7. Time limit for construction.
A. A permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall provide that the applicant
must complete construction of either a section of the proposed
campgrounds or the entire proposed campgrounds, said construction to
be in accordance with the approval site plan and the provisions of this
chapter, within one year of the date of issuance of the permit. If not
completed within the prescribed time as aforesaid, any permit issued
hereunder shall be null and void.
B. The Township Committee may extend the time period of the permit
granted hereunder for a period of not more than six months in the event
that the applicant demonstrates to the Township Committee that the
applicant, through no fault of its own and for justifiable cause, was
unable to complete the subject campgrounds within the time period
allotted for the same in this chapter.
C. In the event that an applicant is issued a permit for a section of the
proposed campgrounds, the applicant must complete this section and
be issued a license for any such section before the applicant will be
issued any additional permits. In any event, the applicant must
complete the entire proposed campgrounds within two years of the
issuance of the first permit hereunder.
§ 145-4 JACKSON CODE § 145-7
1:400
§ 145-8. Building permit for construction.
Upon receipt of a permit from the Township Clerk, the applicant shall
present said permit to the Building Inspector of the Township of Jackson
and pay such fees as may be due the Township for a building permit
for the construction of any and all permanent structures, buildings and
appurtenances, according to the Building Code.86
§ 145-9. Inspection; issuance of license.
§ 145-10. Expiration date of license.
All licenses for campgrounds shall expire on the 30th day of June next
following the date of issuance and shall be valid for a period of one year.
§ 145-11. License renewal.
A renewal of a campgrounds license shall and may be obtained from the
Township Clerk for each succeeding year in which the operation of the
existing campgrounds is sought to be continued, upon the payment to
said Clerk of the operating license fees as provided hereinafter; provided,
however, that no such renewal shall be issued if, in respect to said
campgrounds:
D. The granting of a permit hereunder shall not entitle the applicant to in
any manner operate a campgrounds until the granting of a license
hereunder.
A. Upon completion of a campgrounds in accordance with this chapter, all
applicable standards, the site plan as submitted, the granting of
approval by the State Board of Health and all other applicable
approvals, the applicant shall notify the Township Engineer, who shall
inspect the campgrounds and submit a report to the Township
Committee, who shall consider said report as a basis for directing the
Township Clerk to issue a license.
B. Upon the finding by the Township Committee that the applicant has
completed the campgrounds in accordance with the applicable
standards, the Township Clerk shall be directed to issue a license to the
applicant.
A. There is any notice of an alleged violation issued pursuant to this
chapter outstanding and unresolved.
B. The licensee has not paid to the Township any sum due to the Township
under this chapter.
C. The licensee has failed or refused to correct a condition that would
constitute a violation of this chapter.
86.Editor's Note: See Ch. 162, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 145-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-11
1:401
§ 145-12. Transferability of license.
§ 145-13. Operating license fees.
The annual operating license fee for each campground is hereby fixed at
$200 for up to and including 100 campsites, plus $2 for each campsite in
excess of 100. In the event a new license shall be issued on a date other
than the 30th day of June, the annual fee shall be prorated but in no event
shall be less than $100.
§ 145-14. Permanent camping vehicles unlawful. [Amended
11-29-1982 by Ord. No. 49-82]
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation owning or operating
a camping vehicle located in a campground to remove or cause to have
removed the wheels or any similar transporting device from said vehicle
or to otherwise permanently fix any camping vehicle to the ground in a
manner which would prevent ready removal of such vehicle. In addition, it
shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation owning or operating a
campground to locate or permit the location in said campground of a mobile
home or trailer; provided, however, that in the event there is presently
located within any campground a single mobile home or trailer occupied
by the owner, operator, manager or other employee of the campground for
the purpose of providing security and supervision of said campground, such
mobile home or trailer shall be permitted to remain in the campground
for a period not to exceed five years from the date of adoption of this
provision, provided that all utility connections conform to state, county and
local regulations.
D. The licensee fails to submit any map required under this chapter.
E. The licensee has failed to pay or cause to be paid any taxes upon the
lands covered by such license.
F. The licensee is in violation of any federal, state, county or municipal law
or ordinance or health regulation as a result of any activity or operation
under this chapter.
G. Any operation of the licensee under this chapter endangers the person
or property of adjoining landowners or other persons in the Township.
A. A license or permit shall not be transferable without the permission of
the Township Committee. Any party so desiring to transfer a license or
permit shall notify the Township Committee, whereupon a hearing shall
be held to determine the qualifications of the transferee.
B. In the event such transferee is a corporation of the State of New Jersey
or a foreign corporation licensed to do business in the State of New
Jersey or is operating under a trade name, such transferee must comply
with the requirements of § 145-3E hereinabove.
§ 145-11 JACKSON CODE § 145-15
1:402
§ 145-15. Site plan requirements.
The site plan to be submitted by the applicant to the Jackson Township
Planning Board shall be submitted in the following form and shall contain
the following information:
§ 145-16. Adoption of state sanitary standards; modifications.
A. The site plan shall be prepared by a professional engineer or architect
licensed in the State of New Jersey, and duly signed and sealed. Said
site plan shall be duly certified as to accuracy of everything represented
thereon.
B. The name and title of the applicant, the owner and of the person
preparing the plan maps and accompanying data.
C. Place for the signatures of the Chairman and Secretary of the Planning
Board.
D. Place for the signature of the Township Engineer.
E. Tax Map lot and block number of the premises affected.
F. Date, scale and North arrow.
G. Names, blocks and lots of adjacent property owners and property
within 200 feet of the boundaries of the affected premises.
H. Boundary limit of premises, setback lines, lines of existing easements
and proposed easements.
I. Any proposed regulations or restrictive covenants which would affect
the premises.
J. Detailed plans of all permanent structures.
K. Location of all existing and proposed storm and water drainage
systems.
L. Location of all existing and proposed utilities systems.
M. Location of recreational areas and storage areas.
N. Location of all signs.
O. Location and layout of campsites and parking areas.
P. Topography of existing and proposed grades, with contours taken at
two-foot intervals.
Q. Location of all access and service roads within the affected premises,
showing access points to already existing public roads.
A. Pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 21, P.L. 1946, as amended
(N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.1 et seq.), the provisions of the New Jersey State
§ 145-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-16
1:403
Sanitary Code applicable to campgrounds, promulgated pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 26:1A-7 and more particularly known as the "New Jersey State
Sanitary Code, Chapter XI, Campgrounds," hereinafter known as
"Chapter XI, Campgrounds," are hereby adopted, accepted and
established, except as hereinafter amended and modified, as a standard
to be used as a guide in determining whether campgrounds, as well
as their facilities, are safe, sanitary and fit for human habitation and
rental and shall be used as a standard by the Township Committee to
determine if a license shall issue to an applicant who has been granted
a permit.
B. A copy of Chapter XI, Campgrounds, is annexed to this chapter and
made a part hereof without inclusion of the text thereof herein. Three
copies of Chapter XI, Campgrounds, have been placed on file in the
office of the Clerk of the Township of Jackson upon the introduction of
this chapter and will remain on file in said office for the use and
examination of the public.
C. Chapter XI, Campgrounds, for the purposes of this chapter, is amended
as follows:
(1) Section 3.1 is hereby amended to read:
"3.1. Access roads. Each campground shall be provided with
convenient access for the ingress and egress of traffic from the
public highway. Said access road or roads shall be of sufficient
width to permit the simultaneous movement of traffic in and out
of the campgrounds."
(2) Section 3.2 is hereby amended to read:
"3.2. Service roads.
a. Service roads shall be so located and of such width to provide
convenient and safe movement for all sorts of camping vehicles
and emergency vehicles in and around the camping grounds to
existing roads.
b. There shall be provided sufficient number of access points
to existing roads to permit safe and convenient movement of
traffic."
(3) Section 3.3 is hereby amended to read:
"3.3. Service road and parking area construction.
a. Service roads shall be constructed of an established hard
surface, such as gravel, crushed stone or other comparable
material, and shall be well drained.
b. Service roads shall be maintained in a proper state of repair
and shall be maintained by the owner of the campgrounds.
§ 145-16 JACKSON CODE § 145-16
1:404
c. The establishment of any road in the site plan shall not relieve
the owner of the campgrounds of the responsibility to maintain
same.
d. Parking areas shall be composed or consist of suitable
materials to provide stability."
(4) Section 3.5 is hereby amended to read:
"3.5. Campsite density and area.
a. Density of campsites in a campgrounds shall not exceed an
average of 12 campsites per gross acre.
b. Each campsite (including parking space) shall provide a
minimum of 900 square feet of space.
c. There shall be no more than 300 total campsites within any
single campgrounds."
(5) Section 3.7 is hereby amended to read:
"3.7. Campsite occupancy.
a. Each campsite may accommodate one or more camping units
occupied by persons within the same party in charge in a
camper, but in no case shall a total number of overnight
occupants exceed a density of 72 persons per acre."
(6) Section 3.9 is hereby amended to read: [Amended 12-10-1974 by
Ord. No. 50-74; 12-22-2009 by Ord. No. 41-09]
"3.9. Occupancy limit.
a. Only camping units, as defined in Section 2 of this chapter,
shall be accommodated at a campgrounds.
b. Occupancy of any campsite in a campgrounds shall be from
April 1 to October 31, except as hereinafter provided.
c. From November 1 to March 31, occupancy of any campsite in
a campground shall not be allowed, except by special weekly
permit as provided in Subsection g below.
d. Unoccupied camping units and equipment may be permitted
to remain on any campsite. Said camping units or equipment
may also be stored at a designated storage area on the
campgrounds.
e. Occupancy of any of the campsites in a particular
campgrounds by the same person or persons shall not be
permitted for more than 240 days in any calendar year.
f. In the event of the violation of any of the above provisions, the
campgrounds owner, upon conviction in the Municipal Court,
shall be subject to a fine of up to $25 per day for each day each
such violation occurs or continues.
§ 145-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-16
1:405
g. A licensed campground may offer special weekly permits from
November 1 to March 31 if:
[1] All camping vehicles are registered to a permanent
location, other than the campground, or contractors are
working in or around the area of Jackson Township;
[2] The campground continues to provide utility hookups
which meet the standards required in this chapter; and
[3] A register is maintained current and available for
inspection by the Township.
[4] No permit shall be issued for:
(a) More than three consecutive weeks to any individual
or group of individuals; or
(b) More than a total of five weeks to any individual or
group of individuals in the period November 1 to
March 31."
(7) Chapter XI, Campgrounds, shall be and is hereby amended to add
thereto a new section, designated as 3.11, which shall read:
"3.11. Registration of campers. The owner of each campgrounds
shall maintain a log of each camper who uses the campgrounds'
facilities. The log shall contain:
1. The camper's name and address (from proper identification).
2. The number of people in the party.
3. Make, model and year of vehicle and license number (both
motor vehicle and camping unit).
4. Time and date of arrival and departure."
(8) Section 4.1a is hereby amended to read:
"4.1. General.
a. An adequate supply of potable water capable of supplying a
total capacity of at least 100 gallons per campsite per day shall
be provided at one or more locations in every campgrounds."
(9) Section 5.1b is hereby amended to read:
"5.1. General.
b. Privies and pit-toilets shall not be allowed."
(10) Section 5.4 is hereby deleted.
(11) Section 6.2e shall be amended to read:
§ 145-16 JACKSON CODE § 145-16
1:406
§ 145-17. Board of Health.
Any reference in the aforementioned Chapter XI, Campgrounds, to the
Local Board of Health shall mean the Jackson Township Board of Health.
§ 145-18. Preexisting campgrounds.
Any campgrounds in actual and physical existence at the effective date
of this chapter which came into existence under prior ordinances of the
Township of Jackson, hereinafter referred to as "preexisting campgrounds,"
must, within one year of the effective date of this chapter, comply with all
the provisions of this chapter. Preexisting campgrounds shall be subject
to the applicable standards of prior ordinances, which shall remain in full
force and effect for the aforementioned one-year period for this purpose.
The owner of any such preexisting campgrounds shall make application
for a license within 10 days of the effective date of this chapter and shall
submit with its application a plan of the existing campgrounds, showing
number and location of campsites, sanitary and health facilities, together
with existing roads. Application fee for such preexisting campgrounds shall
be $200.
"Where the requirements of item 1 above cannot be met, the sewer
shall be constructed of cast-iron pipe with mechanical or slipon
joints, or hot-poured lead joints, for a distance of at least 10
feet on either side of the crossing; or other suitable protection,
as approved by the Jackson Township Board of Health, shall be
provided."
(12) Section 10.1 shall be amended to read:
"10.1. General. Electrical systems and equipment installed in
campgrounds shall be subject to the applicable ordinances, rules
and regulations of the Township of Jackson and the County of
Ocean."
(13) Section 11.1 shall be amended to read:
"11.1. Storage and handling of flammable liquids. Storage and
handling of flammable liquids shall be in accordance with the
applicable ordinances of the Township of Jackson governing
same."
(14) Section 12.1 shall be amended to read:
"12.1. Swimming pools. Swimming pools, if provided, shall
conform to the applicable ordinances of the Township of Jackson
governing their construction and operation."
§ 145-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-19
1:407
§ 145-19. Expansion of preexisting campgrounds.
Preexisting campgrounds may expand their capacity to the limit of 300
campsites, provided they comply with all the applicable provisions of this
chapter, and such expansion must be on acreage contiguous to the existing
campgrounds site.
§ 145-20. Monthly inspections. [Amended 2-11-2002 by Ord. No.
6-02]
The Jackson Township Sanitary Inspector and the Jackson Township Code
Enforcement Officer are hereby authorized and directed to make monthly
inspections of all campgrounds located in Jackson Township to determine
if they comply with the provisions of this chapter or prior applicable
ordinances, as the case may be.
§ 145-21. Right of entry for inspections. [Amended 2-11-2002 by
Ord. No. 6-02]
The owner or the person in charge of any campgrounds shall provide free
access to the Jackson Township Sanitary Inspector and Jackson Township
Code Enforcement Officer at all reasonable times for the purpose of
inspecting said campgrounds or for the purpose of any lawful order issued
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 145-22. Notice of violation; hearings; emergency orders.
A. Whenever the Jackson Township Sanitary Inspector or the Jackson
Township Code Enforcement Officer shall determine that there are
reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any
provision of this chapter or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant
thereto, he shall give notice of such alleged violation to the person or
persons responsible therefor as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall:
[Amended 2-11-2002 by Ord. No. 6-02]
(1) Be put in writing;
(2) Include a statement of the reasons why it is being issued;
(3) Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires;
and
(4) Be served upon the owner or his agent, provided that such notice
shall be deemed to be properly served upon such owner or agent if
a copy thereof is served upon him personally, or if a copy thereof is
sent by certified mail to his last known address, or if a copy thereof
is posted in a conspicuous place in or about the campgrounds
affected by the notice, or if he is served with such notice by any
other method authorized or required under the laws of this state.
Such notice may contain an outline of remedial action which, if
taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter and
with rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
§ 145-19 JACKSON CODE § 145-22
1:408
B. Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection
with the enforcement of any provisions of this chapter or any rule or
regulation adopted pursuant thereto may request and shall be granted
a hearing on the matter before the Township Committee, provided such
person shall file in the office of the Township Clerk a written petition
requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the
grounds therefor within 10 days after the day the notice was served.
Upon receipt of such petition, the Township Clerk shall set a time and
place for such hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice
thereof. At such hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to
be heard and to show why such notice should be modified or withdrawn.
The hearing shall be commenced not later than 16 days after the day on
which the petition was filed; provided that, upon application of the
petitioner, the Township Committee may postpone the date of the
hearing for a reasonable time beyond such sixteen-day period if in its
judgment the petitioner has submitted a good and sufficient reason for
such postponement. After such hearing the Township Committee shall
sustain, modify or withdraw the notice, depending upon its findings as
to whether the provisions of this chapter and the rules and regulations
adopted pursuant thereto have been complied with. If the Township
Committee sustains or modifies such notice, it shall be deemed to be an
order, which, at the discretion of the Township Committee, may operate
as a revocation of a campgrounds' license. Any notice served pursuant
to this chapter shall automatically become an order if a written petition
for a hearing is not filed in the office of the Township Clerk within 10
days after such notice is served. The proceedings at such hearing,
including the findings and decision of the Township Committee, shall be
summarized, reduced to writing and entered as a matter of public
record in the office of the Township Clerk. Such record shall also
include a copy of every notice or order issued in connection with the
matter. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Township
Committee may seek relief therefrom in any court of competent
jurisdiction, as provided by the laws of this state.
C. Whenever the Sanitary Inspector of the Township of Jackson or the
Code Enforcement Officer of the Township of Jackson shall find that an
emergency exists which requires immediate action to protect the public
health or safety, he may, without notice or hearing, issue an order
reciting the existence of such an emergency and requiring that such
action be taken as he deems necessary to meet the emergency.
Notwithstanding the other provisions of this chapter, such order shall
be effective immediately. Any person to whom such order is directed
shall comply therewith immediately, but upon petition to the Township
Committee shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible. After such
hearing, depending upon its findings as to whether the provisions of
this chapter and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto
have been complied with, the Township Committee shall continue such
order in effect, modify or revoke it. [Amended 2-11-2002 by Ord. No.
6-02]
§ 145-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-23
1:409
§ 145-23. Authority to make rules and regulations.
The Board of Health of the Township of Jackson is hereby authorized and
empowered to make and adopt such written rules and regulations as it
may deem necessary for the proper enforcement of the provisions of this
chapter; provided, however, that such rules and regulations shall not be in
conflict with the provisions of this chapter nor in any way alter, amend or
supersede any of the provisions thereof. The Board of Health shall file a
certified copy of all rules and regulations which it may adopt in the office of
the Clerk of the Township of Jackson.
§ 145-24. Posting of license certificate and regulations.
The license certificate and a copy of this chapter shall be conspicuously
posted in the office of the campgrounds at all times.87
§ 145-25. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed
$500 or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed 90
days, or by both such fine and imprisonment; and each violation of any
of the provisions of this chapter, and each day the same is violated, shall
be deemed and taken to be a separate and distinct offense. The Township
of Jackson may, at its discretion, seek injunctive relief from a court of
competent jurisdiction of the State of New Jersey.
Chapter 148
CHARITABLE CLOTHING BINS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junk and junk dealers — See Ch. 239.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 310.
Secondhand dealers — See Ch. 338.
§ 148-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, only the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
SOLICITATION or SOLICIT — The request, directly or indirectly, for money,
credit, property, financial assistance, or other thing of any kind or value.
Solicitation shall include, but not be limited to, the use or employment of
canisters, cards, receptacles or similar devices for the collection of money
87.Editor's Note: Original § 46-25, Number of licenses restricted, of the 1972 Code, as
amended, which immediately followed this section, was repealed 1-24-1978 by Ord. No.
3-78.
§ 145-23 JACKSON CODE § 148-1
1:410
or other thing of value. A solicitation shall take place whether or not the
person making the solicitation receives any contribution.
§ 148-2. Permit required for placement and use.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, no person shall
place, use, or employ a donation clothing bin within the Township of Jackson
for solicitation purposes without obtaining a permit from the Zoning Officer,
the form of which shall be approved by the Township Administrator. Permits
are renewable on an annual basis during the month of January.
§ 148-3. Permit fee.
The annual permit fee is $25 per bin and will be used to offset the costs
involved in enforcing this chapter.
§ 148-4. Late fees. [Added 3-8-2011 by Ord. No. 12-11]
§ 148-5. Permit application requirements.
The application for obtaining a permit shall include:
A. Any person or organization applying for a renewal after January 31
shall be assessed an additional late fee of $10 for each charitable bin
permit.
B. Any person or organization applying for a renewal after February 28
shall be assessed an additional late fee of $15 for each charitable bin
permit.
C. Failure to obtain a renewal permit on or before March 31 shall
constitute a violation of this chapter and subject the violator to
penalties in accordance with § 148-10.
A. The location where the bin would be situated, as precisely as possible;
B. The manner in which the person anticipates any clothing or other
donations collected via the bin would be used, sold, or dispersed, and
the method by which the proceeds of collected donations would be
allocated or spent;
C. The name and telephone number of the bona fide office of any person or
entity which may share or profit from any clothing or other donations
collected via the bin, at which such person can be reached during
normal business hours. For the purposes of this subsection, an
answering machine or service unrelated to the person does not
constitute a bona fide office; and
D. Written consent from the property owner to place the bin on his or her
property.
§ 148-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-6
1:411
§ 148-6. Permit renewal application requirements.
In addition to the above application requirements, renewal applications
must include:
§ 148-7. Placement of bins; maintenance.
§ 148-8. Display of certain information required.
The following information shall be clearly and conspicuously displayed on
the exterior of the donation clothing bin:
A. A statement on the manner in which the person has used, sold, or
dispersed any clothing or other donation collected via the bin, the
method by which the proceeds of collected donations have been
allocated or spent, and any changes the person anticipates it may make
in these processes during the period covered by the renewal;
B. The name and telephone number of the bona fide office of any entity
which shared or profited from any clothing or other donations collected
via the bin, and of any entities which may do so during the period
covered by the renewal; and
C. If the location of the bin is to be moved, the new location where the bin
is to be situated, as precisely as possible, and written consent from the
property owner of the new location.
A. Jackson Township shall not grant an application for a permit to place,
use, or employ a donation clothing bin if it determines that the
placement of the bin could constitute a safety hazard. Such hazards
shall include, but not be limited to, the placement of a donation clothing
bin within 100 yards of any place which stores or sells large amounts of
fuel or other flammable liquids or gases; or the placement of a bin
where it interferes with vehicular or pedestrian circulation.
B. The person placing, using or employing a donation clothing bin shall
maintain the bin and the area surrounding the bin such that there shall
be no accumulation of clothing or other donations outside the bin.
A. The permit number and its date of expiration;
B. The name and address of the registered person who owns the bin, and
of any other entity which may share or profit from any clothing or other
donations collected via the bin;
C. The telephone number of the owner's bona fide office, and, if applicable,
the telephone number of the bona fide office of any other entity which
may share or profit from any clothing or other donations collected via
the bin. For the purposes of this subsection, an answering machine or
service unrelated to the person does not constitute a bona fide office;
D. In cases in which any entity other than the person who owns the bin
may share or profit from any clothing or other donations collected via
§ 148-6 JACKSON CODE § 148-8
1:412
§ 148-9. Receipt and investigation of complaints; correction of
violations.
§ 148-10. Violations and penalties.
In addition to any other penalties or remedies authorized by the laws of
this state, any person who violates any provision of this chapter or the
provisions of P.L. 2007, c. 209 (N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.60 et seq.), which results in
seizure of the donation clothing bin shall be:
the bin, a notice, written in a clear and easily understandable manner,
indicating that clothing or other donations collected via the bin, their
proceeds, or both, may be shared with or given entirely to an entity
other than the person who owns the bin, and identifying all such
entities which may share or profit from such donations; and
E. A statement, consistent with the information provided to the Township
in the most recent permit or renewal application, indicating the manner
in which the owner anticipates any clothing or other donations
collected via the bin would be used, sold, or dispersed, and the method
by which the proceeds of collected donations would be allocated or
spent.
A. The Zoning Officer shall receive and investigate, within 30 days, any
complaints from the public about the bin. Whenever it appears to the
Zoning Officer that a person has engaged in or is engaging in any act or
practice in violation of this chapter, the person who placed the bin shall
be issued a warning stating that if the violation is not rectified or a
hearing with the appropriate municipal agency is not requested within
45 days, the bin will be seized or removed at the expense of the person
who placed the bin, and any clothing or other donations collected via
the bin will be sold at public auction or otherwise disposed of. In
addition to any other means used to notify the person who placed the
bin, such warning shall be affixed to the exterior of the bin itself.
B. In the event that the person who placed the bin does not rectify the
violation or request a hearing within 45 days of the posting of the
warning, Jackson Township may seize the bin, remove it, or have it
removed at the expense of the person who placed the bin and sell at
public auction or otherwise dispose of any clothing or other donations
collected via the bin. Any proceeds from the sale of the donations
collected via the bin shall be paid to the Chief Financial Officer of the
Township.
A. Subject to a penalty of up to $20,000 for each violation. The Township
may bring this action in the Jackson Township Municipal Court or the
Superior Court of New Jersey as a summary proceeding under the
Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999, P.L. 1999, c. 274 (N.J.S.A. 2A:58-10
et seq.), and any penalty moneys collected shall be paid to the Chief
Financial Officer of the Township; and
§ 148-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-10
1:413
Chapter 150
CHECKS, RETURNED
§ 150-1. Purpose.
The purpose of the within chapter is to establish a fee for returned checks
to offset the administrative costs involved where the municipality is
inconvenienced by returned or dishonored checks.
§ 150-2. Fee established. [Amended 8-27-2001 by Ord. No. 42-01;
3-11-2002 by Ord. No. 9-02]
There is hereby established a fee of $20 for any returned check that was
previously submitted to the Township for payment of any fee, tax or other
fees of Jackson Township.
Chapter 162
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Moving of buildings and structures — See Ch.
127.
Unsafe buildings and structures — See Ch.
133.
Commercial building standards — See Ch.
139.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 204.
Housing standards — See Ch. 233.
Land use and development regulations — See
Ch. 244.
B. Deemed ineligible to place, use, or employ a donation clothing bin for
solicitation purposes pursuant to this chapter and P.L. 2007, c. 209
(N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.61). A person disqualified from placing, using, or
employing a donation clothing bin by violating the provisions of P.L.
2007, c. 209 (N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.60 et seq.), may apply to the governing
body to have that person's eligibility restored. The governing body may
restore the eligibility of a person who:
(1) Acts within the public interest; and
(2) Demonstrates that he or she made a good faith effort to comply
with the provisions of this chapter and P.L. 2007, c. 209 (N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.60 et seq.), and all other applicable laws and regulations,
or had no fraudulent intentions.
§ 148-10 JACKSON CODE § 150-2
1:414
ARTICLE I
Enforcement of State Code
§ 162-1. Applicability of state provisions; enforcing agency.
The New Jersey State Uniform Construction Code as promulgated by the
Department of Community Affairs shall be applicable to all construction in
the Township of Jackson. The municipal enforcing agency to enforce the
provisions of said code shall be the Division of Inspections.
§ 162-2. Collection of fees.
The fees as set forth in this article shall be collected by the Township of
Jackson.
§ 162-3. Construction permit fees.
The fee for construction permits shall be the sum of the subcode fees listed
in Subsections A through D of § 162-4 and paid before the permit is issued.
§ 162-4. Subcode fees. [Amended 2-10-2015 by Ord. No. 03-15;
4-28-2015 by Ord. No. 10-15; 5-8-2018 by Ord. No. 09-18; 8-13-2019
by Ord. No. 18-19]
Under the provisions of this article, the following fee schedules are
established:
A. Building subcode fees. All fees charged pursuant to this article shall be
rounded in accordance with standard mathematical practices (i.e.,
$105.43 becomes $105, and $198.67 becomes $199).
(1) Plan review.
(a) For the purpose of N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.18(b)1, the plan review fee
shall be 20%.
(b) The minimum plan review fee shall be:
[1] Residential permit: $100.
[2] Commercial permit: $140.
[3] Update residential permit: $50.
[4] Update commercial permit: $70.
(c) Request for permit refund. The amount paid as the plan review
fee will be deducted from the total permit fee upon issuance.
The plan review fee of 20% is nonrefundable.
(d) The State of New Jersey training fee shall be collected at the
rate in effect at the time of the permit issuance per N.J.A.C.
5:23-4.19(b) and shall be rounded to the nearest whole dollar.
§ 162-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 162-4
1:415
(2) New construction. The fee shall be based upon the volume of the
structure.
(a) Volume computation shall be determined by N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.28;
use groups and types of construction are classified and defined
in accordance with the provisions of the code most recently
adopted by the Township's Building Department in accordance
with the Department of Community Affairs, Uniform
Construction Code.
(b) New construction, all use groups (per cubic foot of volume).
[1] All use groups, with the exception of S-1 and S-2: $0.07
per cubic foot of volume.
[2] Use Groups S-1 and S-2: $0.06 per cubic foot of volume.
[3] Minimum fees for Subsection A(2)(b)[1], [2], [3] and [4].
[4] Structures on farms used exclusively for the purpose of
storage of food or grain or sheltering of livestock: $0.02
per cubic foot of volume.
(3) Modular and premanufactured buildings and moving houses.
(a) Basic unit set footing and foundation. Fee is based on the
estimated cost of work. Refer to Subsection A(4)(a)[1], [2] and
[3] for fee per thousand.
(b) Minimum fee: $400.
(4) Renovations, alterations and repairs, etc.
(a) Fees shall be based on the estimated cost of work. (For the
purpose of determining the estimated cost, the applicant shall
submit to the Construction Official such cost data as may be
available, produced by an architect or engineer of record or by
a recognized estimating firm or by the contractor. A bona fide
contractor's bid may be required. The Construction Official
shall make the final decision regarding the estimated cost.)
[1] $1 to $50,000 (per thousand):
[a] Residential: $40.
[b] Commercial: $42.
[2] $50,001 to $100,000 (per thousand):
[a] Residential: add $32.
[b] Commercial: add $34.
[3] Over $100,000 (per thousand):
§ 162-4 JACKSON CODE § 162-4
1:416
[a] Residential: add $29.
[b] Commercial: add $32.
[4] Minimum fee:
[a] Residential permit: $100.
[b] Commercial permit: $140.
[c] Update residential permit: $50.
[d] Update commercial permit: $70.
(b) For the combination of addition and renovation, etc., the sum
of the fees shall be computed separately as additions and
renovations.
(5) Fences.
(a) Per linear foot:
[1] Residential: $0.33.
[2] Commercial: $0.38.
[3] No permit required for fences less than six feet in height
unless serving as a barrier surrounding swimming pools.
(b) Minimum fee:
[1] Residential permit: $100.
[2] Commercial permit: $140.
[3] Update residential permit: $50.
[4] Update commercial permit: $70.
(6) Wood decks.
(a) Per square foot:
[1] Residential: $0.33.
[2] Commercial: $0.38.
[3] Demolition of residential decks shall be $90.
(b) Minimum fee:
[1] Residential permit: $100.
[2] Commercial permit: $140.
[3] Update residential permit: $50.
[4] Update commercial permit: $70.
§ 162-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 162-4
1:417
(7) Retaining walls, bulkheads and docks.
(a) The fee for a retaining wall, bulkhead or dock with a surface
area greater than 550 square feet that is associated with a
Class 3 residential structure shall be $225.
(b) The fee for a retaining wall, bulkhead or dock with a surface
area of 550 square feet or less that is associated with a Class 3
residential structure shall be $115.
(c) The fee for a newly constructed retaining wall, bulkhead or
dock of any size at other than a Class 3 residential structure
shall be based on the cost of the construction; minimum fee:
$105.
(8) Fireplace and masonry chimneys, wood stoves and chimneys.
(a) Minimum fee:
[1] Residential permit: $100.
[2] Commercial permit: $140.
[3] Update residential permit: $50.
[4] Update commercial permit: $70.
(9) Installation of swimming pools/spas.
(a) The fee for an aboveground swimming pool or spa shall be
$155 for a pool with a surface area greater than 550 square
feet; the fee for pools or spas under 550 square feet shall be
$110.
(b) The fee for an in-ground swimming pool or spa shall be $250
for a pool with a surface area greater than 550 square feet; the
fee for pools or spas under 550 square feet shall be $130.
(c) Public/commercial pool or spa shall be $400.
(d) Demolition of above ground pools shall be $90.
(10) Installation of temporary structures and/or other structures for
which volume cannot be computed.
(a) No permit requirement for garden-type utility sheds not
exceeding 200 square feet in area and 10 feet in height.
(b) Structures exceeding 100 square feet in area: fee based on
cubic foot of volume. Refer to Subsection (A)(2)(b)[1] and [2].
(c) Minimum fee:
[1] Residential permit: $100.
[2] Commercial permit: $140.
§ 162-4 JACKSON CODE § 162-4
1:418
[3] Update residential permit: $50.
[4] Update commercial permit: $70.
(d) The fee for tents not meeting the requirements of N.J.A.C.
5:23-2.14.4, and in excess of 900 square feet or more than 30
feet in any dimension, shall be $135. All tents under 900
square feet shall be calculated by volume.
(11) Demolition of structure.
(a) Use Group R, less than 2,000 square feet and 30 feet high or
less shall be $225 for each structure.
(b) All others shall be $350.
(12) The fee for a permit to construct a sign.
(a) Fees for pylon signs shall be $10 per square foot for the first
100 square feet, $7 per square foot for the next 400 square feet
and $4 per square foot thereafter.
(b) Fees for ground signs or wall signs shall be $7 per square foot
for the first 100 square feet, $4.35 per square foot for the next
400 square feet and $3.65 per square foot thereafter.
(c) The minimum fee:
[1] Residential permit: $100.
[2] Commercial permit: $140.
[3] Update residential permit: $50.
[4] Update commercial permit: $70.
(13) Asbestos removal.
(a) Each permit issued: $118.
(b) Each certificate: $28.
(c) Removal of nonfriable asbestos-containing materials, minimum
fee $100.
(14) Lead abatement.
(a) Lead abatement permit: $196.
(b) Lead abatement clearance certificate: $39.
(15) Reroof existing structure other than a detached one or two family
dwelling, minimum fee: $100.
(16) Re-siding existing structure other than a detached one- or twofamily
dwelling, minimum fee: $100.
§ 162-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 162-4
1:419
(17) The fee for plan review of a building for compliance under the
alternate systems and nondepletable energy provisions of the
energy source provisions of the energy subcode shall be $383 for
one- and two-family dwellings (Group R-3 and R-5 of the building
subcode), and for light commercial structures having the indoor
temperature controlled from a single point, and $1,915 for all other
structures.
(18) Building minimum fees.
(a) Residential permit: $100.
(b) Commercial permit: $140.
(c) Update residential permit: $50.
(d) Update commercial permit: $70.
B. Plumbing subcode fees. All fees charged pursuant to this article shall be
rounded in accordance with standard mathematical practices (i.e.,
$105.43 becomes $105, and $198.67 becomes $199).
(1) Fixtures and equipment.
(a) Each fixture, piece of equipment or appliance connected to the
plumbing system and each appliance connected to the gas
piping or oil piping system, except as indicated in Subsection
B(1)(b) below: $20.
(b) Minimum fee:
[1] Residential permit: $100.
[2] Commercial permit: $140.
[3] Update residential permit: $50.
[4] Update commercial permit: $70.
(2) The plumbing subcode fee shall be $20 per fixture or stack fixtures
to be installed. For the purpose of computing the fee, fixtures or
stacks shall include, but not be limited to, all sinks, urinals, water
closets, bathtubs, shower stalls, laundry tubs, floor drains, drinking
fountains, dishwashers, garbage disposals, clothes washers, hotwater
heaters, or smaller devices. In addition, the following
subcode fees shall be paid in connection with the issuance of
permits for the following:
(a) Water service:
[1] The installation or replacement of a water service: $100.
[2] The installation of a second water meter for external use of
an irrigation system:
§ 162-4 JACKSON CODE § 162-4
1:420
[a] Residential: $100.
[b] Commercial: $140.
(b) Sewer service:
[1] The installation or replacement of a sewer service: $100.
(c) Lawn/garden sprinklers:
[1] The attachment of lawn or garden sprinkler system to
potable water system: $100.
(d) Special devices. Installation or replacement of special devices,
grease traps, oil separators, refrigeration units, steam boilers,
hot-water boilers, active solar systems, sewer pumps and
interceptors: (There shall be no fee charge for gas service
entrances.)
[1] Minimum fee:
[a] Residential permit: $100.
[b] Commercial permit: $140.
[c] Update residential permit: $50.
[d] Update commercial permit: $70.
(e) Gas fixtures, attachments for installation of a gas fixture or
fixtures:
[1] Each gas fixture: $20.
[2] Minimum fee:
[a] Residential permit: $100.
[b] Commercial permit: $140.
[c] Update residential permit: $50.
[d] Update commercial permit: $70.
[3] Propane tank placement:
[a] Residential: $125.
[b] Commercial: $150.
[4] Propane underground piping: $30.
(f) Replacement hot-water heaters:
[1] Residential replacement: $90.
[2] Commercial replacement:
§ 162-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 162-4
1:421
[a] Under 100 gallons: $150.
[b] Over 100 gallons: $175.
(g) Septic closure:
[1] Residential: $100.
[2] Commercial: $100 (engineer's certification required).
(h) Oil fixtures:
[1] Each oil fixture: $20.
[2] Minimum fee:
[a] Residential permit: $100.
[b] Commercial permit: $140.
[c] Update residential permit: $50.
[d] Update commercial permit: $70.
[3] Oil underground piping: $30.
(i) Swimming pools, hot tubs and spas:
[1] Bottom drain systems installed: $90.
(j) Testing of backflow preventers:
[1] Minimum fee for each device: $70.
(k) Plumbing minimum fees:
[1] Residential: $100.
[2] Commercial: $140.
(l) A/C evaporator coils: $25.
(m) Fuel tanks. (Reserved.)
(n) Installation of private water main and private sewer main.
[1] Private water main per linear foot: $2.
[2] Private sewer main per linear foot: $2.
C. Electrical subcode fees. All fees charged pursuant to this article shall
be rounded in accordance with standard mathematical practices (i.e.,
$105.43 becomes $105, and $198.67 becomes $199).
(1) Fixtures or receptacles. Receptacles and fixtures shall include
lighting outlets, wall switches, electrical discharge fixtures,
convenience receptacles or similar fixtures, and motors or devices
§ 162-4 JACKSON CODE § 162-4
1:422
of less than one horsepower or one kilowatt, burglar, fire and
communications devices, etc.
(a) Minimum fee:
[1] Residential permit: $100.
[2] Commercial permit: $140.
[3] Update residential permit: $50.
[4] Update commercial permit: $70.
(b) One through 25: $90.
(c) Each additional 25: $19.
(2) Motors or electrical devices (each):
(a) One horsepower to 10 horsepower: $30.
(b) Greater than 10 horsepower to 50 horsepower: $65.
(c) Greater than 50 horsepower to 100 horsepower: $150.
(d) Greater than 100 horsepower to 1,000 horsepower: $640.
(e) Greater than 1,000 horsepower: $640.
(3) Transformers and generators (each):
(a) One kilowatt to 10 kilowatts: $30.
(b) Greater than 10 kilowatts to 45 kilowatts: $65.
(c) Greater than 45 kilowatts to 112.5 kilowatts: $150.
(d) Greater than 112.5 kilowatts: $640.
(4) Service panels, service entrance or subpanel (each):
(a) One to 100 amperes: $80.
(b) From 101 to 200 amperes: $100.
(c) From 201 to 600 amperes: $150.
(d) From 601 to 1,000 amperes: $225.
(e) Greater than 1,000 amperes: $640.
(5) Computing fees. For the purpose of computing these fees, all
motors except those in plug-in appliances shall be counted,
including control equipment, generators, transformers and all
heating, cooking or other devices consuming or generating
electrical current.
§ 162-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 162-4
1:423
(6) Signs: counted in Subsection C(1) and (2), fixtures and devices.
(7) Photovoltaic systems:
(a) Photovoltaic systems one to 50 kilowatts: $100.
(b) Photovoltaic systems 51 to 100 kilowatts: $216.
(c) Photovoltaic systems 101 to 1,000 kilowatts: $640.
(d) Photovoltaic systems per each 1,000 kilowatts: $640.
(e) Photovoltaic systems per each megawatt: $12,000.
(8) Low-voltage systems:
(a) One to 20 devices: $65.
(b) Each additional device: $15.
(9) Installation of second water meter:
(a) Minimum fee:
[1] Residential: $100.
[2] Commercial: $140.
(10) The minimum fee for the annual electrical inspection of each
fountain, swimming pool, spa or hot tub shall be $100.
(11) Pool lighting:
(a) Minimum fee:
[1] Residential permit: $85.
[2] Commercial permit: $100.
[3] Update residential permit: $50.
[4] Update commercial permit: $70.
(12) Commercial signs:
(a) Per sign $100.
(13) Portable pools, hot tubs and spas:
(a) Minimum fee:
[1] Residential permit: $100.
[2] Commercial permit: $140.
D. Fire subcode fee. All fees charged pursuant to this article shall be
rounded in accordance with standard mathematical practices (i.e.,
$105.43 becomes $105, and $198.67 becomes $199).
§ 162-4 JACKSON CODE § 162-4
1:424
(1) Installation of gas-/oil-/wood-/coal-/pellet-fired appliances not
associated with the Plumbing Code.
(a) The fee for a gas- or oil-fired appliance that is not connected to
the plumbing system shall be $75.
(b) Each gas- or oil-fired appliance for commercial construction:
$95.
(c) Installation or replacement of a wood stove, fireplace, solid
fuel appliance, flue or chimney under the fire subcode
responsibility:
[1] Residential: $80.
[2] Commercial: $100.
(d) The fee for each crematorium shall be $511.
(e) The fee for each incinerator shall be $511.
(2) Installation of a residential (R-3, R-4 and R-5) sprinkler system shall
be $250.
(3) Standpipes, for each unit installed, shall be $330.
(4) Installation of suppression systems other than sprinklers (CO2,
gas, foam, dry or wet chemical), for each unit installed, shall be
$140.
(5) Installation of hood, duct and exhaust systems for each unit
installed shall be $130.
(6) Installation of smoke/heat detectors (carbon monoxide detectors,
notification or initiating devices) and/or sprinkler heads:
(a) For single and multiple-station smoke or heat detectors and
fire alarm systems in any one- or two-family dwelling, there
shall be a flat fee of $80 per dwelling unit.
(b) One to 20 heads or devices: $100.
(c) Twenty-one to 100 heads or devices: $175.
(d) One hundred one to 200 heads or devices: $330.
(e) Two hundred one to 400 heads or devices: $840.
(f) Four hundred one to 1,000 heads or devices: $1,160.
(g) One thousand one to 1,500 heads or devices: $1,480.
(h) One thousand five hundred one to 2,000 heads or devices:
$1,790.
§ 162-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 162-4
1:425
(i) Over 2,000 heads or devices: $190 for each additional 100
heads or devices.
(7) Fuel storage tanks, or tanks containing hazardous material as
listed in the current adopted codes by and listed in the Uniform
Construction Code, International Building Codes and adopted
NFPA Codes for residential and commercial for each tank
installation:
(a) Installation, 500 gallons or less: $125.
(b) Installation, 501 to 1,000 gallons: $175.
(c) Installation, 1,001 to 2,500 gallons: $275.
(d) Installation, 2,501 gallons and over: $525.
(e) Removal, residential: $125.
(f) Removal, commercial: $150.
(8) Fire pumps, for each unit installed: $150.
(9) Testing of backflow preventers. Required devices that isolate crossconnections
between the water supply and contaminants that are
toxic are required to be tested annually. Where the backflow
preventer is installed on the water service that is a dedicated fire
line, there shall be a minimum fee assessed for each device in the
amount of $70.
(10) Installation/removal for each fire suppression water storage tank:
(a) Installation, 500 gallons or less: $125.
(b) Installation, 501 to 1,000 gallons: $175.
(c) Installation, 1,001 to 2,500 gallons: $275.
(d) Installation, 2,501 and over: $525.
(e) Removal, residential: $125.
(f) Removal, commercial: $150.
(11) Installation of private fire-suppression water mains, hydrants and
control valves:
(a) Private fire service mains per linear foot: $2.
(b) Fire hydrant, for each unit installed: $75.
(c) Control valves, for each unit installed: $75.
(12) Minimum permit fee:
(a) Residential permit: $100.
§ 162-4 JACKSON CODE § 162-4
1:426
(b) Commercial permit: $140.
(c) Update residential permit: $50.
(d) Update commercial permit: $70.
E. Elevator subcode fees. All elevator review and inspections are under
the jurisdiction of the state and all testing fees shall be in accordance
with those fees established and as amended from time to time under the
New Jersey Administrative Code, N.J.A.C. 5:23-12.6 et seq. All
applications are to be made to the State Elevator Division (Resolution
No. 130R-12, March 27, 2012).
F. Mechanical subcode fees:
(1) Water heater: $90.
(2) Fuel oil piping connections: $30.
(3) Gas piping connections: $30.
(4) Steam boiler: $90.
(5) Hot-water boiler: $90.
(6) Hot-air furnace: $90.
(7) Fuel tanks. (Reserved).
(8) Propane tank placement:
(a) Residential: $125.
(b) Commercial: $150.
(9) Fireplace: $90.
(10) Chimney liner: $90.
(11) Air-conditioning unit: $90.
(12) A/C coil $20.
(13) Backflow preventer: $90.
(14) 06-1 Bulletin: $90.
(15) Permit reinstatement: $50.
(16) Residential minimum fee: $90.
(17) Residential permit update: $50.
(18)Water service: $90.
(19) Sewer service: $90.
§ 162-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 162-4
1:427
G. Certificate of occupancy.
(1) Certificates.
(a) Certificate of occupancy:
[1] Use Groups R-3, R-4 and R-5, per unit: $65.
[2] Use Groups R-1 and R-2, per unit: $75.
[3] All other use groups, per unit: $150.
[4] The fee for issuance of a certificate of occupancy for oneand
two-family dwellings shall be $65 per building. In the
event that such new construction consists of multiplefamily
dwellings or condominiums containing more than
one unit, each to be occupied separately, then each unit
will require a separate inspection and an individual
certificate of occupancy, the fee for which shall be $75 per
unit. The fee for commercial and industrial buildings shall
be 10%, provided that the minimum fee in all cases shall
be $150.
(b) Temporary certificate of occupancy.
[1] The fee for the issuance of a temporary certificate of
occupancy for one- and two-family dwellings shall be $39
per building. In the event that such new construction
consists of multiple-family dwellings or a condominium
containing more than one unit, each to be occupied
separately, then each unit will require a separate
inspection and an individual temporary certificate of
occupancy, the fee for which will be $39 per unit. The fee
for commercial and industrial buildings, or each separate
unit within a building to be occupied, shall be $75.
[2] When the permit applicant chooses to pay the full
certificate of occupancy fee at the time of the initial
issuance of the temporary certificate of occupancy, there
shall be no temporary certificate of occupancy fee for the
initial issuance. If the temporary certificate of occupancy
is renewed, a temporary certificate of occupancy renewal
fee will be charged, even when the certificate of
occupancy fee has been paid in full.
[3] The temporary certificate of occupancy fee and renewal
fee shall be paid prior to the renewal of the temporary
certificate of occupancy: $39.
(c) Continued use certificate.
[1] Work performed by previous home owner(s), which shall
include all detached one and two family dwellings not
§ 162-4 JACKSON CODE § 162-4
1:428
more than three stories in height with a separate means
of egress and multiple single-family townhouses not more
than three stories in height with a separate means of
egress which is therefore requested by the property owner
based on Bulletin 06-1, the fee is based on the type of
work performed and the required subcodes to inspect. All
other residential transfer of ownership or rentals shall
be referred to the Housing Resale Division or Code
Enforcement Division for Rental Properties.
[a] Building: $90.
[b] Electrical: $90.
[c] Fire: $90.
[d] Plumbing: $90.
[2] For all use groups, with the exception of R-3, R-4 and R-5,
that are requested by the owner pursuant to the
requirements set forth by the Uniform Construction Code
as listed under continuous certificate of occupancy and not
associated with Chapter 139, Building Standards,
Commercial: $200.
(d) Change of use: refer to Subsection F(1)(a)[1] through [4],
Certificate of occupancy.
(e) Certificate of approval or compliance: no fee applicable.
(f) Certificate of occupancy motel/hotel. The fee for issuance of a
certificate of occupancy applicable to new construction of a
mote/hotel shall be $60 for each unit.
H. Application for a variation in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.10.
(1) Variation fee.
(a) Class I structures: $821.
(b) Class II and Class III structures: $176.
(c) Resubmission fee, Class I structures: $321.
(d) Resubmission fee, Class II and Class III structures: $91.
I. Reinstatement of lapsed permit.
(1) Lapsed permit fees:
(a) Building: $50.
(b) Electrical: $50.
(c) Fire: $50.
§ 162-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 162-4
1:429
(d) Plumbing: $50.
(e) Elevator: All elevator fees, to include the review and
inspections are under the jurisdiction of the state's Elevator
Division (Resolution No. 130R-12, March 27, 2012).
J. Fee waivers. The waiver of fees for any municipal corporation or any
other organization shall be in accordance with law and shall be deemed
exempt.
K. Administrative fees.
(1) Copies of documents: as adopted by the Township of Jackson
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 47:1A-2.88
(2) Copies of plans, revisions and reapproval of plans: as referenced as
a minimum fee for each subcode (building, fire, plumbing,
electrical and elevator).
(3) There shall be an additional fee of $57 per hour for review of any
amendment or change to a plan that has already been released.
(4) In any case where the Department of Community Affairs conducts
plan review for a local enforcing agency, the fee charged by the
local enforcing agency for inspection services shall be the
percentage balance based on the amount charged for the review of
the fee that would otherwise be determined under the local fee
schedule; (i.e., state review, fee 20%, Township's fee, 80%; state
review fee, 22%, Township's fee, 78%, etc.).
(5) Hourly charges and fees for development-wide inspection of homes
after issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall be in such amount
as reasonable and necessary in order to ascertain whether a
violation exists or verify that any work performed has abated the
violation.
(a) The hourly charge shall be the amount as the hourly charge set
forth at Subsection K(3), Administrative fees, times the number
of hours spent by the code official in determining whether a
violation exists or verifying that any work performed has
abated the violation.
(b) Any appeal of a charge levied by the local enforcing agency
may be made to the County Board of Appeals.
(6) Penalties may be levied by the enforcing agency as follows:
(a) Up to $1,000 per violation for failure or refusal to comply with
any lawful order unless the failure to comply is done with
knowledge that will endanger the life or safety of any person,
in which case the penalty shall be up to $2,000 per violation.
88.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 47:1A-2 was repealed by P.L. 2001, c 404. See now N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5.
§ 162-4 JACKSON CODE § 162-4
1:430
§ 162-5. Waiver of building permit fees.
(b) Up to $2,000 per violation for failure to obtain a required
permit prior to commencing construction or for allowing a
building to be occupied without a certificate of occupancy.
(c) Up to $2,000 per violation for failure to comply with a stopwork
order.
(d) Up to $2,000 per violation for willfully making a false or
misleading written statement, or willfully omitting any
required information or statement in any application or
request for approval.
(e) Up to $500 per violation for any violation not covered under
Subsection K(6)(a) through (d) above.
(7) Notary fees. There shall be no fee for the first item. For each
additional item over the first, a fee will be charged:
(a) Administering an oath or taking an affidavit shall be $0.50.
(b) Taking proof of a deed shall be $1.
(c) Taking all acknowledgments shall be $1.
L. Annual report. The Construction Official shall, with the advice of the
subcode officials, prepare and submit to the Township Council, no later
than November 30, an annual report recommending a fee schedule
based on the operating expenses of the agency, and any other expenses
of the municipality fairly attributable to the enforcement of the State
Uniform Construction Code Act, P.L. 1975, c. 217, as amended.89
A. No person shall be charged a construction permit surcharge fee or
enforcing agency fee for any construction, reconstruction, alteration or
improvement designed and undertaken solely to promote accessibility
by disabled persons to an existing private structure or any of the
facilities contained therein.
B. A disabled person, or a parent or sibling of a disabled person, shall not
be required to pay any municipal fee or charge in order to secure a
construction permit for any construction, reconstruction, alteration or
improvement which promotes accessibility to his or her own living unit.
C. "Disabled person" means a person who has a total and permanent
inability to engage in any substantial gainful activity by reason of any
medically determinable physical or mental impairment, including
blindness, and shall include, but not be limited to, any resident of this
state who is disabled pursuant the Federal Social Security Act (42
U.S.C. § 416) or the Federal Railroad Retirement Act of 1974 (45 U.S.C.
§ 231 et seq.) or is rated as having a sixty-percent disability or higher
89.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
§ 162-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 162-5
1:431
pursuant to any federal law administered by the United States Veterans
Act. For purposes of this section, "blindness" means central visual
acuity of 20/200 or less in the better eye with the use of a corrective
lens. An eye which is accompanied by a limitation in the fields of vision
such that the widest diameter of the visual fields subtends an angle no
greater than 20° shall be considered as having a central visual acuity of
20/200 or less.
D. No county, municipality, or any agency or instrumentality thereof shall
be required to pay any municipal fee or charge in order to secure a
construction permit for the erection or alteration of any public building
or part thereof from the municipality wherein the building may be
located. No erection or alteration of any public building or part thereof
by a county, municipality, school board or any agency or instrumentality
thereof shall be subject to any fee, including any surcharge or training
fee, imposed by any department or agency of state government
pursuant to any law, or rule or regulation, except that nothing
contained in this section shall be interpreted as preventing the
imposition of a fee upon a Board of Education by either the Department
of Education for plan review or by a municipality for the review of plans
submitted.
(1) Municipal agencies shall include the following:
(a) Township-owned and leased structures.
(b) Fire district structures.
(c) Municipal Utilities Authority-owned structures.
(d) Municipal volunteer fire company-owned structures.
(e) Municipal volunteer first aid squad-owned structures.
E. No fee shall be collected for work consequential to a natural disaster
when identified upon the local Emergency Management Coordinator
providing a report based on local, county, state and federal documents.
The Mayor and Council will adopt a specific resolution for said purpose
if the local conditions warrant assistance being provided to the
Township's residents and business owners.
F. Notwithstanding the provisions of the State Uniform Construction Code
Act, P.L. 1975, c. 217 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.) or any rules,
regulations or standards adopted pursuant thereto to the contrary, the
governing body of any municipality which has appointed an enforcing
agency pursuant to the provisions of Section 8 of P.L. 1975, c. 217
(N.J.S.A. 52:27D-126) shall not charge a person who has a serviceconnected
disability declared by the United States Department of
Veterans Affairs, or its successor, to be a total or one-hundred-percent
permanent disability that would entitle them to a property tax
exemption under Section 1 of P.L. 1948, c. 259 (N.J.S.A. 54:4-3.30) or a
spouse, parent, sibling, or guardian of the disabled veteran, a
§ 162-5 JACKSON CODE § 162-5
1:432
§ 162-6. Procedure for issuance of certificate of occupancy.
No single-family dwelling, individual unit of a multifamily dwelling,
commercial unit or structure, industrial unit or structure or other type
of building or structure intended for occupancy or use by any individual
or group of individuals, whether sold or rented, shall be occupied by the
vendee, tenant or lessee, as the case may be, after such sale or rental until
a certificate of occupancy has been secured from the Inspection Division.
construction permit surcharge fee or enforcing agency fee for any
construction, reconstruction, alteration, or improvement designed and
undertaken solely to promote accessibility by the disabled veteran to
his own living unit. [Added 7-26-2016 by Ord. No. 16-16]
G. A municipality that has granted an exemption from a construction
permit surcharge fee or enforcing agency fee pursuant to Subsection F
of this section may apply to the Department of Community Affairs, in
accordance with the rules and regulations promulgated by the
Commissioner of Community Affairs for this purpose, for
reimbursement of those exempt fees. [Added 7-26-2016 by Ord. No.
16-16]
A. Procedures.
(1) Application must first be made to the Inspection Bureau of the
Township of Jackson, on a form to be provided, for a certificate of
occupancy. Inspection shall be made to determine whether there
are any violations of the applicable ordinances of the Township of
Jackson. If no such violation is found, a certificate of occupancy
shall be issued; otherwise, the owner shall be notified in writing of
any such violations found.
(2) The aforesaid inspection shall be made and either a certificate of
occupancy or a notice of violation shall be issued within seven days
from the date of application for a certificate of occupancy. If no
such inspection is accomplished within the aforesaid seven-day
period, the dwelling may be occupied but subject to the right of the
Township to cause said dwelling to be inspected and, if a violation
is found, to cause said premises to be vacated within 10 days'
notice thereof.
B. Standards.
(1) No certificate of occupancy shall be reissued for any single-family
dwelling or for any individual unit of a multifamily dwelling that is
not fit for human habitation, occupancy or use and in full
compliance of the Township of Jackson relating to building, health,
safety or general welfare, and no certificate of occupancy shall be
reissued if there are found on the premises defects causing the
hazard of fire, accident or other calamities, lack of adequate
ventilation, lack of adequate light or sanitary facilities,
§ 162-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 162-6
1:433
dilapidation, disrepair or structural defects or uncleanliness, so as
to tend to cause or spread disease or harbor insects, rodents or
vermin.
(2) The following specific standards shall apply when an inspection is
being made for the issuance of a certificate of occupancy:
(a) The stairways and platforms constituting the entrance to the
dwelling or structure shall be of sturdy construction and shall
have stairway guards and handrails designed to withstand an
applied load of 200 pounds in any direction at any given point.
The stairways shall be free of obstructions and debris.
(b) Interior floors, walls and ceilings shall be clean and free of
cracks, holes or crevices, and any windows shall operate
properly and shall be free of any cracks or broken glass.
(c) Plumbing fixtures in the kitchen and bathroom shall be
structurally sound and shall be sealed so as to prevent the
leaking of moisture.Every bath and toilet room shall be lighted
and ventilated in Accordance with the provisions of the code
most recently adopted by the Township's Building Department
in accordance with the Department of Community Affairs,
Uniform Construction Code.
(d) Fire doors shall be required where a garage area for the
storage of a motor vehicle is attached to a residential dwelling
or dwellings; in addition, overhead garage doors shall be in
proper operating condition and shall be properly strung or
counterbalanced so as to permit their being opened by a lifting
force of 50 pounds or less.
(e) Heating ducts shall be properly installed and shall be tightfitting
with no cracks or openings. Chimneys and vents used in
connection with a heating system shall comply with the
provisions of the code most recently adopted by the Township's
Building Department in accordance with the Department of
Community Affairs, Uniform Construction Code. All heating
systems shall have an emergency on-off switch in a ready
accessible location.
(f) Basements or cellars shall have structurally sound stairways
with railings meeting the requirements of Subsection B(2)(a)
above. Basements and cellars should be free of standing water
or water leaks or cracks in the foundation or flooring. All pipes
for the electrical, heating or plumbing systems shall be
properly supported and free of breaks, cracks or other defects.
Structural girders and floor joists shall be structurally sound.
(g) The premises shall be in a clean and sanitary condition, free of
debris, junk cars or other violations of the Township of Jackson.
§ 162-6 JACKSON CODE § 162-6
1:434
§ 162-7. Additional certifications and information prior to
certificate of occupancy.
In addition, a certificate as required by § 469-8 of the Jackson
Code shall be obtained from the Board of Health.
C. Each residential single-family, two-family and multiple-dwelling unit
shall have installed in each individual dwelling unit an approved smoke
detector system installed pursuant to the Uniform Construction Code
and inspected by the Inspections Division. When actuated, the
detector(s) shall provide an alarm suitable to warn the occupants within
the dwelling unit.
D. Carbon monoxide detectors are required to be installed in all buildings
of Use Groups I-1, R-1, R-2 and in those buildings of Use Group R-3 that
require to be registered with DCA as multiple dwellings. Additional
buildings, pursuant to the Uniform Construction Code, are required to
install carbon monoxide detectors and shall be installed pursuant to
Bulletin No. 99-3 and as referenced in N.J.A.C. 5:23-3.20, 5:23-6.21A,
5:23-6.25A, 5:23-6.26A, 5:23-6.27 and 5:23-6.31.
E. Any person or corporation who shall violate or fail to comply with the
provisions of this section shall be punished by a fine of not more than
$500 or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both.
A. With the request for a building permit to be submitted to the Township
Construction Official, the applicant shall submit to the Zoning Official
with a fee of $125 and two copies of a plan shall be accompanied by a
certification from a New Jersey licensed professional engineer or a New
Jersey licensed land surveyor that the plan has been prepared by him
and includes all of the hereinafter-listed items. Said certification shall
further set forth that the proposed grading and floor elevation that are
proposed will not impact detrimentally upon any adjoining owner; if
applicable, that said plan conforms to an approved site grading plan or,
if not, that the changes are not significant to that approval and will in no
way further impact adjoiners; and further that the plan provides for
proper on-site runoff that is adequate to prevent ponding, severe
erosion and positive drainage away from the proposed building
construction. The map prepared based on survey measurements shall
show:
(1) Property lines and dimensions.
(2) Building dimensions and proposed setback dimensions.
(3) Existing elevations of the lot and street conditions, spot elevations
and contours.
(4) Proposed grades to include proposed contours and sufficient spot
elevations at the building corners, driveway and yard areas to
clearly show impact of new grading.
§ 162-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 162-7
1:435
(5) Finished floor grades of house and garage and description of house
style (ranch, bi-level, two-story) and critical grade that applies.
(6) A description of the building to be constructed, basement, crawl
space or slab construction.
(7) That grading in area of septic design conforms to septic design
parameters, without unsightly mounding.
(8) Where applicable, sufficient information to show any impact on
adjoining properties, if any.
B. Foundation location/as-built plans. Prior to framing, placing the
modular units or prefab units on the foundation as constructed, the
New Jersey licensed professional engineer or New Jersey licensed land
surveyor shall provide a fee of $10 and two copies of a plan showing the
setbacks and elevations as to said as-built foundation and specifically
showing the top-of-block elevation and any other critical floor elevation.
C. As-built survey or final engineering survey.
(1) The plan utilized for a request for a certificate of occupancy,
accompanied by a copy of the initial review plans, shall be reviewed
by the Township Engineer, who will, in addition to said review,
cause an on-site inspection and submit a written report to the
Construction Code Official as to the status of all improvements
required and as-built conditions that conform satisfactorily to the
approved plans or, if not, a report that the same neither satisfies
the intent of the procedural outline herein or does not conform.
(2) Upon completion of all building construction and related required
site improvements, the applicant shall provide to the Construction
Official two copies of as-built plans showing the following on an
overall plan, as well as depicting the same data in a tabulation
format on the plan:
(a) Property lines and dimensions.
(b) Existing elevations of the lot and street conditions, as well as
contours and critical spot elevations.
(c) Finished floor grades of house and garage and description of
house style (ranch, bi-level, two-story) and critical grade that
applies.
(d) All building setbacks.
(e) A description of the building constructed, basement, crawl
space or slab construction.
(f) Where applicable, sufficient information to show any impact on
adjoining properties, if any.
§ 162-7 JACKSON CODE § 162-7
1:436
§ 162-8. Report recommending fee schedule.
The Construction Official shall, with the advice of the subcode officials,
prepare and submit to the Township Committee, biannually, a report
recommending a fee schedule based on the operating expenses of the
agency and any other expenses of the municipality fairly attributable to the
enforcement of the State Uniform Construction Code Act.
§ 162-9. Definitions.
The following words shall have the meanings indicated:
CONTRACTOR — Individuals, companies or corporations that have entered
into an agreement with the State of New Jersey to perform retrofit
installations.
(3) Said as-built plans shall be accompanied by a certificate from the
preparer that the same conforms with the above-listed items and is
substantially in conformance with the plan previously submitted for
initial review for a building permit. (One copy of each of the
previously submitted plans shall be attached.) If alterations have
been made, they should be explained by notes or attachments, with
explanation of how the changes are different from the approval and
have no significant impact on initial intent and not significantly
impacting adjoiners.
(4) The fee for this as-built review shall be $150, which shall be
submitted to the Zoning Official. Any additional required reviews
requested by the Township Engineer or requested by the
Construction Official in accordance with the criteria set forth in the
Uniform Construction Code shall require an additional fee of $75,
which shall be submitted to the Zoning Official. This shall apply to
any rejection of the as-builts submitted or, if an additional review is
required, at the request of the applicant on the same site.
D. The above initial review and as-built foundation shall be accepted by
the Construction Code Official as the basis for meeting conditions
related to site grading without necessity of the Township Engineer's
review and comments.
E. In addition, in no event shall a certificate of occupancy be issued for any
new building or structure or for any renovation or alteration to any
existing building or structure unless such building or structure shall be
in compliance with Article VI of Chapter 372 of this Code.
F. In no event shall a certificate of occupancy be issued for any new
building or structure or for any renovation or alteration of any existing
building or structure until the applicant shall produce a paid receipt or
other proof satisfactory to the Construction Official, on a form
promulgated by the Township, that any debris resulting from such
building renovation or alteration has been disposed of in accordance
with law.
§ 162-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 162-9
1:437
LOW-INCOME — All individuals who occupy a dwelling unit whose
combined income does not exceed 125% of the income poverty guidelines
published annually by the Secretary of the United States Department of
Health and Human Services.
RETROFIT — Consists of cleaning the heating system, sealing the
combustion chamber and installing a flame-retention head burner. It may
include, replacement of the oil filter, installation of a draft regulator,
replacement of the flue pipe and replacement of controls and wiring.
§ 162-9 JACKSON CODE § 162-9
1:438
ARTICLE II
Demolition of Structures
§ 162-10. Conformity required.
On and after the effective date of this article, no person shall demolish any
structure except in conformity with the provisions of this article.
§ 162-11. Permit required.
A. The demolition of any structure or building within the Township of
Jackson shall require a permit pursuant to the State Uniform
Construction Code.
B. A person seeking a permit to demolish a structure or building within the
Township shall apply for a permit at the office of the Construction Code
Official. Such application shall be on a form provided by the
Construction Code Official and shall include:
(1) The name and address of the owner of the building or structure to
be demolished.
(2) The name and address of the contractor that will demolish the
building or structure.
(3) The certificate of insurance for the contractor showing liability
coverage for the contractor and/or owner in the minimum amount
of $300,000.
(4) Statements and releases from the telephone, cable television,
electricity, water, gas, sewer and other utilities that the service
connections and appurtenant equipment has been disconnected,
removed, sealed and/or plugged from the structure or building at
the street line in a safe manner.
(5) Certification from the Construction Code Official that any
cesspools, septic systems, well or other subterranean
improvements and/or utility systems associated with the structure
to be demolished have been removed and/or sealed in accordance
with the guidelines established by the NJDEP, Ocean County Board
of Health and Jackson Township Construction Code Official.
(6) Proof of eradication of rodents and vermin.
(a) Before a demolition permit is issued, the contractor shall carry
out effective measures for the eradication of any rodents and
other vermin that might be caused to seek shelter in a
neighboring building or structure as a result of the demolition
activity. This work shall be performed by licensed, qualified
exterminators having adequate experience in this type of work.
§ 162-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 162-11
1:439
§ 162-12. Permit fee.
The fee for a demolition permit shall be determined in accordance with the
schedule of subcode fees in Chapter 162, Article I, § 162-4A(11).
§ 162-13. Restoration of site.
Within five working days after the demolition is complete, all debris shall
be removed from the site and the excavation resulting from the demolition
shall be filled with clean fill unless an extension of time is granted from
the Construction Code Official. The site shall be kept free from all unsafe
or hazardous conditions by its proper regulation, restoration of established
grade and erection of necessary retaining wall and fences.
§ 162-14. Violations and penalties.
Any person demolishing a structure or building within the Township of
Jackson without first having obtained a permit therefor or who, having
demolished a structure or building, fails to remove the debris or fill any
excavations as provided herein shall be deemed to be in violation of this
article. A violation of any section or subsection of this article shall be
punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000 or not more than 30 days in jail,
or both.
(b) The contractor shall submit a certificate from the exterminator
verifying that the work has been completed prior to the
issuance of the demolition permit.
(c) The contractor shall secure a fumigation permit from the fire
district in which the property is located if the type of
fumigation to be performed requires a permit pursuant to
5.70-2.7(a)4 of the Uniform Fire Code.
(7) Proof that the taxes on the property are current.
§ 162-11 JACKSON CODE § 162-14
1:440
Chapter 166
CRIMINAL OFFENDERS, REGISTRATION OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Background checks — See Ch. 107.
§ 166-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
CONVICTED OFFENDER — Any person who has been convicted of a
violation of the following statutes: N.J.S.A. 2C:14-2, N.J.S.A. 2C:14-3 and
N.J.S.A. 2C:14-4, where the victim of said crime was a person under the age
of 18.
PERMANENT RESIDENT — Any person who resides within the Township of
Jackson for more than 30 days in any one year.
§ 166-2. Registration requirements.
A. Any convicted offender who becomes a permanent resident of the
Township of Jackson shall, upon obtaining permanent residence status
as defined in this chapter, register at the Jackson Township Police
Department. At the time of registration, the following information shall
be supplied by the convicted offender:
(1) Name and social security number.
(2) Street address.
(3) Driver's license number.
(4) Make, model and license plate number of any motor vehicle owned
or used.
(5) Nature of each and every offense committed.
(6) Date of each offense and date of each conviction.
(7) Date of release from custody.
(8) Prosecuting agency for each offense.
(9) Age of victim for each offense.
B. Obligation to provide that information contained in Subsection A shall
be a continuing obligation, and any change in any of the information so
supplied shall be immediately reported to the Jackson Township Police
Department.
§ 162-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 166-3
1:441
§ 166-3. Maintenance of registry.
The Director of Public Safety shall maintain a registry of convicted
offenders containing the information required in § 166-2 of this chapter in
alphabetical order by street name, which registry shall be available at all
times for inspection by any person. A copy of the registry shall also be
forwarded by the Jackson Township Director of Public Safety.
§ 166-4. Violations and penalties.
Unless otherwise provided by law, statute or ordinance, any person charged
with violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, pay a fine not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 and be subject
to imprisonment for any term not exceeding 90 days, or both.
§ 166-5. Construal of provisions.
This chapter shall be liberally construed for the protection of the health,
safety and welfare of the people of this municipality.
Chapter 172
CURFEW
§ 172-1. Purpose.
The purpose of the within chapter is to adopt a statutorily authorized
curfew ordinance with sufficient strength, but appropriate safeguards and
flexibility, to provide for the institution of a curfew that will enhance the
safety and well-being of the citizens of Jackson Township. It is further
the belief of the governing body that children left unsupervised during
the overnight hours may be exposed to the most detrimental influences of
society, including the lure of the rampant drug culture, the potential for
involvement in criminal activity and other potential threats to the physical
and mental health and welfare of children, that would justify governmental
action in furtherance of the protection of one of the most fragile and easily
influenced segments of our society.
§ 172-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
GUARDIAN — A person, other than a parent, to whom legal custody of the
juvenile has been given by court order or who is acting in the place of the
parent or is responsible for the care and welfare of the juvenile.
JUVENILE — An individual who is under the age of 17 years.
KNOWINGLY — Actual knowledge or such total information which a parent
has or should reasonably be expected to have pertaining to the whereabouts
of the juvenile in that guardian's legal custody. It is intended to include
within the meaning of "knowledge" the requirement of neglectful or
§ 166-3 JACKSON CODE § 172-2
1:442
careless parents to maintain a reasonable community standard of parental
responsibility through this objective test as to maintaining knowledge of the
juvenile's whereabouts.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the public has access, including
but not limited to a public street, boardwalk, road, thoroughfare, sidewalk,
bridge, alley, plaza, park, recreation or shopping area, public transportation
facility, vehicle used for public transportation, parking lot or any other
public building, structure or area.
§ 172-3. Prohibitions for juveniles; exceptions.
§ 172-4. Parental responsibility.
Any parent or guardian who knowingly allows an unaccompanied juvenile
to be on any public street or in any public place during the operation of a
curfew and between the hours specified herein, except as allowed herein,
shall be deemed as violating this chapter.
§ 172-5. Apprehension of juvenile; custody.
If any juvenile shall be apprehended for violating the provisions of this
chapter, the Township Police Department shall immediately notify the
parents, guardian or other adult having care and custody of the juvenile
A. A juvenile is prohibited from being on any public street or in any public
place between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to a juvenile when any one
of the following circumstances are present:
(1) When the juvenile is accompanied by a parent or guardian or other
adult having the care and custody of the juvenile.
(2) Where the juvenile is upon a medical emergency, errand or
legitimate business directed by the juvenile's parent or guardian.
(3) When the work time of the juvenile who is gainfully employed
overlaps the curfew hours.
(4) When the juvenile is in attendance at a function sponsored by a
religious or educational organization.
(5) When the juvenile is in attendance as a bona fide student at an
evening school of instruction.
(6) When the juvenile is in attendance at a civic, cultural, recreational
or social function.
(7) When the juvenile shall, as a result of the above exceptions, be
traveling within the Township after the prescribed hour to or from
the juvenile's residence in a direct manner in connection with any
of the above-excepted activities.
§ 172-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-5
1:443
of such arrest and, upon such notification, such parent, guardian or other
adult having care and custody of the juvenile shall immediately provide for
the juvenile's placement in their custody, care and keeping.
§ 172-6. Posting of regulations; knowledge not required.
This chapter shall be posted in the Municipal Building, the public schools
of Jackson Township and in such public or quasi-public places as may be
deemed appropriate so that the public will be constantly informed of the
existence of this order and any actions taken thereunder. This provision
shall not be interpreted to require proof of actual notice or knowledge of
this chapter or any proclamation made pursuant to this chapter in order to
have a conviction for violation of any provision of this chapter.
§ 172-7. Violations and penalties.
Anyone convicted of violating this chapter shall be required to perform
community service of up to 240 hours and may be subject in addition to
a fine of up to $1,000. If both the juvenile and the juvenile's parent or
guardian violate this chapter, they shall be required to perform community
service together.
§ 172-8. Statutory authority; interpretation; enforcement.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.52. It is determined
that the standards established herein are consistent with the findings of fact
made by the Legislature in its legislative history in adopting said legislation.
It is further determined that the language contained herein does establish
clear standards and precise language adequate to apprise a juvenile and
a parent or guardian of that which is unlawful, as well as that which is
adequate to circumscribe the discretion of police officers, so as to prevent
subjective and discriminatory enforcement of this chapter. The Committee
does further determine that juveniles and their parents or guardians are
hereby specifically apprised that both are responsible for the conduct of the
juvenile and that juveniles shall not be allowed to be on public streets or in
public places during the hours between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., unless the
juvenile's parent or guardian is in the physical presence of the juvenile or
unless the juvenile has a particular purpose as set forth in this chapter for
his being in a public street or public place between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 6:00 a.m. Police officers enforcing this chapter shall enforce it against
any and all juveniles who are in or about the public streets, boardwalk or
public places of the Township of Jackson unaccompanied by their parent or
guardian or not having a specific, particular purpose as authorized by this
chapter for their movements in the absence of a parent or guardian.
§ 172-9. Indifference to responsibility.
It shall be no defense to any violation charge hereunder that a guardian was
completely indifferent to the activities or conduct or whereabouts of such
juvenile who is charged with the violation of this chapter.
§ 172-5 JACKSON CODE § 172-9
1:444
Chapter 179
DRUG-FREE ZONES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 86. Smoking — See Ch. 357.
§ 179-1. Approval of map.
In accordance with, and pursuant to, the authority of N.J.S.A. 2C:35-5 and
2C:35-7, the Drug-Free Zone Map produced by John E. Walsh, P.E., under
date of July 22, 1999, as the Jackson Township Municipal Engineer, is
hereby approved and adopted by the Township of Jackson as an official
finding and record of the location and areas within the municipality of
property which are used for school purposes, which are owned by, or leased
to, any elementary or secondary school or school board, and the areas
within 1,000 feet of such school property, and areas within the municipality
of property that comprise any public housing facility, public park or other
public building, and the areas within 500 feet of such public property.
§ 179-2. Map to constitute official record.
The Drug-Free Zone Map approved and adopted pursuant to this chapter
shall continue to constitute an official finding and record as to the location
and boundaries of areas on or within 1,000 feet of property owned by, or
leased to, any elementary or secondary school or school board and areas
on or within 500 feet of property that comprises a public housing facility,
public park or other public building, until such time, if any, that this chapter
shall be amended to reflect any additions or deletions with respect to the
location and boundaries of said properties and the drug-free zones.
§ 179-3. Boundaries.
The school board, or the chief administrative officer in the case of any
private or parochial school, the Board of Trustees of the Public Library,
and any other public or quasi-public agency or body having ownership and/
or control of any public lands within the Township of Jackson shall have
the continued obligation to promptly notify the Municipal Engineer and the
Township Attorney of any changes or contemplated changes in the location
and/or boundaries of any public property which creates a one-thousand-foot
or five-hundred-foot drug-free zone.
§ 179-4. Availability of copies of map.
The Clerk of the Township of Jackson is hereby directed to receive and
to keep on file the original map approved and adopted pursuant to this
chapter, and to provide, at a reasonable cost, a true copy thereof to any
person, agency or court which may, from time to time, request such a copy,
§ 172-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 179-4
1:445
along with a certification that such copy is a true copy of the map approved
and adopted herein and kept on file. It is further directed that a true copy
of such map and of this chapter shall be provided to the County Clerk and
to the Office of the Ocean County Prosecutor.
§ 179-5. Findings.
The following additional matters are hereby determined, declared, recited
and stated:
A. It is understood that the map approved and adopted pursuant to this
chapter was prepared and is intended to be used as evidence in
prosecutions arising under the criminal laws of this state and that,
pursuant to state law, such map shall constitute prima facie evidence of
the following:
(1) The location of elementary and secondary schools within the
municipality.
(2) The boundaries of the real property that is and continues to be used
for school purposes.
(3) Such property is and continues to be used for school purposes.
(4) The location and boundaries of areas which are on, or within, 1,000
feet of such school property.
(5) The location of property that comprises a public housing facility,
public park or other public building within the municipality.
(6) The boundaries of the real property that is and continues to be used
for a public housing facility, public park or other public purpose.
(7) The location and boundaries of areas which are on, or within, 500
feet of such public property.
B. A prosecutor is not precluded from introducing or relying upon any
other evidence or testimony to establish a violation of any offense
defined in the statutes of this state, including the use of a map or
diagram other than the one approved and adopted pursuant to this
chapter. The failure of the map approved and adopted herein to depict
the location and boundaries of any property which is, in fact, used for
school purposes or for public purposes, or which is owned by or leased
to any elementary or secondary school or school board, whether the
absence of such depiction is the result of inadvertent omission or the
result of any changes in the location and boundaries of such property
which have not yet been incorporated into a revised approved map,
shall not be deemed to be an official finding and record that such
property is not owned by or leased to a school or school board, or that
such property is not used for school purposes or a public housing
facility, public park or other public purpose within the municipality.
§ 179-4 JACKSON CODE § 179-5
1:446
Chapter 185
EXCAVATIONS, MINING AND DREDGING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 162.
Land use and development regulations — See
Ch. 244.
Soil erosion and sediment control — See Ch.
363.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 372.
§ 185-1. License required.
No person, firm or corporation shall engage in any operation for the
excavation, mining and removal for commercial use or other disposition
of any sand, gravel, stone or other natural mineral or ore or any one or
combination of them unless or until such license therefor shall have been
issued to such person, firm or corporation at the direction of the Township
Committee.
§ 185-2. Application; licensing.
C. The Municipal Engineer has complied with the statutory requirements
concerning the preparation, approval and adoption of a Drug-Free Zone
Map.
A. An application for a license shall be made to the Township Committee
by delivering such application and supporting documents to the
Township Clerk in triplicate.
B. No application shall be made for a license hereunder and no license
shall be granted under this chapter for any operation or site which
would be in conflict or in noncompliance with any zoning ordinance of
the Township. But in no event shall any license be issued for premises
or operations which are not in the Industrial Zone.
C. No original application for such license shall be made until the
applicant has secured a special use permit under the Zoning
Ordinance90 for the site of the excavation or mining.
D. Application for a license under this chapter shall be accompanied by a
special use permit or a certified copy thereof.
E. Application requirements. Application for a license hereunder shall be
made on a form furnished by the Township, which form shall be
executed by the applicant and submitted with the appropriate license
fee to the Township Clerk. The application shall be accompanied by a
map or maps which indicate the following:
90.Editor's Note: See Ch. 244, Land Use and Development Regulations.
§ 179-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-2
1:447
(1) The exterior lines of the land that will comprise the site of the
mining or other activity hereunder.
(2) The lot and block numbers of all adjoining lands as shown on the
Official Tax Map and an identification of the owners thereof.
(3) The existence of a permanently established bench mark approved
by the Township Engineer.
(4) Contour lines showing elevations of the proposed mining site at the
time of the application.
(5) Contour lines showing elevations as a result of the excavation,
mining and removal of any natural mineral substance.
(6) Limits. The limits of the area to be mined or excavated, which area
shall not in any one license term exceed:
(a) In the case of a license under § 185-10 of this chapter, 400
acres.
(b) In the case of a license under § 185-11 of this chapter, 50 acres
to a depth not to exceed 10 feet below the surface of any
adjoining property or road. These limitations of the area and
depth to be mined shall not apply to any licensee operating
under § 185-10 hereof, but such licensee shall also obtain a
license under § 185-11 hereof. [Amended 6-1-1971 by Ord.
No. 16-71]
(c) In the case of a license under § 185-12 of this chapter, 10 acres.
(7) The location of all access roads and other roads adjoining the
property.
(8) The location of all slopes created by the mining or excavation.
(9) The location of any artificial lakes that may be created as a result of
the mining or excavation.
F. Granting license. If, after examining the application and the
accompanying map or maps as elsewhere herein provided and after
approval of the application and supporting documents by the Township
Engineer and the Township Attorney, and after public hearing and due
consideration of such factors as erosion, drainage, soil fertility, grades
and elevations of adjoining streets and lands, land value and uses,
factors relating to the coordinated, adjusted and harmonious
development of the Township, public health, safety and welfare, the
Township Committee shall be of the opinion that the proposed
operation will not create conditions inimical to public health, safety and
welfare and will not result in the creation of any sharp or dangerous
declivities, pits or depressions, soil erosion or fertility problems or
depressed land values, and will not create any drainage problems or
other conditions of danger, a license, to expire on the following 30th day
§ 185-2 JACKSON CODE § 185-2
1:448
§ 185-3. Expiration.
All licenses issued under this chapter shall expire on April 30 of the year
following the year of issuance, except limited licenses as hereinafter
provided, which shall expire six months from date of issuance.
§ 185-4. Renewal. [Amended 6-1-1971 by Ord. No. 16-71]
A permit issued under this chapter may be renewed annually upon the
following conditions:
of April, may, at the direction of the Township Committee, be granted
under the terms and conditions of this chapter. The first year's license
fee shall be prorated to the remainder of the annual license period,
but in no case shall such prorated fee be less than the sum of $350.
[Amended 6-1-1971 by Ord. No. 16-71]
G. Denying license. In the event that the Township Committee rejects or
refuses to grant an application for a license, it shall deduct from the fee
tendered up to the sum of $350 for any inspection expenses and
services to which the Township has been put in having said map or plan,
application and any other submitted data inspected and checked by its
Township Attorney, Township Engineer and other officials, or any of
them. All such charges shall be and remain municipal funds for the use
and benefit of the Township.
H. Taxes. No application will be considered and no license will be granted
until the owner or applicant, if the applicant is other than the owner,
produces satisfactory proof that all taxes have been paid on the lands
comprising the site of proposed operation, for which a license under
this chapter is sought.
A. If the appropriate annual fee for such permit is tendered with the
application.
B. The applicant has not permitted or suffered a condition which, if
uncorrected, would violate this chapter.
C. The applicant holds a special use permit covering the area to be mined,
excavated or dredged during the renewal period.
D. The applicant submits a map as described in § 185-2 of this chapter to
reflect the proposed changes in elevation and other topography as a
result of the mining or excavation during the renewal period.
E. The applicant has complied with the requirements of this chapter
relating to grading, seeding and reforestation of that area of the site
that has been excavated or mined.
F. All current taxes on the site for which license renewal is sought have
been paid.
§ 185-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-4
1:449
§ 185-5. Time for renewal application.
An applicant for renewal of a license hereunder shall make application for
renewal at a time sufficiently prior to the expiration of the then current
license, but in no case less than 60 days prior thereto, to permit necessary
consideration of the application, supporting documents and necessary
inspection to allow issuance of the renewal license on or before the
expiration of the then current license. The Township Engineer shall submit
his findings to the Township Committee at least 14 days prior to the renewal
date.
§ 185-6. Bond.
G. The applicant is not in violation of any state, county or municipal law or
ordinance or health regulation as a result of any activity or operation
under this chapter.
H. The applicant is in compliance with the requirements for insurance
under § 185-7 of this chapter.
I. The applicant is in compliance with the requirements for a bond under
§ 185-6 of this chapter.
J. All fees and charges due the Township as a result of operations by the
applicant under this chapter have been paid.
A. Prior to the issuance of any license or renewal of a license under this
chapter, the applicant shall submit a bond in an amount approved by
the Township Engineer and the Township Committee wherein the
owner, if not the applicant, and the applicant is principal and a bonding
or insurance company licensed to do business in New Jersey is surety,
the bond to run to the Township of Jackson, in the County of Ocean and
State of New Jersey, its successors or assigns, and to be conditioned for
the faithful performance of the conditions of this chapter.
B. Except as hereinafter provided, the actual amount of the bond of the
applicant shall be such amount as is approved by the Township
Engineer, but in no case less than $1,500 per acre or fraction thereof
for the total number of acres covered by any original or renewal
application. The bond shall be renewed or a new bond given at the time
of application for a renewal license in an amount not less than $1,500
per acre or fraction thereof, multiplied by the total number of acres
covered by the original license, plus the number of acres or fraction
thereof to be covered by the renewal license, less the number of acres
that the Township Engineer has certified have been graded, seeded and
planted with trees, where required, as herein provided.
C. An application for a limited license as hereinafter provided shall be
accompanied by a bond in an amount which, in the opinion of the
Township Committee and the Township Engineer, will enable the
Township to correct any condition that results from the improper use of
§ 185-4 JACKSON CODE § 185-6
1:450
§ 185-7. Insurance.
§ 185-8. Enforcement and inspection.
For the purpose of enforcing this chapter, the Township Engineer and the
Zoning Officer, under the Township Engineer, are designated as enforcing
officers. It shall be the duty of the Township Engineer or the Zoning Officer,
under the supervision of the Township Engineer, or one of them, to make
physical inspections in connection with any application for a license or
renewal license hereunder and, in addition, to make at least one other
physical inspection after an interval of approximately six months.
§ 185-9. License for grading.
such limited license and which amount may be less than the amount
specified in Subsection B hereof.
D. All bonds must be approved by the Township Attorney.
E. In no event shall any licensee or applicant for a license or for renewal of
a license be required to furnish a bond to the Township of Jackson
pursuant to this chapter in an amount in excess of $250,000.
[Amended 6-1-1971 by Ord. No. 16-71]
A. An original application for a license under this chapter, other than a
special license as herein provided, shall be accompanied by a certificate
of public liability insurance, reflecting the issuance to the applicant of a
policy of public liability insurance wherein the Township is named as
coinsured for damages arising out of any activity of the applicant under
a license issued under this chapter, in an amount not less than
$500,000/$1,000,000 for death or bodily injury and $50,000/$100,000
for property damage.
B. An application for a limited license as hereinafter provided need not be
accompanied by a certificate of public liability insurance, but no limited
license shall issue until the applicant or his contractor files with the
Township Clerk evidence that such insurance is in effect in an amount
determined and specified by the Township Engineer, but in no case less
than $20,000/$40,000 for death or bodily injury and $10,000/$20,000
for property damage.
C. No renewal license of any class shall issue unless and until the
applicant files with the Township Clerk a certificate reflecting
continued or renewed public liability insurance in the amount specified
in Subsections A and B hereof.
A. In any area, location or zone in the Township of Jackson where a
landowner, tenant or other interested party desires to remove or
relocate sand, gravel, stone, topsoil or mineral deposits or a
combination of any two or more of them, where the primary purpose of
such removal or relocation is to bring the grade of the parcel or parcels
§ 185-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-9
1:451
of land to the grade desired by the owner, tenant or other interested
party, the landowner, tenant or other interested party may apply to the
Township Committee for a license to grade the parcel or parcels of land
which will be the subject of the application. [Amended 12-5-1972 by
Ord. No. 34-72]
B. The applicant for such license shall file a written application therefor
with the Township Clerk and accompany such application with:
(1) Written consent of the landowner, if the applicant is other than the
landowner.
(2) The necessary fee.
(3) A written statement of the length of time required to complete the
proposed grading of land.
(4) A contour or other map or maps showing the present grade and the
proposed grade of the premises in question, after the operation is
completed, and adjacent public highways and adjacent properties
within 200 feet of the premises in question, using numbers of lots
and blocks as shown on the Official Tax Assessment Map for all
lands referred to thereon. On one or more of said maps or in other
written data accompanying the map or maps, the applicant shall
show any drainage problem which will be caused by the proposed
removal and how such problem will be cured by the landowner or
applicant.
(5) A written statement setting forth what, if anything, is upon the
lands, such as buildings, trees, brush or other things, and how the
applicant proposes to dispose of such things that are on said lands.
C. Where the completed grade of the premises in question will be below
the grade of adjacent lands or lands owned by another, the bank or
banks of the applicant's lands shall be sloped off so as not to endanger
or damage the property of any other person or be dangerous to any
person or any of said lands.
D. No person, firm or corporation shall remove any soil, sand, gravel,
stone or mineral deposit from any parcel of land under this section until
such license is acquired.
E. No such license shall be granted if it is apparent to the Township of
Jackson, its governing body or Engineer that the proposed removal
would create a danger or hazard to any public highway or to the
property of another, create or cause to be likely to cause an unsolved
drainage problem, or create a health or sanitary hazard or a place
where stagnant water may stand.
F. No person, firm or corporation shall fail to promptly remove the
materials from the land for which a license is granted or fail to place the
§ 185-9 JACKSON CODE § 185-9
1:452
§ 185-10. Mining permit.
final grade of said premises in such form and manner as shown in his
or its application.
G. Where the primary purpose of removal of any of the minerals referred
to in this section is to grade the land, under the provisions of this
section, and not to engage in any business requiring a license under
this chapter, no application for a special use permit shall be required.
H. No person, firm or corporation shall:
(1) Use this section as a subterfuge to avoid making application for or
paying for a license as herein otherwise provided for.
(2) Use this section or attempt to use this section as a means to engage
or attempt to engage in any business required to be licensed
hereunder which could not be so licensed because it was not
located in a zone where such business is permitted under the
Zoning Ordinance.91
I. Limited license. The Township Committee, upon recommendation of the
enforcing officer, may waive the requirements of Subsection B(4) of this
section under any one of the conditions set forth in this subsection, and,
upon receipt and consideration of the application, as elsewhere in this
section prescribed, together with the appropriate fee, may direct the
issuance of a limited license. The Township Clerk, upon the compliance
of the applicant with §§ 185-6C and 185-7B of this chapter, shall issue
said limited license:
(1) Where the owner of the building lot or some other interested
person on his or its behalf has secured a valid building permit and
paid the proper fee therefor, which said building permit is in full
force and effect at the time of application hereunder.
(2) Where removal of soil, sand, gravel or stone is reasonably
necessary to the proper construction or use of a proposed addition
to or alteration of an existing building.
(3) Where the grade of the land has been altered by the owner or
lessee by dumping fill to restore the land to its former grade,
provided, that such grade is not lower than the grade of any
abutting street after completion of the proposed grading.
A. Where the purpose of the application for a license or renewal under this
chapter is the recovery of materials, deposits or ores or other mineral
substances, other than sand, gravel, stone or topsoil, for sale and
removal or other commercial disposition thereof, and the applicant
employs one or more bucket dredges, suction dredges, draglines, sluice
washing apparatus or other forms of hydraulic mining, such person,
91.Editor's Note: See Ch. 244, Land Use and Development Regulations.
§ 185-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-10
1:453
§ 185-11. Gravel license.
Where the purpose of the application for a license under this chapter is the
excavation, sale, removal or other commercial disposition of sand, gravel
or stone and the applicant does not contemplate the purpose specified in
§ 185-10 of this chapter or the removal, sale or other disposition of topsoil,
such person, firm or corporation shall obtain from the Township, prior to
the commencement of operations, a sand and gravel license.
§ 185-12. Topsoil license.
Where the purpose of the application for a license under this chapter is
the removal and sale or other disposition of topsoil and the applicant does
not contemplate the purpose or any of them as set forth in §§ 185-10 and
185-11 of this chapter, such person, firm or corporation shall obtain from
the Township, prior to the commencement of operations, a topsoil license.
§ 185-13. License for removal of natural arable topsoil.
A license for the removal of natural arable topsoil from cultivated land in
the Township of Jackson may be issued at the direction of the Township
Committee, subject to the following conditions:
firm or corporation shall obtain from the Township, prior to
commencement of operations, a mining permit.
B. Without limiting its generality, this section comprehends any
commercial operation for the recovery of ilmenite, leucoxene, rutile and
zircon.
C. Where a licensee under this section engages in the sale or other
commercial disposition of such by-products of the mining operation as
sand, gravel or stone or any combination of such or other by-products,
such licensee must also obtain a license under § 185-11 of this chapter
and as also set forth in § 185-2E(6)(b). [Added 6-1-1971 by Ord. No.
16-71]
A. The owner of the land shall make application for such license, which
application shall be in verified form and shall contain the following
information and statements:
(1) A description of the property for which the license is applied by
reference to the Jackson Township Tax Map.
(2) The names of all persons having an interest in the lands for which
such license is applied.
(3) The names and addresses of all persons having liens on said land
and the consent of such lienors to the issuance of the license
applied for.
§ 185-10 JACKSON CODE § 185-13
1:454
§ 185-14. Prohibited activities.
No license shall be granted which will permit a licensee to, and no licensee
shall:
(4) A statement by the applicant that the topsoil to be removed will not
be sold or transported out of the municipal limits of the Township of
Jackson, and that such topsoil shall not, in fact, be so sold or
transported.
B. Inspection of the land and a statement of the Township Engineer that
the removal of such topsoil shall not have any detrimental effect upon
the land and the adjacent properties shall be required. In making such
inspection and statement, the Township Engineer shall take into
consideration the following:
(1) The surface drainage of the site to be mined.
(2) The surface drainage of the adjacent property.
(3) The effect of the mining upon buildings or other improvements
located on the property from which the topsoil shall be mined, as
well as on buildings located on adjacent land.
C. Upon receipt of the report of the Township Engineer, as provided for in
the preceding subsection, the Township Committee, prior to the
issuance of such license, shall determine that there will be no
impairment of convenience, accessibility, health, safety, neighborhood
character or the maintenance of property values in the areas adjacent
to the proposed site.
D. No license shall be issued at the direction of the Township Committee
until the applicant has posted with the Township a bond in an amount to
be determined by the Township Engineer as will insure that there shall
be left on the land arable topsoil in an amount sufficient to cover all
land mined, to a depth of at least four inches, and seeded with rye grass
or other suitable covering crop after completion of the topsoil mined.
E. Any misstatement in the application provided for in Subsection A hereof
or any violation of the conditions under which such license may be
issued or of any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a
reason for revocation of the license by the Township Committee of the
Township of Jackson upon notice to the applicant or owner of the land
and after public hearing before the Township Committee.
A. Engage in the business referred to in §§ 185-10, 185-11 and 185-12
hereof until and unless the owner of the lands from which the soil, sand,
gravel, stone or other natural mineral deposits are proposed to be
removed has signed a written consent thereto and filed same with
Township Clerk, unless the applicant for license is such landowner, in
which event the applicant for a license shall so state. If a consent is
§ 185-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-14
1:455
§ 185-15. Rehabilitation of licensed premises. [Amended 6-1-1971
by Ord. No. 16-71]
required hereunder, it shall accompany the application to be filed with
Township Clerk.
B. Either begin or continue the removal of any of said materials or mineral
deposits from any land until an annual license fee as elsewhere herein
provided has been paid said Township and a license therefor has been
issued and is in full force and effect.
C. Begin to operate and engage in said business until the Township
Engineer has caused or approved the corners and exterior lines of the
licensed premises to be staked and marked so that the licensed area
shall be clearly designated and in order that no public highway or
private property of another shall be endangered by the proposed
business. If the licensee desires, he may have any licensed New Jersey
land surveyor or civil engineer stake and mark said area, provided that
if such procedure is followed, the Township Engineer shall check said
fieldwork and approve the same to the Township Committee.
D. Prevent or attempt to prevent or hinder the Township Committee or any
of its authorized employees or servants from viewing, inspecting and
examining the licensed premises at any reasonable time. [Amended
6-1-1971 by Ord. No. 16-71]
E. Remove or permit to be removed or obliterated any stake or marking. If
any of said stakes or markings are removed or destroyed, the same shall
be promptly replaced by the licensee. The intent of this provision is that
said stakes and markings shall be maintained at all times on the
licensed premises by the licensee.
F. Permit any unattended child or children upon the licensed premises or
do anything to permit or cause the licensed premises to be or continue
as a source of danger to children.
G. Construe his, her or its license to cover any other area or parcel of land
other than the area, lot or parcel described in his license.
H. Bury any old lumber, building materials, debris, cut or dead trees,
stumps, brush or other similar waste on any premises for which a
license hereunder has been issued.
I. Engage in any operations for the mining or removal of any mineral
substance in any area of the Township that is not zoned as industrial,
except for operations conducted under § 185-9 of this chapter.
J. Remove, relocate, sell or otherwise dispose of any soil, sand, gravel,
stone or other natural mineral deposit from any land unless and until all
taxes on said land shall have been paid.
§ 185-14 JACKSON CODE § 185-15
1:456
A. Prior to the commencement of mining operations under any license
issued under this chapter, the overburden or topsoil, where found, shall
be stripped and stockpiled on the premises.
B. A licensee under § 185-11 (but not licensed under §§ 185-10 and 185-11
jointly) or a licensee under § 185-12 hereof shall, within 120 days of the
conclusion of the mining operation, or within 120 days of having mined
to planned grade as shown on the contour map filed in support of the
mining application, or within three years of the issuance of the original
issuance of a license hereunder, whichever shall occur first, regrade,
reseed and reforest said licensed premises as hereinafter provided. In
the event the licensee has not completed its operations on the licensed
premises or mined to planned grade within one year from the issuance
of the original license for the premises in question, then, in that event,
the licensee shall regrade, reseed and reforest such portion or portions
of the licensed area mined, stripped or denuded at the rate of at least
25% of said area mined, stripped or denuded within 120 days of the
expiration date of its original license issued, at least an additional 25%
during the second year following the issuance date of the original
license and the balance on or before the expiration of three years from
the issuance of the original license.
C. The licensee shall respread the overburden or topsoil over the mined
area, including slopes, to a minimum depth of four inches, capable of
supporting a cover crop. This area shall be seeded with rye grass or
other approved cover crop. The land shall also be reforested with a
minimum planting of a mixture of evergreen and deciduous plantings of
at least 50 trees per acre planted on a grid pattern of approximately
thirty-foot centers. The minimum size of the deciduous plantings shall
be no less than 1 1/2 calipers and the evergreen plantings shall not be
less than 18 inches in height. The 50 trees per acre shall consist of not
less than 12 nor more 25 deciduous trees.
D. The licensee shall seed and reforest as herein provided in any area
where mining operations were carried on under a license issued under
Ordinance No. 5-5992 and where a license has been or is presently held
under and by virtue of § 185-10 hereof (even though said licensee
simultaneously holds a license for said premises pursuant to § 185-11
hereof) and where those portions of the mining premises have been
dredged or refilled or partially refilled, or which consist of lakes or
ponds, or which are to be reworked, or are being used for stockpiling of
mineral substances either for refilling or regrading purposes or for
resale by the licensee under §§ 185-10 and/or 185-11 of this chapter, or
pursuant to Ordinance No. 5-59, or which comprise the actual portion
of the premises upon which a dredging operation is being conducted, or
which are being used as a dump for tailings or which have been
stripped in preparation for actual mining operations.
92.Editor's Note: Ord. No. 5-59, adopted 4-1-1959, concerning mining and excavating, was
repealed 4-20-1971 by Ord. No. 10-71, which is included as this chapter.
§ 185-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-15
1:457
E. Such licensee, i.e., a licensee pursuant to § 185-10 hereof, shall be
permitted a maximum working acreage which shall be limited to the
area on which mining operations are actually being actively conducted,
and in no event shall such working acreage exceed 300 acres. Such a
licensee shall rehabilitate at least 1 1/2 acres per year for each and
every new acre that is mined until such time as all outstanding
nonrehabilitated land, except its maximum working acreage allowance,
is rehabilitated. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, all presently
outstanding nonrehabilitated land, except its working acreage
allowance, shall be rehabilitated within three years of the issuance of a
license under § 185-10 hereof.
F. In this connection, a licensee under § 185-10 hereof shall file, in
addition to such other maps as required hereunder, appropriate maps
indicating the area sought to be mined and licensed, its working
acreage requirement and location and its presently outstanding
nonrehabilitated land. Thenceforth, said licensee shall rehabilitate one
acre for each and every new acre mined in a given year. At such time as
such licensee determines to permanently end all its mining operations,
it shall notify the Township Committee and the Township Engineer in
writing of such fact and shall then rehabilitate its working acreage
allowance within a period of three years from the date of the cessation
of its operation at a rate of 100 acres per year until such time as its
entire working acreage is rehabilitated.
G. During the time said licensee is in the process of ending its operations,
the licensee shall be bonded in such amounts and for such period of
time as herein provided.
H. Maintenance bond.
(1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein or elsewhere, a
maintenance bond shall be maintained in full force and effect for a
period of two years beyond the date when the regrading, reseeding
and reforestation has been inspected and approved by the
Township Engineer. The Township Engineer shall inspect the
regrading, reseeding and reforestation within 30 days of receipt by
him of written notice by the licensee or his agent that the
regrading, reseeding and reforestation has been completed and
shall file his report, indicating the acceptance or rejection of same
with the Township Clerk, and send a copy to the licensee or his
agent. If said work is not acceptable to the Township Engineer, he
shall specify in his report the reason therefor, and the licensee shall
proceed forthwith to correct any deficiency. Upon correction of the
deficiency or deficiencies, the licensee or his agent shall notify the
Township Engineer, who shall inspect the corrections and file his
report as herein provided, the Engineer furnishing a copy to the
licensee. The Township Engineer shall file his report and send a
copy thereof to the licensee or his agent within 14 days of his
inspection or reinspection, as the case may be.
§ 185-15 JACKSON CODE § 185-15
1:458
§ 185-16. Grading and settling ponds.
§ 185-17. Distance from street and screening of operations.
§ 185-18. Warning signs and markers.
All persons engaged in the excavating, mining or removal of gravel, stone,
sand or other mineral substances under § 185-11 hereof shall provide
(2) Upon acceptance of the regrading, reseeding and reforestation by
the Township Engineer, the licensee shall furnish a maintenance
bond in accordance herewith.
(3) The maintenance bond shall be in the amount of $500 per acre of
the licensed premises inspected and approved by the Township
Engineer, unless that officer determines that a greater amount will
be necessary to cover the cost of any necessary reseeding or
replanting, in which case the Township Engineer will specify the
amount of the maintenance bond required in his report.
I. Lakes. Wherever feasible, in the opinion of the Township Engineer,
lakes may be permitted to be created on the mined area, provided such
lakes shall be stream fed and adequately drained.
A. Where a license has been issued under this chapter and the licensee
conducts dredging, mining or excavation on lands and in beds of
streams in the Township of Jackson, it is hereby required that the
ground disturbed thereby be leveled and generally graded, when
possible, in a manner reasonably comparable with the natural contour
of the ground prior to such disturbance, and that any watercourse
disturbed by such dredging shall be left in a state conducive to the
public safety, health and general welfare.
B. Settling ponds. Where any licensee operates a dredge and/or conducts
a mining and washing operation where the water disturbed by such
dredging or the water used in such washing operation flows into a
stream in Jackson Township, the licensee shall construct settling ponds
of sufficient capacity and character to reasonably clarify the water used
in the dredging or washing operation before such water flows into any
stream.
A. No licensee shall remove any sand, gravel, stone or other mineral
substance by any means whatsoever below the surface of any street,
road, highway or other thoroughfare at any point nearer said street,
road, highway or other thoroughfare than 50 feet.
B. Screening operations from view. Where residential dwellings are
located within 100 feet of the boundary line of the tract to be mined or
excavated, a screening strip of trees or hedge shall be provided to
screen the mining or excavating operation from the view of such
residential dwellings.
§ 185-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-18
1:459
adequate and suitable dust-free access roads and shall install or cause
to be installed adequate and suitable signs and other devices within 200
feet in either direction of the point where the access road enters any
public road, to warn motorists and other persons of the dangers inherent
in the excavation and removal of gravel, stone, sand and/or other mineral
substances, including the existence of access roads and the use thereof by
trucks and other heavy machinery. There shall also be installed white posts
with reflectors at driveway entrances. In addition to the signs and markers
specified herein, the licensee shall install such additional signs or markers
at such places as the Township Engineer shall direct.
§ 185-19. Roads to be kept clear.
No person engaged in the excavating, mining or removal of gravel, sand
or stone shall allow or permit any dangerous condition to result from
the excavating, mining, removal or transportation of gravel, sand or stone
on any public road or highway. The public roads and highways in close
proximity to the excavation shall be kept clear of loose dirt, gravel, sand
or stones. In the event any violation of this section exists, the Township of
Jackson shall be authorized to rectify the situation, and the cost of such
work will be borne by the applicant.
§ 185-20. Manner of mining or excavation.
§ 185-21. Modification of license. [Amended 6-1-1971 by Ord. No.
16-71]
The Township Committee expressly reserves the right to change, alter,
modify, revoke or refuse to renew any license issued under this chapter at
A. Retention of topsoil. Except as provided in § 185-13 hereof, an
applicant, after having been issued a license under this chapter, shall
not remove the top layer of arable soil to a depth of six inches, but shall
set this soil aside for retention on the premises and shall respread it
over the premises when the gravel, stone or sand has been removed, or
sooner, at the direction of the Township Engineer, pursuant to levels
and contour lines and grades as approved by the Township Committee.
B. Slopes and grades.
(1) The excavation, mining or removal of sand, stone and gravel shall
be conducted in such a manner that there shall be no sharp
declivities, pits or depressions and in such a manner that the area
shall be properly leveled off, cleaned of debris and graded to
conform with the contour lines and grades as approved by the
Township Committee.
(2) The minimum grade of slope shall be not less than three feet
horizontal to one-foot vertical; provided, however, that the grade of
slope shall not commence until the appropriate setback
requirements have been met.
§ 185-18 JACKSON CODE § 185-21
1:460
any time and to regulate the hours of operation after written notice to the
applicant of such intention, including the reasons for such action, and after
an opportunity has been extended to the applicant to be heard at a public
hearing. Nothing herein contained shall be deemed a waiver of any other
recourse available to the Township of Jackson, including any action at law
or equity for damages, fines, penalties or restraints. The standards to be
applied to any action taken or proceedings held by the Township Committee
shall be the same as those set forth in § 185-22 hereof.
§ 185-22. Suspension or revocation of license.
A. A license or limited license issued under this chapter may be suspended
or revoked by the Township Committee:
(1) Where the licensee has not paid to the Township any sum due to the
Township under this chapter.
(2) Where the licensee has failed or refused to correct a condition that
would constitute a violation of this chapter.
(3) Where the licensee conducts a mining, excavation, removal or
relocation of any soil, sand, gravel or stone without having a special
use permit covering the land upon which such operation is or has
been conducted.
(4) Where the licensee fails to submit any map required under this
chapter.
(5) Where the licensee has failed or refused to comply with the
provisions of this chapter relating to grading, seeding or
reforestation.
(6) Where the licensee has failed to pay or caused to be paid any taxes
upon the lands covered by his or its license.
(7) Where the licensee is in violation of any federal, state, county or
municipal law or ordinance or health regulation as a result of any
activity or operation under this chapter.
(8) Where the licensee has failed or refused to comply with the
requirements of § 185-7 of this chapter relating to insurance.
(9) Where the licensee has failed or refused to comply with the
requirements of § 185-6 of this chapter relating to bonding.
(10) Where the licensee has failed or refused to keep and maintain true
and accurate records.
(11) Where any operation of the licensee under this chapter endangers
the person or property of adjoining landowners or other persons in
the Township.
B. Procedure for suspension or revocation of license.
§ 185-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-22
1:461
(1) Whenever any of the enforcement officers of the Township of
Jackson determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe
that there has been a violation of any provision of this chapter or of
a rule or regulation, if any, adopted pursuant thereto, he shall give
notice of such alleged violation to the person or persons
responsible therefor as hereinafter provided.
(a) Such notice shall:
[1] Be put in writing.
[2] Include a statement of the reasons why it is being issued.
[3] Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it
requires.
[4] Be served upon the owner or his agent, provided that such
notice shall be deemed to be properly served upon such
owner or agent if a copy thereof is served upon him
personally, or if a copy thereof is sent by certified mail,
return receipt requested, to the licensee or his agent at the
address set forth in the license application, or if a copy
thereof is posted in a conspicuous place in or about the
licensed premises affected by the notice or if he is served
with such notice by any other method authorized or
required under the laws of this state. [Amended
6-1-1971 by Ord. No. 16-71]
(b) Such notice may contain an outline of remedial action which, if
taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter
and with rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
(2) Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in
connection with the enforcement of any provision of this chapter or
rule or regulation, if any, adopted pursuant thereto may request
and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the Township
Committee, provided such person shall file in the office of the
Township Clerk a written petition requesting such hearing and
setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor within 10
days after the day the notice was served. Upon receipt of such
petition, the Township Clerk shall set a time and place for such
hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice thereof. At such
hearing the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and
to show why such notice should be modified or withdrawn. The
hearing shall be commenced not later than seven days after the day
on which the petition was filed, provided that, upon application of
the petitioner, the Township Committee may postpone the date of
the hearing for a reasonable time beyond such seven-day period if
in its judgment the petitioner has submitted a good and sufficient
reason for such postponement. After such hearing the Township
Committee shall sustain, modify or withdraw the notice, depending
§ 185-22 JACKSON CODE § 185-22
1:462
§ 185-23. Fees and charges.
upon its findings as to whether the provisions of this chapter or the
rules and regulations, if any, adopted pursuant thereto have been
complied with. If the Township Committee sustains or modifies
such notice, it shall be deemed to be an order which, at the
discretion of the Township Committee, may operate as a revocation
of the license. Any notice served pursuant to this chapter shall
automatically become an order if a written petition for a hearing
is not filed in the office of the Township Clerk within 10 days after
such notice is served. The proceedings at such hearing, including
the findings and decision of the Township Committee, shall be
summarized, reduced to writing and entered as a matter of public
record in the office of the Township Clerk. Such record shall also
include a copy of every notice or order issued in connection with
the matter. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Township
Committee may seek relief therefrom in any court of competent
jurisdiction as provided by the laws of the state. [Amended
6-1-1971 by Ord. No. 16-71]
C. Procedure for suspension in emergency.
(1) Whenever the enforcement officers of the Township of Jackson find
that an emergency exists which requires immediate action to
protect the public health or safety, they may, without notice or
hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such an emergency
and requiring that such action be taken as they deem necessary to
meet the emergency. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this
chapter, such order shall be effective immediately. Any person to
whom such order is directed shall comply therewith immediately,
but upon petition to the Township Committee shall be afforded a
hearing as soon as possible. After such hearing, depending upon its
findings as to whether the provisions of this chapter and the rules
and regulations, if any, adopted pursuant thereto have been
complied with, the Township Committee shall continue such order
in effect, modify it or revoke it.
(2) Where a licensee or owner requests in writing a hearing on an
emergency suspension, such hearing shall be held within 72 hours
of the receipt by the Clerk of a written request for such hearing.
[Added 6-1-1971 by Ord. No. 16-71]
A. In those cases where no provision for the amount of the fee to
accompany the application for a license or renewal of a license has been
made, the following shall apply:
(1) For a license under § 185-9 of this chapter:
(a) The sum of $50 where the area involved is two acres or less.
§ 185-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-23
1:463
§ 185-24. Obligations continued.
Any obligation on the part of a licensee holding a license under Ordinance
No. 5-59 or Ordinance No. 3-6993 shall continue, notwithstanding the
enactment of this chapter, until the obligation is discharged. Any bond
given to the Township and any public liability insurance procured to protect
the Township from loss arising out of any operation of the licensee under
Ordinance No. 5-59 or Ordinance No. 3-69 shall be continued or renewed
until such obligation on the part of the licensee is discharged. Among the
obligations of the licensee are the obligations relating to grading, seeding
and reforestation. Any license valid on the date this chapter becomes
(b) The sum of $150 per acre or fraction thereof where the area
involved is more than two acres and less than five acres.
(c) The additional sum of $250 per acre or fraction thereof where
the area involved is more than five acres but less than 10 acres.
(d) The additional sum of $250 per acre or fraction thereof where
the area involved is 10 acres or more.
(e) The sum of $50 where a limited license is sought under
§ 185-9I of this chapter.
(2) For a license under § 185-10 of this chapter, the sum of $1,500.
(3) For a license under § 185-11 of this chapter, the sum of $750.
[Amended 6-1-1971 by Ord. No. 16-71]
(4) For a license under § 185-12 of this chapter, the sum of $500.
[Amended 6-1-1971 by Ord. No. 16-71]
B. Each licensee shall submit to the Township Engineer between the first
and 15th days of July and the first and 15th days of January of each year
a verified statement of the cubic yardage of all materials removed from
the licensed premises for the preceding six-month period. The failure to
submit such verified statement shall immediately effect the suspension
of the license, and the holder thereof shall not conduct any mining
operations on the licensed premises until such suspension has been
lifted by action of the Township Committee. This subsection shall not
apply to operations under § 185-9I(1) and (2) of this chapter.
[Amended 6-1-1971 by Ord. No. 16-71]
C. The fees and other charges collected under this chapter shall not be
used for revenue purposes but shall be used for the purpose of covering
the expenses incurred in the enforcement of the regulations and for
engineering surveys, reports and inspections in connection with this
chapter.
93.Editor's Note: Ord. Nos. 5-59 and 3-69, concerning mining and excavating, were repealed
4-20-1971 by Ord. No. 10-71, which is included as this chapter.
§ 185-23 JACKSON CODE § 185-24
1:464
effective will continue in effect to permit operations under this chapter until
the date such license is due to expire.
§ 185-25. Mailing of provisions to license holders.
The Township Clerk shall mail a copy of this chapter to each holder of a
license issued under Ordinance No. 5-59 or Ordinance No. 3-6994 of this
municipality as soon as this chapter is finally adopted in order that such
persons may know and be advised of the provisions of this chapter.
§ 185-26. Exemptions. [Added 3-28-1983 by Ord. No. 15-83]
Excavations by any person for the purpose of establishment of a pond not
related to any mining activity or other commercial use of the premises
to be excavated are hereby authorized and permitted as an exception to
the provisions of this chapter, where the establishment of location of such
pond has been reviewed, authorized and approved by the Ocean County
Soil Conservation District, where stream encroachment permits and other
permits required by the State of New Jersey or other regulatory agencies
have been obtained, and where the material resulting from such excavation
shall not be removed from the site or otherwise sold or disposed of.
§ 185-27. Violations and penalties; additional remedies.
A. No owner of land in this municipality shall permit and no person shall
conduct operations for the removal, relocation, sale or other disposition
of any sand, stone, gravel, topsoil or other mineral deposits, or any
combination of them, unless and until a license therefor, as herein
described, has been procured in accordance with this chapter. For any
and every violation of any provision of this chapter, the owner, general
agent or contractor of a building or premises where such violation has
been committed or shall exist, and the lessee, tenant, agent, architect,
builder or any other person who causes or suffers or assists in a
violation of this chapter, shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500
or to imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding 90 days,
or both, upon conviction, at the discretion of the Judge before whom
such conviction shall be had. Each and every violation of this chapter
and each day that any provision of this chapter shall have been violated
shall be construed as a separate and distinct violation. [Amended
12-5-1972 by Ord. No. 34-72]
B. Additional rights of Township. In addition to the foregoing, but not
limited thereto, the municipality may institute and maintain a civil
action:
(1) For injunctive and other equitable relief.
94.Editor's Note: Ord. Nos. 5-59 and 3-69, concerning mining and excavating, were repealed
4-20-1971 by Ord. No. 10-71, which is included as this chapter.
§ 185-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-27
1:465
Chapter 189
FERTILIZER APPLICATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use and development regulations — See
Ch. 244.
Soil erosion and sediment control — See Ch.
363.
Toxic and hazardous materials — See Ch. 394.
§ 189-1. Purpose; applicability.
§ 189-2. Findings.
(2) To set aside and invalidate any license made in violation of the
provisions of this chapter or nonconformance therewith, which
license was procured through misrepresentation or falsification in
applying for such license or the failure to file a contour map or
report as required by this chapter.
A. The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the outdoor application of
fertilizer so as to reduce the overall amount of excess nutrients entering
waterways, thereby helping to protect and improve surface water
quality.
B. This chapter shall not apply to fertilizer application on commercial
farms.
A. Elevated levels of nutrients, particularly phosphorous, in surface water
bodies can result in excessive and accelerated growth of algae and
aquatic plants (eutrophication). Excessive plant growth can result in
diurnal variations and extremes in dissolved oxygen and pH, which, in
turn, can be detrimental to aquatic life. As algae and plant materials die
off, the decay process creates a further demand on dissolved oxygen
levels. The presence of excessive plant matter can also restrict use of
the affected water for recreation and water supply.
B. While healthy vegetated areas are protective of water quality by
stabilizing soil and filtering precipitation, when fertilizers are applied to
the land surface improperly or in excess of the needs of target
vegetation, nutrients can be transported by means of stormwater to
nearby waterways, contributing to the problematic growth of excessive
aquatic vegetation. Most soils in New Jersey contain sufficient amounts
of phosphorus to support adequate root growth for established turf.
Over time, it is necessary to replenish available phosphorus, but
generally not at the levels commonly applied. Other target vegetation,
such as vegetable gardens and agricultural/horticultural plantings, will
have a greater need for phosphorus application, as will the repair or
establishment of new lawns or cover vegetation. A soils test and
§ 185-27 JACKSON CODE § 189-2
1:466
§ 189-3. Word usage; definitions.
fertilizer application recommendation geared to the soil and planting
type is the best means to determine the amount of nutrients to apply.
Timing and placement of fertilizer application is also critical to avoid
transport of nutrients to waterways through stormwater runoff.
Fertilizer applied immediately prior to a runoff-producing rainfall,
outside the growing season, or to impervious surfaces, is most likely to
be carried away by means of runoff without accomplishing the desired
objective of supporting target vegetation growth. Therefore, the
management of the type, amount and techniques for fertilizer
application is necessary as one tool to protect water resources.
C. This chapter shall not apply to application of fertilizer on commercial
farms, but improper application of fertilizer on farms would be
problematic as well. Stewardship on the part of commercial farmers is
needed to address this potential source of excess nutrient load to water
bodies. Commercial farmers are expected to implement best
management practices in accordance with conservation management
plans or resource conservation plans developed for the farm by the
Natural Resource Conservation Service, and approved by the Soil
Conservation District Board.
A. For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words,
and their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein, unless
their use in the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different
meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the
present tense include the future, words in the plural number include
the singular number, and words used in the singular number include
the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely
directory.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUFFER — The land area, 25 feet in width, adjacent to any water body.
COMMERCIAL FARM — A farm management unit producing
agricultural or horticultural products worth $2,500 or more annually.
FERTILIZER — A fertilizer material, mixed fertilizer or any other
substance containing one or more recognized plant nutrients, which is
used for its plant nutrient content, which is designed for use or claimed
to have value in promoting plant growth, and which is sold, offered for
sale, or intended for sale.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer
of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water. This
term shall be used to include any highway, street, sidewalk, parking lot,
driveway, or other material that prevents infiltration of water into the
soil.
§ 189-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-3
1:467
§ 189-4. Prohibited conduct.
No person may do any of the following:
§ 189-5. Application of phosphorus fertilizer restricted; exceptions.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PHOSPHORUS FERTILIZER — Any fertilizer that contains phosphorus,
expressed as P2O5, with a guaranteed analysis of greater than zero,
except that it shall not be considered to include animal (including
human) or vegetable manures, agricultural liming materials, or wood
ashes that have not been amended to increase their nutrient content.
SOILS TEST — A technical analysis of soil conducted by an accredited
soil-testing laboratory following the protocol for such a test established
by Rutgers Cooperative Research and Extension.
WATER BODY — A surface water feature, such as a lake, river, stream,
creek, pond, lagoon, bay or estuary.
A. Apply fertilizer when a runoff-producing rainfall is occurring or
predicted and/or when soils are saturated and a potential for fertilizer
movement off site exists.
B. Apply fertilizer to an impervious surface. Fertilizer inadvertently
applied to an impervious surface must be swept or blown back into the
target surface or returned to either its original or another appropriate
container for reuse.
C. Apply fertilizer within the buffer of any water body.
D. Apply fertilizer more than 15 days prior to the recognized growing
season in Zone 6b (northeastern, central and part of southern New
Jersey) March 1 to November 15, as identified by the USDA Plant
Hardiness Zones, found in the Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control in New Jersey, July 1999.
A. No person may do the following: apply phosphorus fertilizer in outdoor
areas except as demonstrated to be needed for the specific soils and
target vegetation in accordance with a soils test and the associated
annual fertilizer recommendation issued by Rutgers Cooperative
Research and Extension.
B. Exceptions.
(1) Application of phosphorus fertilizer needed for:
(a) Establishing vegetation for the first time, such as after land
disturbance, provided that the application is in accordance
with the requirements established under the Soil Erosion and
§ 189-3 JACKSON CODE § 189-5
1:468
§ 189-6. Enforcement.
All provisions contained within this chapter shall at all times be subject
to enforcement by the Police Department of the Township of Jackson and
by the Jackson Township Code Enforcement Officer, or his or her duly
designated agent of the Township of Jackson.
§ 189-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine in a
minimum amount of $100 or imprisonment in the county jail for a term not
to exceed 90 days, or both, or community service as ordered by the court,
which shall not reduce the fine imposed by more than 50%. Each and every
violation of this chapter, or each day that the provisions of this chapter are
violated, shall be construed as a separate and distinct violation thereof.
Chapter 190
FINGERPRINTING
§ 190-1. Fingerprinting services.
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and
implementing rules.
(b) Reestablishing or repairing a turf area.
(2) Application of phosphorus fertilizer that delivers liquid or granular
fertilizer under the soils surface, directly to the feeder roots.
(3) Application of phosphorus fertilizer to residential container
plantings, flowerbeds, or vegetable gardens.
A. Qualified members of the Police Department may perform
fingerprinting services for the residents of the Township of Jackson
upon request.
B. Hours.
(1) Fingerprinting services shall be available by appointment during
regular business hours, Monday through Friday, 8:30 a.m. through
4:30 p.m.
(2) Fingerprinting services shall be available Wednesday evenings,
4:30 p.m. through 7:00 p.m. by appointment only. Additional
evening appointment times may be available, at the discretion of
the Chief of Police.
C. Fees.
§ 189-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-1
1:469
Chapter 192
FIREARMS AND OTHER WEAPONS
§ 192-1. Prohibition; definitions.
No person shall have in his or her possession a loaded firearm or nocked
arrow for any purpose while within 450 feet of any dwelling, business
or school or public playground. For purposes of this chapter, the term
"firearm" shall be as defined in Title 2C of the New Jersey Statutes.
§ 192-2. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to apply to:
§ 192-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any one or more sections of this chapter shall be
subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 for each separate offense and/or
confinement in the Ocean County Jail for a period of not more than 90 days.
§ 192-4. Fees. [Added 2-9-2004 by Ord. No. 10-04]
Chapter 198
FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 204.
(1) The fee for the fingerprinting service for Township residents is $5/
per fingerprint card and $7.50/per fingerprint card for
nonresidents.
(2) No fee shall be charged for fingerprinting services when they are
required for the issuance of licenses or permits to be issued by the
Township.
A. Persons authorized to carry firearms by N.J.S.A. 2C:39-6.
B. The owner or a lessee of property, or person specifically authorized by
such owner or lessee, in writing, while on such property,
notwithstanding proximity to said property owner's dwelling.
A. Firearms identification card: $5.
B. Firearms permit: $2.
§ 190-1 JACKSON CODE § 198-1
1:470
§ 198-1. Legislative authority.
Pursuant to the authority of and provisions set forth in the Public Laws
of 1978, Chapter 184,95 no insurance company authorized to issue fire
insurance policies in this state shall pay any claims in excess of $2,500 on
any property located within the Township of Jackson, unless or until the
insured person submits an official certificate of search for municipal liens
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-12, certifying that all taxes, assessments or other
municipal liens or charges levied and assessed and due and payable against
said property have been paid, or the Township of Jackson submits to said
insurance company a certified copy of a resolution adopted pursuant to
§ 198-6 of this chapter.
§ 198-2. Requirements prior to payment of claims.
The Township of Jackson hereby prohibits the payment to a claimant by
any insurance company of any claim in excess of $2,500 for fire damages
on any real property located within the Township of Jackson pursuant to
any fire insurance policy issued or renewed after the effective date of this
chapter and after the filing of this chapter with the State Commissioner
of Insurance, until such time as all taxes and assessments and all other
municipal liens or charges, due and payable, appearing on the official
certificate of search shall have been paid, either by the owner of such
property or by the insurance company pursuant to the provisions of § 198-5
of this chapter, or the Township of Jackson submits to the insurance
company a copy of a resolution adopted pursuant to § 198-6 of this chapter.
§ 198-3. Filing of changes with State Commissioner of Insurance.
It is hereby provided that no change in this chapter shall take effect until
filed with the Commissioner of Insurance of the State of New Jersey.
§ 198-4. Alteration of certificate of search.
The official certificate of search may, from time to time, be altered by
the bonded official responsible for preparing such certificates in order to
correct any errors or omissions or to add any municipal liens or related
charges due and payable subsequent to the preparation of the official
certificate.
§ 198-5. Payment of liens by insurance company; appeals on
amount of liens.
Unless a resolution is received in accordance with § 198-6 of this chapter
by an insurance company writing fire insurance policies in the Township
of Jackson, such insurance company is hereby authorized and required,
prior to the payment of any claims for fire damages in excess of $2,500,
to pay to the Township of Jackson the amount of the liens appearing on
the official certificate and such other recorded liens or related charges
95.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 17:36-8 et seq.
§ 198-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-5
1:471
as may be certified to the insurance company; provided, however, that
if an appeal is taken on the amount of any lien or charge, other than
an appeal on the assessed valuation of real property pursuant to N.J.S.A.
54:3-21, the insurance company shall withhold 75% of the full amount of
the lien or charge being contested pending termination of all proceedings,
at which time such moneys and all interest accruing thereon at a rate
paid on interest-bearing accounts in banking institutions or savings-andloan
associations in the state shall be disbursed in accordance with the final
order or judgment of the court.
§ 198-6. Agreement with owner to pay liens in installments.
The Township Committee of the Township of Jackson may enter into an
agreement with the owner of any fire-damaged property authorizing such
owner to pay in full all delinquent taxes, assessments or other municipal
liens by installments pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-19, or for the redemption of
the tax sale lien by installment payments pursuant to Article 7 of Chapter 5
of Title 54 of the New Jersey Revised Statutes,96 if the Township Committee
is satisfied that the claim for fire damages is to be used to restore and
improve the fire-damaged property. An insurance company receiving a
certified copy of a resolution of agreement from the Township Committee of
the Township of Jackson is authorized to make full payment on the claim to
the insured person.
§ 198-7. Priority of claims.
A claim of the Township of Jackson made in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter and the aforesaid Public Laws of 1978, Chapter 184,97 shall
be paramount to any other claims on the proceeds of the fire insurance
policy, except the claim of a holder of a mortgage on the fire-damaged
property, where the fire insurance policy at the time of the loss listed the
mortgagee as a named insured, in which event the claim of the mortgagee
to the proceeds shall be paramount to the municipal lien under this chapter
and aforesaid public law only to the extent of the amount due and payable
to the mortgagee under the mortgage contract.
§ 198-8. Construal of provisions.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed:
A. To obligate an insurance company for any amount in excess of the value
of the fire insurance policy of the property or the amount of the liability
of the insurance company thereunder.
B. Except as provided in the case of appeals under § 198-5 of this chapter,
to obligate the insurance company for any liens not appearing on the
official certificate or any certified changes submitted by the bonded
official.
96.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 54:5-65 et seq.
97.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 17:36-8 et seq.
§ 198-5 JACKSON CODE § 198-8
1:472
§ 198-9. Applicability.
In addition to the standard provisions for fire insurance policies set forth
in Section 6 of P.L. 1954, c. 268 (N.J.S.A. 17:36-5.20), every fire insurance
policy issued on property situated in the Township of Jackson shall be
subject to the provisions of this chapter and the aforesaid Public Laws of
1978, Chapter 184.98
Chapter 204
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 80.
Unsafe buildings and structures — See Ch.
133.
Commercial building standards — See Ch.
139.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 162.
Fire insurance claims — See Ch. 198.
Housing standards — See Ch. 233.
C. To affect the authority of the Township of Jackson to enforce a municipal
lien under any other law of this state.
98.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 17:36-8 et seq.
§ 198-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-9
1:473

ARTICLE I
Administration and Enforcement
§ 204-1. Adoption of standards.
Pursuant to the State of New Jersey Uniform Fire Safety Act, N.J.S.A.
52:27D-192 et seq., the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code, N.J.A.C. 5:70-1 et
seq., shall be enforced locally in the Township of Jackson in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:70-1 et seq. The Township shall recognize and hereby adopt
the standards of the International Fire Code, New Jersey Edition, and
the National Fire Protection Association Code, and supplements and
amendments thereto, which the Fire Bureaus may refer to in the
enforcement of this chapter.
§ 204-2. Local enforcement and duties.
§ 204-3. Agency designation and organization. [Amended 9-27-2011
by Ord. No. 30-11]
A. Pursuant to Section 11 of the State of New Jersey Uniform Fire Safety
Act,99 the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code (hereinafter "NJUFC") shall be
enforced locally within the Township of Jackson.
B. The local enforcing agencies (hereinafter "LEA") shall enforce the
NJUFC, and the codes and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, in all
buildings, structures and premises within established boundaries of the
Township of Jackson, other than owner-occupied one- and two-family
dwellings, and shall faithfully comply with the requirements of the
NJUFC.
A. The LEAs established by this chapter shall be under the direct
supervision and control of the Fire Official, who shall serve as the Chief
Administrator and Code Official for said agency. Such funds as may be
necessary to support the operation of the Fire Bureaus shall be paid
from the budgets of the Board of Fire Commissioners having
jurisdiction.
B. The LEA located within the geographic boundaries established by
ordinance for Fire District Nos. 1 and 2 shall be the Board of Fire
Commissioners of Fire District No. 2, who shall operate the Bureau of
Fire Safety Fire District Nos. 1 and 2, which is hereby created to
enforce the NJUFC within the respective geographic boundaries of
those districts. The Fire Official for First District Nos. 1 and 2 shall
report to the Board of Fire Commissioners of Fire District No. 2.
[Amended 5-12-2015 by Ord. No. 11-15; 12-8-2015 by Ord. No.
30-2015]
C. The LEA located within the geographic boundaries established by
ordinance for Fire District No. 3 shall be the Board of Fire
99.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-202.
§ 204-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-3
1:475
§ 204-4. Fire Official; fire inspectors and other employees.
[Amended 9-27-2011 by Ord. No. 30-11]
Commissioners of Fire District No. 3, who shall operate the Bureau of
Fire Safety Fire District No. 3, which is hereby created to enforce the
NJUFC within the respective geographic boundaries of those districts.
The Fire Official for First District No. 3 shall report to the Board of Fire
Commissioners of Fire District No. 3. [Amended 5-12-2015 by Ord.
No. 11-15]
D. The LEA located within the geographic boundaries established by
ordinance for Fire District No. 4 shall be the Board of Fire
Commissioners of Fire District No. 4, who shall operate the Bureau of
Fire Prevention Fire District No. 4, which is hereby created to enforce
the NJUFC within the respective geographic boundaries of those
districts. The Fire Official for First District No. 4 shall report to the
Board of Fire Commissioners of Fire District No. 4. [Added 5-12-2015
by Ord. No. 11-15]
A. Fire Official appointments.
(1) The LEA for Fire District Nos. 1 and 2 shall be under the direct
supervision of a Fire Official appointed by the Board of Fire
Commissioners of Fire District No. 2, pursuant to and in
accordance with the New Jersey Civil Service Rules and
Regulations, Title 11 of the Revised Statutes. [Amended
5-12-2015 by Ord. No. 11-15; 12-8-2015 by Ord. No. 31-2015]
(2) The LEA for Fire District No. 3 shall be under the direct supervision
of a Fire Official appointed by the Board of Fire Commissioners of
Fire District No. 3, pursuant to and in accordance with the New
Jersey Civil Service Rules and Regulations, Title 11 of the Revised
Statutes. [Amended 5-12-2015 by Ord. No. 11-15]
(3) The LEA for Fire District No. 4 shall be under the direct supervision
of a Fire Official appointed by the Board of Fire Commissioners of
Fire District No. 4, pursuant to and in accordance with the New
Jersey Civil Service Rules and Regulations, Title 11 of the Revised
Statutes. [Added 5-12-2015 by Ord. No. 11-15]
B. Fire inspectors and other employees assigned to an LEA shall be
appointed by the Board of Fire Commissioners having jurisdiction, upon
the recommendation of the Fire Official, and shall report to the Fire
Official for day-to-day operation assignments, pursuant to the NJUFC,
and in accordance with the New Jersey State Civil Service Rules and
Regulations, Title 11 of the Revised Statutes.
C. Term of office. The appointment of the Fire Official is permanent,
subject to New Jersey State Department of Personnel Rules and
Regulations.
§ 204-3 JACKSON CODE § 204-4
1:476
D. Removal from office. The Fire Official, inspectors and other employees
of the LEA shall be removed for inefficiency, misconduct or failure to
perform duties, pursuant to and in accordance with the New Jersey
Civil Service Rules and Regulations, Title 11 of the Revised Statutes.
Each person so removed shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard by
the appointing authority, consistent with recognized standards of due
process.
§ 204-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-4
1:477

ARTICLE II
Regulations and Prevention Measures
§ 204-5. Specific regulations.
The following fire prevention regulations shall be applicable within the
Township of Jackson:
A. Fire apparatus obstruction. It shall be unlawful to attempt or conspire
to hamper, obstruct, restrict, block or fail to yield to the path of travel of
any fire emergency vehicle, in any way, operating during a fire or
emergency.
B. Compliance order. A person shall not willfully fail or refuse to comply
with the order or direction of a firefighter, or interfere with the
compliance attempts of another individual during a fire or emergency.
C. Fire hose. A vehicle shall not be driven or propelled over any
unprotected fire hose of a fire company when laid down on any street or
any other vehicular roadway without the consent of the fire officer in
command.
D. Street closure. A person or persons shall not erect, construct, place, or
maintain any fences, gates, chains, bars, pipes, wood or metal horses,
or any other type of obstruction, on any street without permission from
the Fire Official and the Chief of Police. The word "street," as used in
this chapter, shall mean any roadway accessible to the public for
vehicular traffic, including, but not limited to, private streets or access
lanes, as well as all public streets and highways within the boundaries
of the Township of Jackson. The Fire Official shall notify the Fire
Department upon approval.
E. Combustion engine storage. No person shall store or park, or cause to
be stored or parked, any internal combustion vehicle, including, but not
limited to, those commonly known as "motorcycle," "moped," "go-cart,"
"dirt bike," "lawn mower," "snow blower," etc., in or on any apartment
unit porch, balcony, covered patio area, entrance, exit, or any other
private area of an apartment or multidwelling unit.
F. Building identification. New and existing commercial and multifamily
buildings shall display approved address numbers and building
numbers, a minimum of eight inches in height, as described in Jackson
Township Code § 372-27, entitled "Installation and display of numerals."
In addition, all commercial buildings which contain multiple exit doors
shall label rear exterior exit doors with the name of the business and
unit number in not less than four-inch minimum, stroke of 0.5 inch,
reflective letters, as per minimum requirements of the NJUFC.
G. Emergency lock key box and gates. Emergency lock key boxes shall be
installed in all buildings, with the exception of owner-occupied, oneand
two-family dwellings, that are protected by a fire-suppression
system and fire alarm for life safety and fire-fighting purposes, or all
§ 204-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-5
1:479
other areas required by the Fire Official, in accordance with the NJUFC,
Chapter 5, Section 506. Keys required would include a master key,
boiler room, sprinkler controls and room, electrical rooms, elevator
and elevator control rooms, chlorine rooms, fire alarm panel and room,
roof access panels, fence gate, detectors and sprinkler heads, door
codes, and other locked areas or emergency documents of the premises
required by the Fire Official. The Fire Official shall require, as deemed
necessary, an emergency key padlock or key box for fences, gates, or
barricades for emergency access.
H. Building evacuation. It shall be a violation of this article for any person,
manager, firm, corporation, owner, tenant, or person responsible for a
given structure or premises to fail to immediately notify the Fire
Department and immediately evacuate the entire structure when and if
the following conditions are present: fire alarm is activated, smoke is in
the structure, an explosion has occurred, there is a fire in the structure,
any fire-protection system is activated, any hazardous or flammable
material is spilled or leaked, or upon the order of the Chief, Fire Official
or Incident Commander.
I. Building evacuation action plan. Firesafety evacuation and emergency
action plans shall be prepared as set forth in the NJUFC, Chapter 4,
Emergency Planning and Preparedness. The firesafety evacuation and
emergency action plans shall be approved by the Fire Official and shall
be distributed by the owner to all tenants and employees. The
evacuation plan shall be conspicuously posted on every floor and in
each tenant space for the occupants' use. The firesafety evacuation and
emergency action plans shall be maintained to reflect changes in the
use and physical arrangement of the building. If an emergency action
plan assigns employees with specific responsibilities in areas such as
evacuation coordination, firefighting, or material leak and spill
handling, the employer shall provide a minimum of annual training
sessions to prepare the employee for such activities.
J. Open burning. A person shall not kindle, maintain, or authorize to be
kindled or maintained, any open burning, unless in accordance with the
NJUFC, Chapter 3, Section 307, Open Burning and Recreational Fires.
"Recreational fire" is burning that contains material other than rubbish
where the fuel being burned is not contained in an incinerator, outdoor
fireplace, barbecue grill or pit having a total fuel area of three feet or
less in diameter and two feet or less in height, for pleasure, ceremonial,
cooking, warmth, or similar purpose. Additionally, a person shall not
conduct agricultural burnings unless they are conducted in compliance
with a valid permit issued by the New Jersey State Forest Fire Service
Department of Environmental Protection.
K. False fire alarm. Any property containing a fire-protection alarm system
shall not have activated more than three false fire alarms within a
thirty-day period. Violation is subject to the fines and penalties outlined
in § 204-14B below. A "false fire alarm" shall be defined as either a
signal, message or warning transmitted to the Township's fire
§ 204-5 JACKSON CODE § 204-5
1:480
communications central dispatch indicating a fire condition, or the
emission of an audible, visual or electronic transmission of any signal,
message or warning intended to summon the services of Township firefighting
personnel or apparatus, which signal, message, or warning is
activated by a cause other than one for which the transmitting system
is specifically designed to respond, at a time when no fire exists. The
alarm shall not be considered false if caused by a power or telephone
line interruption.
L. Fire-protection system maintenance. Every commercial building or
occupancy having fire-protection equipment shall have an annual
certification performed on its fire-protection system and fire
extinguishers by a licensed agency registered with the State of New
Jersey Department of Community Affairs (hereinafter "DCA"). Every
commercial building or occupancy having a kitchen suppression system
shall have a six-month certification performed by a licensed agency
registered with the DCA. Said certification shall be posted, and a copy
shall be made available to the LEA at time of fire inspection.
M. Fire-protection system impaired. When a fire-protection system is out of
service, the Fire Department and the Fire Code Official shall be
immediately notified and, if the Fire Code Official determines that an
imminent hazard exists pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.16, the building
shall either be evacuated in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.17, or an
approved fire watch shall be provided for all occupants left unprotected
by the shutdown until the fire-protection system has been returned to
service. Fire watch shall be provided with at least one approved means
of notification of the Fire Department, and their only duty shall be to
perform constant patrols of the protected premises and keep watch for
fires.
N. Fire watch conditions and standby personnel.
(1) A fire watch is initiated by the Fire Department as a temporary
measure to ensure continuous and systematic surveillance of a
building, or portion thereof, by one or more qualified individuals for
the purposes of identifying and controlling fire hazards, detecting
early signs of unwanted fire, raising an alarm of fire, and notifying
the Fire Department. Where conditions exist that are deemed an
imminent hazard, or hazardous to life and property by the Fire
Official, Fire Department standby crews shall be deemed as
necessary by the Fire Official for the following, but not limited to,
conditions:
(a) Any building occupied with impaired fire-protection systems.
(b) Buildings, rooms, or public venues exceeding the occupant
load.
(c) Situations where fire load is greater than normal day-to-day
operations.
§ 204-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-5
1:481
§ 204-6. Fire hydrants; fire drafting sites; Fire Department
connections.
(d) As deemed by the Fire Official.
(2) A firefighter standby fee shall be paid by the owner of the building
or company hosting a public venue. Fire Department standby fees
shall be as follows:
(a) Fire pumper: $135 per hour.
(b) Firefighter: $35 each per hour.
O. Construction. All construction requiring a Uniform Construction Code
(hereinafter "UCC") permit shall comply with the requirements of
N.J.A.C. 5:70-3.2(a) and Section 1401, Fire Safety During Construction
and Demolition, of the NJUFC.
P. Place of assembly fire exit announcement. In places of assembly with
occupant loads of 50 and over, such as theaters, auditoriums,
multipurpose rooms, or similar occupancies used for noncontinuance
programs, an audible announcement by the venue host, or by recorded
announcement, shall be made not more than 10 minutes prior to the
start of each program, to notify the occupants of the location of the exits
to be used in the event of a fire or emergency.
Q. Strobe light display over FDC connections. A strobe light shall be
installed over any Fire Department connections in buildings with fire
alarm systems. This requirement shall take effect two years from
enactment of this chapter.
A. No person shall at any time park a motor vehicle or obstruction within a
ten-foot perimeter of a fire hydrant or obstruct a fire drafting site or
Fire Department connection/appliance. The LEA and/or its designated
agents are authorized to tow motor vehicles and remove obstructions at
their discretion.
B. No person shall conceal, cover, paint, or disguise any fire hydrant.
Commercial property owners shall keep clear at all times a ten-foot
perimeter around fire hydrants and shall not allow snow, brush, bushes,
grass, flowers or trees to encroach upon or conceal a fire hydrant or
hamper the ability of the Fire Department to access a fire hydrant.
C. The Jackson Municipal Utilities Authority (hereinafter "JTMUA") shall
maintain all fire hydrants, both public and private, in accordance with
JTMUA regulations and the shared services agreement with the fire
districts with regard to AWWA standards, ISO installation, maintenance
and water flow testing, annual written reports, and NFPA paint
schedule.
§ 204-5 JACKSON CODE § 204-6
1:482
§ 204-7. Fire lanes or zones; loading zones.
D. All new fire hydrant systems shall have a five-inch storz connection
installed on the main valve opening (steamer side of the fire hydrant),
along with cap and cable.
E. All new Fire Department sprinkler connections (hereinafter "FDC")
shall have a five-inch storz connection, along with a forty-five-degree
elbow, stainless steel screen, cap and cable.
A. The Fire Official shall require and designate public or private fire lanes
or zones, as deemed necessary, for the efficient use of fire apparatus
access for firefighting, egress of occupants, or whenever it is deemed
necessary for public safety to ensure fire equipment and other
emergency vehicles unobstructed means of ingress and egress to
properties and buildings, fire hydrants, fire drafting sites, and Fire
Department connections in case of fire or emergency.
B. The Fire Official, LEAs, Board of Fire Commissioners, and/or their
designated agents are further authorized to regulate, restrict and
prohibit parking or obstructions that may affect public safety or the
ability to fight or control fires. They shall impose regulations necessary
to ensure that such areas are free from obstructions, and shall have
concurrent jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this chapter, and are
authorized to issue violations, tow motor vehicles and remove
obstructions, parked or standing.
C. No person shall, at any time, park a motor vehicle or obstruct a fire
lane/zone, loading zones, or driveway, affecting the ability to fight or
control fires. The Fire Official or the LEA, and/or designated agents, are
authorized to issue summons, tow motor vehicles, and remove
obstructions from any fire lane/zone, loading zone, driveway, and fire
area or drafting location. If, at any time, due to weather conditions,
vandalism or any extenuating circumstances, fire lane/zone or loading
zone signs or surface markings are not visible, the remaining markings
or signs visible shall be deemed sufficient to provide notice of the
existence of such fire lane/zone or loading zone. All signs and ground
markings shall be legible at all times and shall be provided, erected and
maintained by the owner or operator of the property, in conformance
with the provisions of this chapter.
D. Gates, chains, or other methods utilized to prevent unauthorized access
to fire lanes shall be approved by the Fire Official prior to installation.
E. Specifications for fire lanes/zones.
(1) Fire lane or zone signs shall be erected with the bottom of the sign
not less than six feet above the ground, 12 inches wide by 18 inches
in length, with a white reflective aluminum background with a red
border, and a minimum of three-inch size reflective red letters
labeled "NO" on the first line, three-inch size reflective red letters
§ 204-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-7
1:483
labeled "PARKING" on the second line, two-inch size reflective red
letters labeled "FIRE" on the third line, and two-inch size reflective
red letters labeled "LANE" or "ZONE" on the fourth line. Spacing of
the signs shall be even, with one sign facing the direction of travel,
or alternate direction of travel, for a maximum distance of 100 feet
per sign or as ordered by the Fire Official.
(2) Fire lane ground marking shall be a minimum of 20 feet wide and
labeled "NO PARKING FIRE LANE," bordered by a four-inch-wide
yellow stripe on both sides, with approved New Jersey Department
of Transportation standard traffic yellow paint. The wording shall
face the direction of travel, or alternate direction of travel, for a
maximum distance of every 100 feet on paved surface, or as
ordered by the Fire Official. The lettering shall be legible, and the
letter size shall be a minimum of 24 inches high and four-inch
stroke.
(3) Fire zone ground marking shall be a minimum of 12 feet wide and
10 feet in length, posted with a fire zone sign and ground marking
labeled "FIRE ZONE," bordered by a four-inch-wide yellow stripe
and diagonal stripes with approved New Jersey Department of
Transportation standard traffic yellow paint lettered legibly on a
paved surface. The lettering shall be a minimum of 24 inches high
and four-inch stroke. Two crash posts shall be installed, if required,
by the Fire Official and constructed of steel not less than four
inches in diameter, concrete filled and painted yellow. The posts
shall be spaced not more than four feet six inches between posts on
center, set not less than three feet six inches deep in a concrete
footing of not less than 18 inches in diameter. The top of the posts
shall not be less than three feet above ground.
(4) Preexisting unpaved fire access roadways installed on public or
private property shall be subject to the approval of the Fire Official.
Signs and markings shall be provided as required by the Fire
Official.
§ 204-7 JACKSON CODE § 204-7
1:484
ARTICLE III
Administration and Enforcement of State Standards
§ 204-8. Registration.
§ 204-9. Inspection of life-hazard uses.
The LEAs, as established in this chapter, shall carry out the periodic
inspections of life-hazard uses required by the NJUFC on behalf of the
Commissioner of the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs.
§ 204-10. Inspection of non-life-hazard uses.
A. Registration form. Every owner or tenant/occupant subject to this
chapter shall file for a certification of registration with the LEA, using
forms provided by the LEA. The application shall include, but not be
limited to, the name, address and telephone number of the applicant;
name, address and telephone number of the business; owners of the
business; description of the business; and the name, address and
telephone number of the person responsible for the business.
B. Registration fee. Every owner or tenant/occupant subject to this
chapter shall pay to the LEA an annual registration fee in the amount
specified in this chapter. Said annual registration fee shall be paid by
the date specified on the invoice, within 30 days of mailing.
C. Penalty. Failure to file or pay life-hazard or non-life-hazard registration
applications after being ordered to do so are subject to the penalty in
accordance with the NJUFC, N.J.A.C. 5:70-3 and 5.70-2.12(b)8.
A. In addition to the life-hazard use inspections and fee required pursuant
to the NJUFC and the regulations of the DCA, all business, mercantile,
storage, factory, industrial, or other uses defined in accordance with the
New Jersey edition of the International Building Code and the NJUFC
which are classified as non-life-hazard uses, other than those that are
incidental or auxiliary to the agricultural use of farm property, shall be
registered locally, with fee, and inspected annually as required.
B. Where more than one additional use exists under one ownership at a
given location, the highest use shall be registered at full fee, and the
subsequent use at 1/2 of the scheduled fee per building.
C. Where two or more of the same use, or different uses, exist at the same
building or premises, each one shall be considered as separate and
distinct for the purpose of this article and shall be registered pursuant
thereto.
D. All multiple-family townhomes and condominiums classified as R-5, as
defined by the New Jersey Construction Code, shall be required to
register with the Fire Bureau. Each building's common areas, including
the grounds and parking lots, shall be inspected periodically, but not
§ 204-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-10
1:485
§ 204-11. Non-life-hazard registration fees.
Type Use
Size of Buildings
(square feet) Required Fee
L Under 500 $60
M 501 to 1,499 $80
N 1,500 to 2,499 $85
O 2,500 to 3,499 $155
P 3,500 to 4,999 $160
Q 5,000 to 6,499 $175
R 6,500 to 7,499 $185
S 7,500 to 8,499 $210
T 8,500 to 9,999 $225
U 10,000 and above $275, plus
$20 per additional
1,000 square feet
Common Area Multifamily Apartment Complexes (R-2 Use Group)
Type Use
Number of Apartment
Units
Required Fee
(per unit)
MFA-1 1 to 100 $2.45
MFA-2 101 to 200 $2.55
MFA-3 201 to 250 $2.75
MFA-4 250 to 300 $3
MFA-5 301 to 349 $3.25
MFA-6 350 and above $3.50
less than once every 12 months. This is in addition to the five-year
cyclical inspection conducted by the New Jersey Bureau of Housing.
E. Common area inspections shall include, but not be limited to, fireprotection
systems, basements, laundry rooms, corridors, vestibules
accessible to occupants, exterior property grounds, utilities, building
maintenance, fire lanes and zones, and all other requirements set forth
within the NJUFC.
§ 204-10 JACKSON CODE § 204-11
1:486
Common Area Multifamily Condominiums and Townhouses (R-5
Use Group)
Type Use Number of Buildings Required Fee
MFC-1 1 to 4 $100
MFC-2 5 to 9 $200
MFC-3 10 to 14 $300
MFC-4 15 to 19 $400
MFC-5 20 and above $500, plus
$10 per building
over 20
Common Area Commercial Complexes
Type Use Number of Rental Units Required Fee
CAC-1 1 to 4 $75
CAC-2 5 to 10 $100
CAC-3 11 to 15 $125
CAC-4 16 to 20 $150
CAC-5 21 to 25 $175
CAC-6 26 or over $200
Hotels and Motels
Type Use Number of Rooms Required Fee
HM-1 100 or fewer (non-LHU) $225 initial;
$5 per unit ($200)
Campgrounds
Type Use Number of Campsites Required Fee
CG-1 1 to 20 $75
CG-2 21 to 30 $100
CG-3 31 to 40 $125
CG-4 41 and over $150
§ 204-12. Permit requirements; exemptions; fees.
A. Permits shall be obtained from the Fire Official having jurisdiction of
the fire district for any of those activities listed in N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.7 of
the NJUFC, and any amendments, supplements, and rules and
regulations thereto. Fees for these permits must be collected before a
permit can be issued.
§ 204-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-12
1:487
§ 204-13. Construction plan review.
B. All nonprofit organizations, municipal government and religious
organizations shall be exempt from permit fees.
C. Permit fees, life hazard use, shall be as follows: [Amended 2-27-2018
by Ord. No. 02-18]
(1) Type 1: $54.
(2) Type 2: $214.
(3) Type 3: $427.
(4) Type 4: $641.
A. Plan review and submittal. Submission to the Fire Official having
jurisdiction shall include any plans submitted to the Planning Board or
Board of Adjustment for the development, construction or improvement
of properties. The Fire Official shall submit requirements to the
applicant and the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment prior
to the applicant's board hearing. The Township's engineering firm, in
conjunction with the Fire Official plan review requirements, shall
conduct a site inspection before a permit is closed for compliance and
issued a certificate of occupancy by the Construction Official.
B. Plans submitted to the Fire Official shall include one set of full
construction plans that include building, fire, plumbing, mechanical,
and utility drawings, and two sets of site plans. Site plans shall include,
but not be limited to, to-scale plans of the site, location and size of fire
lanes, zones, water mains, drafting locations, fire hydrants, Fire
Department connections, exterior drives, fire-protection equipment,
doorways, use of rooms, high-hazard materials, and utility controls.
C. Any administrative approval by the Planning Board for alterations or
additions to a previously approved site plan shall be forwarded to the
Fire Official for review, recommendations, and approval, prior to the
Planning Board issuing its approval.
D. Fire hydrants. The Fire Official having jurisdiction shall approve fire
hydrant locations and quantity. At a minimum, hydrants shall be spaced
so that the traveled distance between hydrants does not exceed 500
linear feet. Fire hydrants shall comply with JTMUA rules and
regulations. Fire hydrant barrels shall be painted silver, and the cap
and bonnet shall comply with NFPA standards based on water flow. Fire
hydrants located on dry water systems shall be entirely painted black.
E. Site or subdivision plan fee. Each applicant shall pay the following fees
to the Bureau of Firesafety for review of any site or subdivision plans:
(1) Initial review of any site or subdivision plan: $75.
§ 204-12 JACKSON CODE § 204-13
1:488
§ 204-14. Violations and penalties.
§ 204-15. Appeals.
Pursuant to the New Jersey Uniform Firesafety Act, any person aggrieved
by an order of the LEA shall have the right to appeal to the Ocean County
Construction Board of Appeals, in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.19,
entitled "Appeals."
(2) Review of any resubmitted site or subdivision plan, payable upon
resubmission: $35.
(3) Variance site plan review: $25.
A. All penalties under the NJUFC shall be adopted for the purpose of
enforcing this chapter, except those penalties imposed hereinafter for
violations of this chapter which are not included within the NJUFC.
B. False fire alarm. The Fire Official may assess penalties for violations of
§ 204-5K herein as follows:
(1) Three false fire alarms within a thirty-day period: $100.
(2) Fifth and subsequent false fire alarms within one calendar year:
$200 per occurrence, in addition to remedies available within the
NJUFC and the UCC.
C. Obstruction penalty. Any person who shall violate § 204-6A or B or
204-7C, as listed herein, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $50
nor more than $250, and, at the discretion of the code official charged
with enforcement of this regulation, a vehicle may be towed or the
obstruction or property otherwise removed. The cost of removal, towing
and storage shall be charged to the owner of the vehicle or property
and shall be paid prior to the release of said vehicle or property.
D. Any person or corporation who shall violate any other provision of the
NJUFC or who fails to comply therewith or shall violate or fail to comply
with an order made hereunder shall be punished by a fine of not more
than $2,000 or by imprisonment of not more than 90 days, or both, at
the discretion of the court before which such conviction is held, by civil
action summary proceeding under the Penalty Enforcement Law100 in
Municipal Court.
100. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 2A:58-10 et seq.
§ 204-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-15
1:489
Chapter 210
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 162.
Excavations, mining and dredging — See Ch.
185.
Housing standards — See Ch. 233.
Land use and development regulations — See
Ch. 244.
Soil erosion and sediment control — See Ch.
363.
§ 204-15 JACKSON CODE § 204-15
1:490
ARTICLE I
Statutory Authority; Findings; Purpose and Objectives
§ 210-1. Statutory authority.
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has, in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et
seq., delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote public health, safety, and general welfare
of its citizenry.
§ 210-2. Findings.
§ 210-3. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
A. The flood hazard areas of the Township of Jackson are subject to
periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety, and general welfare.
B. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and
velocities, and when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other
areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise
protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
A. Protect human life and health;
B. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood-control projects;
C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding
and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas
mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, bridges located in
areas of special flood hazard;
F. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood-blight areas;
G. Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and
H. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
§ 210-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-4
1:491
§ 210-4. Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
A. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
B. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
C. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel
floodwaters;
D. Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which
may increase flood damage; and
E. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
§ 210-4 JACKSON CODE § 210-4
1:492
ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 210-5. Word usage; definitions.
A. Unless specifically defined below, words or phases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in
common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPEAL — A request for a review of the Zoning Officer's interpretation
of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH, or VO Zone
on a community's Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM) with an
annual one-percent or greater chance of flooding to an average depth of
one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where
the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be
evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain
within a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of
flooding in any given year.
AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD-RELATED EROSION HAZARD — The land
within a community which is most likely to be subject to severe floodrelated
erosion losses. After a detailed evaluation, the special floodrelated
erosion hazard area will be designated as Zone E on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support
of the building and is intended through its design and construction to
collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage
to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures,
mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations, or storage of equipment or materials located within the
area of special flood hazard.
DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM) — The official map
on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the
areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to
the community.
§ 210-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-5
1:493
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building built, in the case of
a building in an area of special flood hazard, to have the top of the
elevated floor or, in the case of a building in a coastal high hazard
area, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member
of the elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means of
piling, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of
the water and adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural
integrity of the building during a flood up to the magnitude of the
base flood. In an area of special flood hazard, "elevated building"
also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation
perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded
movement of floodwaters. In areas of coastal high hazard, "elevated
buildings" also includes a building otherwise meeting the definition of
"elevated building" even though the lower area is enclosed by means of
breakaway walls.
EROSION — The process of the gradual wearing away of land masses.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided in
which the Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles,
as well as the Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) and the water surface
elevation of the base flood.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial
or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special
purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance
and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power.
The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination
thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage
prevention and reduction.
FLOOD-RELATED EROSION — The collapse or subsidence of land
along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of
undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding
anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by unusually high water
level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by
unanticipated force of nature, such as a flash flood or an abnormal tidal
surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which
results in flooding.
FLOOD-RELATED EROSION AREA MANAGEMENT — The operation of
an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing
flood-related erosion damage, including but not limited to emergency
preparedness plans, flood-related erosion control works, and floodplain
management regulations.
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters
from any source.
(2)
§ 210-5 JACKSON CODE § 210-5
1:494
FLOOD-RELATED EROSION AREA or FLOOD-RELATED EROSIONPRONE
AREA — A land area adjoining the shore of a lake or other
body of water which, due to the composition of the shoreline or bank
and high water levels or wind-driven currents, is likely to suffer floodrelated
erosion.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the
base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
more than 0.2 foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the
ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a
structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area,
including basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable
solely for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an
area other than a basement is not considered a building's lowest floor,
provided that such enclosure is not built so to render the structure in
violation of other applicable nonelevation design requirements.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a recreational
vehicle.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
(1)
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(2)
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by
the Secretary of the Interior; or
(3)
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary
of the Interior; or
(a)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
(b)
(4)
§ 210-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-5
1:495
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or MANUFACTURED HOME
SUBDIVISION — A parcel or contiguous parcels of land divided into two
or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain regulation
adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to
such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are
to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring
of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of the
floodplain management regulations adopted by the Township.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
START OF CONSTRUCTION — For other than new construction or
substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act
(P.L. No. 97-348),101 includes substantial improvements and means the
date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition,
placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit
date. The "actual start" means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of a slab
or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or
any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, nor
does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways, nor does
it include excavation for a basement, footings or piers or foundations,
or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it include the installation
on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not
occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the "actual start of construction" means the
first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a
(1) Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the longest
horizontal projections;
(2)
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a lightduty
truck; and
(3)
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or
seasonal use.
(4)
101. Editor's Note: See 16 U.S.C. § 3501 et seq.
§ 210-5 JACKSON CODE § 210-5
1:496
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions
of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or
a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its beforedamaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of
the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which
exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of
construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter
that permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be
prohibited by this chapter.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local Code
Enforcement Officer and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
(1)
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an
historic structure.
(2)
§ 210-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-5
1:497

ARTICLE III
General Provisions
§ 210-6. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of the Township of Jackson, Ocean County, New Jersey.
§ 210-7. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
§ 210-8. Compliance required; violations and penalties.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions, shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined
not more than $1,250 or imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both, for
each violation and, in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in
the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Township of Jackson
from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy
any violation.
§ 210-9. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
and other ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
A. The areas of special flood hazard for the Township of Jackson,
Community No. 340375, are identified and defined on the following
documents prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
(1) A scientific and engineering report, "Flood Insurance Study, Ocean
County, New Jersey (all jurisdictions)," dated September 29, 2006.
(2) Flood Insurance Rate Map for Ocean County, New Jersey (all
jurisdictions), as shown on index and panel numbers 0015, 0020,
0040, 0042, 0044, 0045, 0063, 0130, 0131, 0132, 0135, 0140,
0145, 0155, 0160, 0164, 0165, 0166, 0167, 0176, 0260, whose
effective date is September 29, 2006.
B. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and maps are on file at the
Municipal Building, 95 West Veterans Highway, Jackson, New Jersey
08527.
§ 210-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-10
1:499
§ 210-10. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
§ 210-11. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special flood
hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding
or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of
the Township of Jackson, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal
Insurance Administration for any flood damages that result from reliance on
this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
A. Considered as minimum requirements;
B. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
§ 210-10 JACKSON CODE § 210-11
1:500
ARTICLE IV
Administration
§ 210-12. Development permit required.
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development
begins within any area of special flood hazard established in § 210-7.
Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by
the Zoning Officer and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate
drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations
of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of
materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically,
the following information is required:
§ 210-13. Designation of Zoning Officer.
The Zoning Officer is hereby appointed to administer and implement this
chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in
accordance with its provisions.
§ 210-14. Duties and responsibilities of Zoning Officer.
Duties of the Zoning Officer shall include, but not be limited to:
A. Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all structures;
B. Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any structure has been
floodproofed;
C. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the
floodproofing criteria in § 210-17; and
D. A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
A. Permit review. He shall:
(1) Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
(2) Review all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
(3) Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway; assure that the
encroachment provisions of § 210-18A are met.
(4) Review all development permits in the coastal high hazard area of
the area of special flood hazard to determine if the proposed
§ 210-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-14
1:501
§ 210-15. Variance procedure.
development alters sand dunes so as to increase potential flood
damage.
B. Use of other base flood and floodway data. When base flood elevation
and floodway data has not been provided in accordance with § 210-7,
Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard, the Zoning Officer
shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and
floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to
administer § 210-17A, Residential construction, and § 210-17B,
Nonresidential construction.
C. Information to be obtained and maintained. He shall:
(1) Obtain and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea
level, of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or
substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure
contains a basement.
(2) For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
(a) Verify and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea
level; and
(b) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in
§ 210-12C.
(3) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter.
D. Alteration of watercourses. He shall:
(1) Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Floodplain Management Section, and
the Land Use Regulation Program prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.
(2) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so the flood-carrying capacity
is not diminished.
E. Interpretation of FIRM boundaries. Make interpretations, where
needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special
flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict
between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person
contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in § 210-15.
A. Zoning Board of Adjustment.
§ 210-14 JACKSON CODE § 210-15
1:502
(1) The Zoning Board of Adjustment as established by the Township of
Jackson shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances
from the requirements of this chapter.
(2) The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals
when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the Zoning Officer in the enforcement or
administration of this chapter.
(3) Those aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning Board of Adjustment,
or any taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the governing body, as
provided by law.
(4) In passing upon such applications, the Zoning Board of Adjustment
shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors,
standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive
Plan and floodplain management program of that area;
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
(k) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
§ 210-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-15
1:503
(5) Upon consideration of the factors of § 210-15A(4) and the purposes
of this chapter, the Zoning Board of Adjustment may attach such
conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to
further the purposes of this chapter.
(6) The Zoning Officer shall maintain the records of all appeal actions,
including technical information, and report any variances to the
Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
B. Conditions for variances.
(1) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items
in § 210-15A(4)(a) through (k) have been fully considered. As the lot
size increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical justification
required for issuing the variance increases.
(2) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as an historic structure and the variance is the
minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design
of the structure.
(3) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
(4) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
(5) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on
or victimization of the public as identified in § 210-15A(4), or
conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(6) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
§ 210-15 JACKSON CODE § 210-15
1:504
ARTICLE V
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
§ 210-16. General standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards, the following standards are required:
A. Anchoring.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the
structure.
(2) All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist flotation,
collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include,
but are not to be limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to
ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state
and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. Special
requirements shall be that:
(a) Over-the-top ties shall be provided at each of the four corners
of the manufactured home, with two additional ties per side at
the intermediate locations, with manufactured homes less than
50 feet long requiring one additional tie per side.
(b) Frame ties shall be provided at each corner of the home, with
five additional ties per side at intermediate points, with
manufactured homes less than 50 feet long requiring four
additional ties per side.
(c) All components of the anchoring system shall be capable of
carrying a force of 4,800 pounds.
(d) Any additions to the manufactured home shall be similarly
anchored.
B. Construction materials and methods.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
(3) Enclosure openings. For all new construction and substantial
improvements, fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are
subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry
and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must
either be certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
§ 210-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-16
1:505
(a) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding shall be provided.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
C. Utilities.
(1) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(2) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems
and discharge from the systems into floodwaters;
(3) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding;
and
(4) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
D. Subdivision proposals.
(1) All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage;
(2) All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage;
(3) All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage; and
(4) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed development which contain at least
50 lots or five acres, whichever is less.
E. Enclosure openings. All new construction and substantial
improvements having fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that
are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in
an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall
be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
§ 210-16 JACKSON CODE § 210-16
1:506
§ 210-17. Specific standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data have
been provided as set forth in § 210-7, Basis for establishing areas of special
flood hazard, or in § 210-14B, Use of other base flood and floodway data, the
following standards are required:
professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
(1) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than
one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding shall be provided.
(2) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above
grade.
(3) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other covering
or devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit
of floodwaters.
A. Residential construction.
(1) In AE Zones, new construction and substantial improvement of any
residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including
basement, elevated to or above base flood elevation.
(2) Within any AO Zone on the Township's FIRM, all new construction
and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have
the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the highest
adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in
feet (at least two feet if no depth number is specified) and require
adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
(3) New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated
to or above base flood elevation.
B. Nonresidential construction. In AE Zones, all new construction and
substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other
nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including
basement, elevated to the level of the base flood elevation or, together
with the attendant utilities and sanitary facilities, shall:
(1) Require within any AO Zone on the Township's FIRM that all new
construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the
lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the highest
adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in
feet (at least two feet if no depth number is specified) and require
§ 210-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-17
1:507
§ 210-18. Floodways.
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in § 210-7 are areas
designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area
due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles,
and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:
adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures; or
(2) New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the
lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the level of the base
flood elevation; or
(3) Be floodproofed so that, below the base flood level, the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water;
(4) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
(5) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice for meeting the applicable
provisions of this subsection. Such certification shall be provided to
the official as set forth in § 210-14C(2).
C. Manufactured homes.
(1) Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with
§ 210-16A(2).
(2) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
within an area of special flood hazard shall be elevated on a
permanent foundation such that the top of the lowest floor is at or
above the base flood elevation.
A. Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development, unless a technical evaluation
demonstrates that encroachment shall not result in any increase in
flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
B. If § 210-18A is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements must comply with Article V, Provisions for Flood Hazard
Reduction.
C. In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation data
has been provided and no floodway has been designated, the
cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with
all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than 0.2 of a foot at any
point.
§ 210-17 JACKSON CODE § 210-19
1:508
§ 210-19. Pinelands Area provisions.
A. Application procedures. In addition to the permit application, appeal
and variance procedures set forth in §§ 210-12, 210-15 and 210-16,
respectively, the procedures set forth in this Code book for the
Pinelands Area shall be followed.
B. Review procedures. In addition to the review procedures set forth in
§ 210-14, the procedures set forth in this Code book for the Pinelands
Area shall be followed.
C. Development standards. In addition to the standards set forth in
§§ 210-16 and 210-17, all development within the Pinelands Area shall
also adhere to the standards set forth in this Code book for the
Pinelands Area.
§ 210-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-19
1:509
Chapter 216
GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND WASTE MATERIAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Removal of dog feces — See Ch. 98, Art. VII.
Brush, weeds, trash and debris — See Ch. 115.
Junk and junk dealers — See Ch. 239.
Land use and development regulations — See
Ch. 244.
Littering — See Ch. 262.
Tree removal — See Ch. 405.
Abandoned or inoperable vehicles and other
machinery — See Ch. 418.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 474.
§ 210-19 JACKSON CODE § 210-19
1:510
ARTICLE I
Pet Waste
[Adopted 2-28-2005 by Ord. No. 15-05 (Ch. 63, Art. I, of the 1972
Code)]
§ 216-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish requirements for the proper
disposal of pet solid waste in the Township of Jackson so as to protect public
health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for failure to comply.
§ 216-2. Definitions; word usage.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein, unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
IMMEDIATE — That the pet solid waste is removed at once, without delay.
OWNER/KEEPER — Any person who shall possess, maintain, house or
harbor any pet or otherwise have custody of any pet, whether or not the
owner of such pet.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PET — A domesticated animal (other than a disability assistance animal)
kept for amusement or companionship.
PET SOLID WASTE — Waste matter expelled from the bowels of the pet;
excrement.
PROPER DISPOSAL — Placement in a designated waste receptacle, or other
suitable container, and discarded in a refuse container which is regularly
emptied by the municipality or some other refuse collector; or disposal into
a system designed to convey domestic sewage for proper treatment and
disposal.
§ 216-3. Disposal required.
All pet owners and keepers are required to immediately and properly
dispose of their pet's solid waste deposited on any property, public or
private, not owned or possessed by that person.
§ 216-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-4
1:511
§ 216-4. Exemptions.
Any owner or keeper who requires the use of a disability assistance animal
shall be exempt from the provisions of this article while such animal is being
used for that purpose.
§ 216-5. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Jackson Township
Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 216-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $100.
§ 216-4 JACKSON CODE § 216-6
1:512
ARTICLE II
Proof of Service; Hours of Operation
[Adopted 6-28-2004 by Ord. No. 29-04 (Ch. 63, Art. II, of the 1972
Code)]
§ 216-7. Requirements.
A. In the case of single-family residential housing, each responsible solid
waste generator, in those instances where a solid waste collection
system is not otherwise provided for by the Township and if he has not
already done so, shall enter into a contract for regular solid waste
collection service with any person lawfully providing private solid waste
collection services within the Township, except that those solid waste
generators who transport solid waste which is generated at this
residential premises directly to the solid waste facility utilized by the
Township for disposal shall be exempt from this requirement.
B. In the case of multifamily residential housing, the responsible solid
waste generator, in those instances where a solid waste collection
system is not otherwise provided for by the Township and he has not
already done so, shall enter into a contract for regular solid waste
collection services with any person lawfully providing private solid
waste collection services within the Township; except that those
responsible solid waste generators who transport the solid waste which
is generated at his residential premises directly to the solid waste
facility utilized by the Township for disposal shall be exempted from this
requirement. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the multiple
dwelling building to provide a sufficient number of appropriate solid
waste containers for the deposit of nonrecyclable waste materials to be
disposed of as solid waste.
C. In the case of any commercial or institutional building or structure
located within the boundaries of the Township, the responsible solid
waste generator, in those instances where regular solid waste
collections services are not otherwise provided for, shall enter into a
contract with any person lawfully providing private solid waste
collection services within the Township.
D. In the case of a responsible solid waste generator, within the Township,
who is transporting the solid waste which is generated at his residential
premises directly to the solid waste facility utilized by the municipality
for disposal, every such responsible solid waste generator within the
Township shall furnish proof that the responsible solid waste generator
is transporting the solid waste which is generated at his residential
premises directly to the solid waste facility utilized by the Township for
disposal to the Township Committee at least once every 12 months. In
order to fulfill the requirements of this subsection, the responsible solid
waste generator may include the proof of service with the tax payment
mailed to the Township Tax Collector.
§ 216-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-8
1:513
§ 216-8. Hours of collection.
In order to preserve the peace and quiet in neighborhoods during the hours
when most residents are asleep, regular solid waste collection services shall
be limited to the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., as set forth in § 291-6L
of the Code.
§ 216-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article or any regulations
promulgated pursuant hereunder shall, upon conviction, be liable to the
penalties stated in § 291-8, entitled "Enforcement; violations and penalties."
Each and every day that such violation continues shall be considered a
separate offense for each violation.
§ 216-8 JACKSON CODE § 216-9
1:514
ARTICLE III
Storage and Collection
[Adopted 12-11-1979 by Ord. No. 54-79 (Ch. 63, Art. IV, of the 1972
Code)]
§ 216-10. Scope.
On and after the effective date of this article, the following regulations
shall control the preparation and collection of refuse, garbage and rubbish
within the Township of Jackson. It is the policy and intent of this article
that to protect and provide for the public's safety, health and welfare every
owner or occupant of premises in the Township shall be responsible for the
disposition of refuse, rubbish and garbage originating on his premises.
§ 216-11. Definitions; word usage.
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words in the plural include the singular number, and words in the
singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always
mandatory and not merely directory.
ASHES — The residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke or other
combustible material.
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization or any kind.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid waste (except body
waste), including garbage, rubbish, ashes and street cleanings.
RUBBISH — Nonperishable solid wastes, excluding ashes, consisting of
both combustible and noncombustible waste, such as paper, cardboard, tin
cans, yard clippings, wood, glass, crockery and similar materials.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Jackson.
§ 216-12. Receptacle requirements. [Amended 8-11-1980 by Ord.
No. 36-80; 12-27-2016 by Ord. No. 31-16]
A. Subject to the specific provisions of § 216-13, it shall be the duty of
every owner, tenant, lessee or occupant of every building within the
corporate limits of the Township to provide or cause to be provided and
to keep on the premises, at all times, suitable receptacles for receiving
and holding the garbage, refuse and rubbish that may accumulate or be
collected in the premises. Suitable receptacles shall be designed for the
combined disposal of garbage, refuse and rubbish and shall be
watertight and closely covered. Except as otherwise provided herein,
§ 216-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-12
1:515
§ 216-13. Precollection practices. [Amended 8-11-1980 by Ord. No.
36-80]
suitable receptacles shall have a capacity of 96 gallons or less or shall
be disposable plastic trash bags, which shall be sealed.
B. Burlap bags may be used for the disposal of leaves, grass clippings, tree
trimmings, brush and similar materials.
A. Garbage and rubbish. All garbage and rubbish, before being placed in
garbage cans or other receptacles as described in § 216-12, shall be
drained of liquid and may be wrapped in paper.
B. Trimmings and clippings. Tree trimmings, which shall be no more than
three inches in diameter, brush and similar materials shall be cut to a
length of six feet or less and securely tied in bundles not more than two
feet thick and are not to weigh more than 30 pounds before being
deposited for collection.
C. Lawn clippings and leaves. Lawn clippings, hedge clippings and leaves
must be placed in disposable receptacles for collection consistent with
the requirements of § 216-12 hereof.
D. Newspapers. Newspapers shall be securely bound with string or cord in
bundles not to exceed 50 pounds of weight.
E. Capacity. No refuse, rubbish or garbage receptacles, newspaper
bundles, plastic bags, etc., shall exceed 50 pounds in weight and shall
be of such size and shape as to permit easy handling. Bundles of tied
tree trimmings and brush shall not exceed 30 pounds.
F. Duty to maintain refuse, rubbish and garbage receptacles in a safe and
sanitary condition. All refuse, rubbish and garbage receptacles shall be
maintained in a safe and sanitary condition, and any receptacle that
does not conform to the provisions of this article or that has ragged or
sharp edges or any other defects liable to hamper or injure the person
collecting the contents thereof shall be promptly replaced. Any
collector of such refuse, rubbish or garbage shall have the authority to
refuse collection services for failure to comply herewith.
G. Each box, carton or other similar container must be flattened out and
disassembled so as to be readily and easily handled. No part of any such
article shall exceed four feet in length or weigh more than 50 pounds
when deposited for collection.
H. All broken glass, pottery, ceramic or other similar materials shall be
placed in a secure container to facilitate the safe loading of such
materials.
I. Each container of rubbish, refuse or garbage shall be so staked or
otherwise stabilized by the property owner, tenant or other person
placing such refuse, rubbish or garbage for collection or from whose
§ 216-12 JACKSON CODE § 216-13
1:516
§ 216-14. Collection practices. [Amended 8-11-1980 by Ord. No.
36-80]
property such garbage is proposed to be collected, so that it cannot
be readily overturned or upset as by animal infiltration or by a child.
Metallic receptacles shall be properly secured with a tight-fitting lid or
cover, and disposable plastic bags shall be properly sealed.
J. If any receptacle containing rubbish, garbage or refuse is upset or
overturned by a person other than a collector engaged in garbage,
rubbish or refuse collection, the property owner, tenant or other person
placing such refuse, rubbish or garbage for collection shall promptly
clean up such spillage and restore same to a receptacle as herein
provided.
K. If any receptacle of refuses, rubbish or garbage is upset or overturned
by a collector, the person responsible for such spillage shall
immediately collect and dispose of same in accordance with this article.
L. All garbage, rubbish or refuse containers must be removed from the
curb or other authorized point of pickup by the property owner by 9:00
p.m. of the same day that garbage, rubbish or refuse is collected.
A. Frequency of collection. Garbage, refuse and rubbish accumulated by
residents of the Township shall be collected at least once a week on a
schedule to be established by the collector. Such schedule may be
altered or amended from time to time to conform with legal holidays
and other emergency matters or upon special arrangements with a
collector.
B. Placement of receptacles. All receptacles shall be placed by the owner,
tenant, lessee or occupant of the building at the curbline to the front of
their premises before 6:00 a.m. on the days designated for collection as
herein provided; provided, however, that if any building abuts upon any
street not improved by curbs, then receptacles shall be placed by the
owner, tenant, lessee or occupant of the building at a point where the
street and the physical boundary of such premises meet or as
reasonable safety precautions may dictate.
C. Quantity. No person shall be entitled to have collected on a specified
day more than eight receptacles weighing not more than 50 pounds
each, provided that no more than four of these receptacles shall contain
lawn clippings, hedge clippings, tree trimmings, brush, leaves or other
similar materials and that no more than four of these receptacles shall
contain refuse, garbage or rubbish. This provision shall be construed as
establishing minimum requirements which can be increased upon
special arrangements with the collector. For purposes of this section,
each separate bundle of tree trimmings, tied brush or newspapers and
each separate container of refuse shall be deemed to be one
receptacle.102
§ 216-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-15
1:517
§ 216-15. Refuse, rubbish and garbage not acceptable for
collection. [Amended 8-11-1980 by Ord. No. 36-80]
The following refuse shall be deemed not acceptable for collection:
§ 216-16. Vehicle requirements.
§ 216-17. Collection contracts authorized; bids; municipal
collection system.
The Township Committee shall have the power, if in its opinion it is more
advantageous to have garbage, refuse and rubbish collected, removed and
A. Dangerous materials or substances, such as poisons, acids, caustics,
noxious chemicals, radioactive materials, corrosives, infected
materials, explosives and ammunitions or any other materials likely to
cause injury to any person or damage to equipment used in making
collections.
B. Any more than one receptacle of materials resulting from the
demolition, repair, excavation, construction, renovation and similar
activities performed on buildings or structures, including but not
limited to such materials as plaster, mortar, lumber, roofing materials
and the like.
C. Special materials generated by a contractor shall be entirely disposed
of by the contractor.
D. Septic waste, sewage or fecal matter, loose piles of vegetation or tree
branches, unless properly prepared for collection.
A. Each vehicle shall be equipped with a broom and shovel, and all
scattered litter shall be cleaned up at the loading point. Boxes, barrels
or cartons shall not be broken or torn apart on the sidewalk or street.
B. Any person who shall transport in his own vehicles only garbage,
rubbish or refuse accumulated as a result of his own business operation
and not the garbage, refuse or rubbish of any other person shall use
either a totally enclosed vehicle body or an open-body vehicle in which
garbage, refuse or rubbish is stored in metal containers with tightly
fitting metal covers.
C. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, all vehicles used for the
purpose of collecting garbage, refuse or rubbish shall otherwise be in
conformance with all applicable standards and regulations prescribed
by the Department of Motor Vehicles of the State of New Jersey,
Department of Health of the State of New Jersey, the Department of
Public Utilities of the State of New Jersey and any other governmental
agency or department having jurisdiction over such collection.
102. Editor's Note: Original § 63-21, Littering lots or public places prohibited, of the 1972
Code, as amended 8-11-1980 by Ord. No. 36-80, which immediately followed this section,
was repealed 1-27-1992 by Ord. No. 1-92.
§ 216-15 JACKSON CODE § 216-17
1:518
disposed of by private collectors, to make a contract or contracts for such
work or any portion thereof with any individual or individuals, corporation
or corporations. Said contract shall be entered into and made only after
bids therefor have been advertised according and subject to all applicable
laws. The person to whom such contract is awarded shall give satisfactory
bond or security for the faithful performance of his work. The Township
Committee shall also have the power to establish a municipal system for
the collection and disposal of garbage, refuse and rubbish subject to all
applicable laws.
§ 216-18. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $500 or imprisonment in the county
jail for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both, in the discretion of the Judge
before whom such convictions shall be had. Each and every violation of this
article, or each day that any provision of this article shall be violated, shall
be construed as a separate and distinct violation thereof.
§ 216-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-18
1:519

ARTICLE IV
Recycling
[Adopted 8-8-1988 by Ord. No. 22-88 (Ch. 63, Art. V, of the 1972
Code)]
§ 216-19. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Recycling Ordinance of
the Township of Jackson."
§ 216-20. Definitions.
The words, terms and phrases used in this article shall have the following
meanings:
ALUMINUM CANS — All empty all-aluminum beverage and food containers.
AUTHORIZED PERSONS LICENSE — The license required by person,
persons, partnerships, organizations or corporations to pick up recyclable
materials pursuant to § 216-24 of this article.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS — Those properties used primarily for
commercial purposes and professional offices, which shall include but not
be limited to shopping centers, restaurants, convenience stores, fast-food
establishments, marinas, taverns and other offices.
FERROUS CONTAINERS — Empty steel or tin food or beverage containers.
GLASS CONTAINERS — Bottles and jars made of clear, green or brown
glass. Expressly excluded are noncontainer glass, plate glass, blue glass,
porcelain products, ceramic products and light bulbs.[Amended
10-13-2009 by Ord. No. 27-09]
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENTS — Those facilities that house or serve
groups of people, including but not limited to hospitals, schools, nursing
homes, libraries and governmental offices.
NEWSPAPERS — Paper of the type commonly referred to as "newsprint"
and distributed at fixed intervals, having printed thereon news and opinions
and containing advertisements and other matters of public interest.
Expressly excluded, however, are newspapers which have been soiled, wet
or yellowed.
OIL — All used motor oils from individuals changing oil from cars, lawn
mowers, motorcycles and other motorized vehicles and machinery.
Expressly excluded are transmission fluids, brake fluids, kerosene, gasoline
and any oil degreasers or solvents.
PERSON — Every owner, lessee and occupant of a residence, commercial
or institutional establishment within the boundaries of the Township of
Jackson.
PLASTIC — Any plastic beverage container which would include PET
bottles, plastic milk containers, cider, soda and water containers and
§ 216-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-20
1:521
detergent containers. Expressly excluded are all other forms of
plastics.[Amended 10-13-2009 by Ord. No. 27-09]
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those materials which would otherwise
become municipal solid waste and which may be collected, separated or
processed and returned to the economic mainstream in the form of raw
materials or products.
RESIDENCE — Any occupied single-family or multifamily dwelling having
up to four dwelling units per structure from which a municipal or private
hauler collects solid waste.
SOLID WASTE — Garbage, refuse and other discarded solid material
normally collected by a municipal or private hauler.
§ 216-21. Recycling program established. [Amended 10-13-2009 by
Ord. No. 27-09; 6-11-2013 by Ord. No. 11-13]
A. The Recycling Coordinator shall establish and promulgate reasonable
rules and regulations as to the manner, days and times for curbside
collection, sorting, transportation, sale and/or marketing of said
recyclable material in order to encourage the preservation of material
resources while minimizing the cost of the recycling program to the
Township of Jackson. The rules and regulations provided for hereunder
shall be adopted by resolution of the Township Council and shall be in
accordance with the Ocean County Solid Waste Plan. Copies shall be
maintained in the office of the Township Clerk and be available for
inspection and/or purchase.
B. Recyclable material shall be the property of the Township of Jackson
once placed at curbside or brought to a dropoff center.
C. It shall be a violation of this article for any person unauthorized by the
Township of Jackson to pick up or cause to be picked up said recyclable
material. Each such collection in violation hereof shall constitute a
separate distinct offense punishable as hereinafter provided.
D. The Township may use municipal personnel to collect residential
recyclable material set forth herein at curbside and/or from a dropoff
center. Disposal shall be in accordance with the agreement set forth by
the Ocean County Solid Waste Plan.
E. The Township may elect to enter into agreements with any private
vendor, person, partnership, corporation or municipality authorizing
him or it to collect said recyclable material at curbside or from a dropoff
center. All recyclable materials shall be disposed in agreement with
Ocean County and in accordance with the Ocean County Solid Waste
plan.
F. It is mandatory for all residents, homeowners, and renters to recycle, as
mandated by the Ocean County Solid Waste Plan and N.J.A.C. 7:26A,
from all other solid waste produced by such residence for collection and
ultimate recycling of said materials.
§ 216-20 JACKSON CODE § 216-21
1:522
G. It is mandatory for businesses, commercial establishments, institutional
establishments, educational institutions, and civic, religious, and
nonprofit organizations within the boundaries of Jackson Township to
recycle as mandated by Jackson Township, the Ocean County Solid
Waste Plan and N.J.A.C. 7:26A. These entities will be responsible for
removal of their own recycling by having it hauled by a private vendor
or taking it to a registered recycling facility. Jackson Township will not
be responsible for removal or receiving recycling from these
establishments but reserves the right to accept certain recycling
products from these entities. Businesses or institutions hauling their
own recyclables shall provide the Municipal Recycling Coordinator with
quarterly reports on the quantity and destination of recyclables.
H. All residents shall be responsible for providing their own recycling
containers, not to exceed 32 gallons, which will be placed curbside on a
biweekly basis as scheduled by the Department of Public Works and the
current vendor's contract. For descriptive purposes, "residents" will be
defined as owners or renters of single-family dwellings, duplexes,
mobile homes, condominiums, town homes and private communities.
Apartment dwellers are required to recycle and will use the containers
placed in designated areas by their management office or by the
curbside recycling vendor contracted by Jackson Township.
I. There are eight designated Public Works districts located in Jackson
Township that are used for scheduling curbside recycling, leaf, brush
and bulky pickup. Residents may locate their individual district by
visiting www.Jacksontwpnj.net, or by calling the Department of Public
Works at 732-928-1200. Maps outlining districts are also available in
the Department of Public Works.
J. Resident containers, which shall be 32 gallons or less, should bear a
yellow Jackson Township recycling sticker. Recycling stickers are
available in the Department of Public Works and are free of charge for
residents. Residents may also use larger cans, up to 96 gallons, if they
are approved by the contracted curbside recycling vendor and can be
picked up by the vendor's automated system.
K. There is hereby established a curbside single-stream recycling program
for use by residents as in accordance with the Ocean County Solid
Waste Plan. The following recyclable materials shall be collected from
the municipal solid waste recycling containers:
(1) Aluminum and tin cans.
(2) Glass jars and bottles.
(3) Plastic containers (neck must be smaller than the body of the
container).
(4) Newspapers.
(5) Mixed paper.
§ 216-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-21
1:523
§ 216-22. Separation of recyclables; placement for disposal; used
motor oil. [Amended 6-11-2013 by Ord. No. 11-13]
(6) Magazines.
(7) Corrugated (excludes gray board or chip board).
(8) Junk mail.
L. All of these items may be mixed together in containers. Up to seven
containers, 32 gallons or less, may be placed curbside for biweekly
pickup.
M. Items that should be excluded are:
(1) Cereal, tissue boxes and pizza boxes.
(2) Plastic bags.
(3) Paper plates and plastic utensils.
(4) Fast-food/restaurant containers that held take-out food or deli-type
food.
(5) Aluminum foil and trays.
(6) Cans that contained motor oil or any type of hazardous liquid.
(7) Drinking glasses.
(8) Light bulbs.
(9) Regular household trash.
(10) Styrofoam.
(11) Bottle caps.
(12) Toys, lawn furniture, plastic hoses, mop/broom handles, flower
pots, etc.
N. If any of the above is found in the recycling containers, the load will be
left and deemed "contaminated."
O. All recycling shall be placed curbside before 6:00 a.m. on the day of the
scheduled pickup. It is recommended that the container be placed
curbside the night before.
P. Residents also have the option of disposing of their recycling at the
transfer station located on Don Connor Boulevard.
Q. All recycling regulations are to be in compliance with N.J.A.C. 7:26A et
seq. and the Ocean County Solid Waste Plan. Copies of regulations are
on file in the Department of Public Works and the Office of the Township
Clerk and are available to the public during normal business hours.
§ 216-21 JACKSON CODE § 216-22
1:524
§ 216-23. Leaves. [Amended 6-11-2013 by Ord. No. 11-13]
All persons within the municipality shall, from the period at such times
and dates as may be hereinafter established in the municipality's recycling
regulations of each year, separate leaves from other solid waste generated
at their premises and, unless the leaves are stored or recycled for
composting or mulching on the premises, place the leaves at the curb or
other designated area for collection at such times and dates and in the
manner established by the municipality's recycling regulations.
§ 216-24. Alternative collection by authorized collectors. [Amended
6-11-2013 by Ord. No. 11-13]
A. The recyclable materials designated in § 216-21 of this article shall be
put in a suitable container, separate from other solid waste, and placed
at the curb or such other designated area for collection at such times
and dates as may be hereinafter established in the municipality's
recycling regulations. The container for recyclable materials shall be
clearly labeled and placed at the curb or other such designated area for
collection and not to exceed 32 gallons' capacity or 50 pounds in weight
or as designated in § 216-21J.
B. It shall be unlawful to dispose of used motor oil in any manner other
than through an authorized used oil collection site. On and after the
adoption of this article and in accordance with existing state
regulations (N.J.A.C. 14A:3-11), any person or property with used oil
holding tanks, as designated by the Recycling Coordinator, shall accept
up to five gallons at a time of used motor oil from individuals changing
oil from cars, lawn mowers, motorcycles and other motorized vehicles
and machinery and shall post a sign informing the public that they are a
used oil collection site. No new persons or sites will be established
except by written authorization of the Recycling Coordinator and with
the approval of the Mayor and Council.
A. As an alternative, Jackson Township reserves the right to donate or sell
recyclable materials to an authorized person or persons, partnership,
organization or corporation as established by the guidelines of this
section and in accordance with the Ocean County Solid Waste Plan.
B. The governing body may authorize a qualified person, persons,
partnership, organization or corporation to collect recyclable materials
as defined in §§ 216-21, 216-22 and 216-23.
C. Any partnerships or corporations shall provide to the Township of
Jackson tipping receipts on a monthly basis. Failure to comply with this
provision shall constitute a violation of this article and shall be subject
to penalties provided under this section of this article. Furthermore,
any violations of this section may result in the revocation of said license
hereinafter stated.
§ 216-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-25
1:525
§ 216-25. Collection by unauthorized collectors. [Amended
6-11-2013 by Ord. No. 11-13]
It shall be a violation of this article for any unauthorized person, persons,
partnerships, organizations or corporations to collect, pick up or cause to
be collected or picked up within the boundaries of the municipality any of
the recyclables designated in §§ 216-21, 216-22 and 216-23 of this article.
Each such collection in violation of this article shall constitute a separate
and distinct offense punishable as hereinafter provided.
§ 216-26. Administration and enforcement. [Amended 6-11-2013 by
Ord. No. 11-13]
The municipality, Recycling Coordinator and Director of Public Works are
hereby authorized and directed to establish and promulgate reasonable
regulations detailing the manner, days and times for the collection of the
recyclable materials designated in §§ 216-21, 216-22 and 216-23 of this
article and such other matters as are required to implement this article.
Such regulations shall take effect only upon the approval of the Township
Council by adoption of a resolution implementing the same. The Recycling
Coordinator, the Director of Public Works, the Police Department and the
Code Enforcement Officer and their duly designated employees or
subordinates are hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions
of this article and any implementing regulations adopted hereunder.
§ 216-27. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-13-2009 by Ord.
No. 27-09; 6-11-2013 by Ord. No. 11-13]
§ 216-28. Exemptions. [Amended 6-11-2013 by Ord. No. 11-13]
The Township Council of the municipality may exempt persons occupying
commercial and institution establishments from the source-separation
requirements of § 216-22 of this article if those persons have otherwise
provided for the recycling of recyclable materials designated in § 216-21
of this article. To be eligible for an exemption under this section, the
person seeking the same shall, prior to June 1 each year, provide written
documentation to the municipality of the total amount of materials recycled
during the preceding calendar year.
A. Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this article or
any regulations adopted hereunder shall be subject to a fine of not less
than $250 or more than $2,500 or imprisonment of up to 30 days for
each offense.
B. No action shall be taken to enforce the provisions of §§ 216-21, 216-22
and 216-23 of this article until its final passage and publication as
required by law.
C. Each and every day in which a violation of any of the provisions of this
article exists shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 216-25 JACKSON CODE § 216-29
1:526
§ 216-29. through § 216-30. (Reserved)103
103. Editor's Note: Former § 216-29, Storage pails; fee, added 9-10-1990 by Ord. No. 50-90, as
amended, and former § 216-30, Tires; fee, added 12-14-2010 by Ord. No. 40-10, were
repealed 6-11-2013 by Ord. No. 11-13.
§ 216-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-29
1:527

ARTICLE V
Transfer Station and Bulky Waste Compactor
[Adopted 8-28-1995 by Ord. No. 31-95 (Ch. 63, Art. VI, of the 1972
Code)]
§ 216-31. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish basic rules and regulations for the
safe and efficient use of the Jackson Township transfer station and bulky
waste compactor.
§ 216-32. Use encouraged.
The Township strongly encourages all Jackson residents to bring all
acceptable residential bulky waste materials to this facility, subject to the
provisions of the following sections.
§ 216-33. Ownership of recyclable and waste materials.
All recyclable and/or waste materials either deposited at the site of the
municipal transfer station or bulky waste compactor or picked up curbside
by Township employees shall immediately become the property of the
Township and shall be disposed of in a manner prescribed by law.
§ 216-34. Rules and regulations.
A. "Residential bulky waste" defined. Residential bulky waste items
include appliances, furniture, bedding, rugs, pool covers, landscaping
items and any other similar types of bulky, nonhazardous, unwanted
household waste materials that are generated by a homeowner
maintaining a residential property in Jackson Township.
B. Jackson residents and homeowners only. The facility provides residents
with a valuable service that is not available in many neighboring
communities. As such, it is necessary for all users of the facility to
submit proof of Jackson residency and/or residential property
ownership. Acceptable forms of proof include drivers license, voter
registration card, photo identification card or, in the case of
nonresident homeowners, a current tax bill in combination with one of
the above.
C. No commercial waste. No waste materials of any kind whatsoever that
are generated by commercial activities or business operations of any
sort, including, but not limited to, retail stores, professional offices, real
estate agencies, landlords, contractors and agricultural business
enterprises, shall be permitted to be deposited at the facility.
D. Prohibited waste materials. No nonrecyclable liquid and/or hazardous
materials of any kind are permitted to be deposited at the facility.
E. Construction/demolition debris.
§ 216-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-34
1:529
(1) Definition. Construction/demolition debris consists of any and all
nonhazardous building materials, including, but not limited to,
plywood, lumber, Sheetrock, paneling, insulation material,
plumbing fixtures, cabinetry, windows, doors, roofing and siding
materials and any other similar types of materials generated by the
construction, demolition, alteration or repair of any residential
dwelling or accessory structure related to residential use.
(2) Limitations.
(a) All construction/demolition debris deposited at the facility
must be no larger than four feet by four feet.
(b) Construction/demolition debris accepted at the facility shall be
limited to only those waste materials generated by
construction, demolition, alteration or repair activities
conducted by the resident or homeowner himself in
accordance with all applicable building codes and regulations.
No waste materials shall be accepted from any residential
property where any such work is performed by a contractor or
tradesman on a commercial basis.
(3) Voucher required.
(a) All residents and homeowners wishing to dispose of
construction/demolition debris at the facility shall be required
to first obtain a voucher authorizing the same from the Jackson
Township Department of Public Works. [Amended 7-9-2001
by Ord. No. 20-01]
(b) The Jackson Township Department of Public Works shall issue
no more than two construction/demolition debris disposal
vouchers per improved residential lot per year. Each voucher
shall bear the lot and block number of the property against
which it is issued as well as the date of issuance. [Amended
7-9-2001 by Ord. No. 20-01]
(c) The Jackson resident or homeowner shall surrender to the
compactor attendant one voucher upon each trip to the
municipal transfer station regardless of the size of the vehicle
transporting the debris that is disposed of, provided that said
vehicle complies with the provisions of Subsection G herein.
(d) All vouchers issued in accordance with this Subsection E(3)
shall be deemed to have expired one year after the date of
issuance of the same.
F. Tires.
(1) All residents and homeowners wishing to dispose of passenger car
tire casings shall be required to transport the same to the transfer
station facility. No tires will be picked up curbside by Township
§ 216-34 JACKSON CODE § 216-34
1:530
§ 216-35. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article or any
regulations adopted hereunder shall be subject to a fine of not more than
$1,000 or imprisonment of up to 30 days for each offense.
personnel as part of Jackson Township's bulky waste pickup
program.
(2) No truck, tractor or heavy equipment tires or racing slicks will be
accepted for disposal, and all light passenger vehicle tires shall be
dismounted from the wheel prior to being delivered to the transfer
station for disposal.
(3) All residents and homeowners shall be permitted to dispose of up to
eight light passenger vehicle tire casings per calendar year. All tire
casings disposed of at the transfer station shall be counted and
recorded against the lot and block number of the homeowner or
resident's property, and all such records shall be maintained by the
transfer station attendant.
G. Size of vehicles limited. Any vehicle transporting bulky waste material
to the facility shall be of a gross vehicle weight of no more than 8,000
pounds.
H. Affidavit may be required. In any instance where a question arises as to
the user's residency qualifications and/or origin of the bulky waste
materials, the resident may be required to execute an affidavit attesting
to the same and acknowledging the penalties for misrepresentation.
I. Vehicle records required. The attendant at the transfer station will
record the vehicle registration of all vehicles entering and using the
facility. In addition, all vehicles and users entering the facility will be
videotaped.
J. Right to reject waste materials. The Township reserves the right to
reject any and all waste materials that may be deemed by the Township
to be potentially detrimental to the safe and efficient operation of the
transfer station, notwithstanding that the material may be otherwise
qualified for disposal at the site under the provisions of this article.
§ 216-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-35
1:531

ARTICLE VI
Bulky Waste and Brush Collection
[Adopted 11-12-2013 by Ord. No. 20-13104]
§ 216-36. Bulky waste collection program established. [Amended
9-24-2019 by Ord. No. 25-19]
§ 216-37. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BRUSH — Trimmings and clippings resulting from the ordinary and regular
pruning and trimming of residential ornamental trees and shrubbery.
COMMERCIAL BULKY WASTE — Any type of bulky waste materials
generated by commercial enterprises or business operations of any sort,
including but not limited to retail stores, professional offices, real estate
A. The Township Council finds it necessary for the convenience of
residents to provide a bulky waste and brush curbside collection
program for all residents. The Department of Public Works shall
establish a bulky waste collection program and a separate scheduled
time for a brush curbside collection program which shall provide each
resident with the opportunity to have their brush and bulky waste items
collected once annually. Pickup will be scheduled by individual Public
Works Zones 1 through 8. The following communities will not be listed
by zone, but by community name as follows:
Private Residential Community
Westlake
Westlake Mews
Winding Ways
CooksBridge Orleans
Four Seasons at Metedeconk
Four Seasons at South Knolls
60 Acres
B. Residents may visit www.jacksontwpnj.net or call 732-928-1311 to
determine in which zone they reside. The annual curbside pickup
schedule for bulky waste and brush shall be determined by the Director
of Public Works and shall be advertised on the Jackson Township
website, local cable access channel and advertised in local publications.
Residents will be notified accordingly each year through various means
of communication and direct mail.
104. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. VI, Bulky Waste and Brush
Collection, adopted 12-11-1995 by Ord. No. 36-95 (Ch. 63, Art. VII, of the 1972 Code).
§ 216-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-37
1:533
agencies, commercial landlords, contractors and agricultural business
enterprises.
CONSTRUCTION/DEMOLITION DEBRIS — Any and all nonhazardous
building materials, such as plywood, lumber, sheetrock, paneling, moldings,
insulation material, plumbing fixtures, roofing and siding materials, that are
generated by the construction, demolition, alteration or remodeling of any
residential dwelling or residential accessory structures.
CONTAINERIZED — The placement of yard waste in a trash can, bucket,
recycle-type paper bag or other vessel, such as to prevent the yard waste
from spilling or blowing out into the street and coming into contact with
stormwater.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Dangerous materials or substances, such as
poisons, acids, caustics, pesticides, paints, chemicals, explosives and any
other materials likely to cause an injury to any person or damage to
equipment used in making collections, such as pool chemicals, automotive
maintenance chemicals, barbecue grill propane tanks that have not been
completely emptied and any other such waste items that may be defined as
"hazardous" and/or "toxic" under state and federal law.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
RESIDENTIAL BULKY WASTE — Any type of bulky items that are not
appropriate for disposal in regular household trash due to their size and
nature, including but not limited to appliances, furniture, bedding, rugs,
pool covers, and any similar types of bulky nonhazardous household waste
items that are generated by a resident maintaining and residing in a
residential property in Jackson Township. Landlords will be considered
commercial vendors and total house cleanouts will not be acceptable for
curbside pickup.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive,
or other way, which is an existing state, county, or municipal roadway,
and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or
unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, parking areas, and other areas within the street lines.
YARD WASTE — Leaves and brush.
§ 216-38. Tires prohibited.
No tires will be collected in the Township's bulky waste collection program.
Residents should contact the Ocean County Department of Solid Waste for
instructions as to how to dispose of tires.
§ 216-39. Waste to be separated and contained. [Amended
9-24-2019 by Ord. No. 25-19]
All residents placing bulky waste items for curbside collection shall
separate the same into metal and nonmetal piles. Small broken items, such
§ 216-37 JACKSON CODE § 216-39
1:534
as toy pieces, broken glass and shoes should be placed in regular trash,
as these are not considered bulky items. Electronic waste, e.g., televisions,
computers, monitors, etc. are not considered bulky waste and will not be
picked up curbside. These items may be disposed of at the bulky waste
convenience center located on Don Connor Boulevard, Jackson Township,
during regular operating hours.
§ 216-40. Brush.
Brush placed for collection must be no larger than four inches in diameter
and six feet in length and placed with butt end facing the street. In addition,
all small brush must be secured in bundles weighing less than 50 pounds
each. No logs, stumps, grass clippings, evergreens with roots or debris from
land clearing will be collected. Christmas trees are not considered brush
and may not be placed curbside. Trees may be disposed of from January
2 through February 1 at the following dropoff locations and each park will
have a specific area designated for Christmas tree dropoff.
§ 216-41. Scavenging prohibited.
All recyclable and bulky waste materials placed at curbside for collection
shall immediately become the property of the Township and shall be
disposed of in a manner prescribed by law. Persons convicted of scavenging
shall be subject to the penalties provided for in Articles I through VI of this
chapter.
§ 216-42. Limit on amount of waste placed for collection. [Amended
9-24-2019 by Ord. No. 25-19]
No person shall place for collection, brush and/or bulky waste items that,
in the aggregate, amount to more than five cubic yards for any one pickup.
Piles of bulky waste items shall be neatly placed, separated and organized
according to composition in accordance with § 216-39 in a pile not to exceed
approximately four feet wide by four feet high by eight feet long.
§ 216-43. Restrictions on time and location of placement of waste
at curbside. [Amended 9-24-2019 by Ord. No. 25-19]
No person shall place bulky waste, brush or yard waste at curbside for
collection more than 48 hours prior to the first day of collection scheduled
for his/her zone. No person shall place bulky waste, brush or yard waste
closer than 10 feet to any storm drain inlet. Placement of any such waste at
A. Jackson Township Compost Facility.
B. Johnson Park.
C. Woodlane Park.
D. Camp Joy.
E. Putnam Park.
§ 216-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-43
1:535
the curb or along the street at any other time or in any other manner is a
violation of this article.
§ 216-44. Commercial bulky waste not to be collected.
No commercial bulky waste will be collected by the Jackson Township
Department of Public Works from any property.
§ 216-45. Violations and penalties.
§ 216-46. through § 216-48. (Reserved)
A. Any resident violating the provisions of this article shall be issued a
warning notice by the Department of Public Works and/or Code
Enforcement upon the first offense. Upon a second violation, the
resident shall be issued a fine of up to $500 by the Division of Code
Enforcement.
B. A third offense under this article shall be punishable, upon the
conviction in Municipal Court, by a fine of not less than $1,000 or by
imprisonment for not exceeding 90 days, or both.
§ 216-43 JACKSON CODE § 216-46
1:536
ARTICLE VII
Disposal Regulations
[Adopted 1-27-1992 by Ord. No. 1-92 (Ch. 90A, Art. I, of the 1972
Code)]
§ 216-49. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Antidumping and Littering Ordinance"
and may be so cited.
§ 216-50. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting from either
the handling, preparation, cooking or consumption of food.
LITTER — Garbage, refuse and rubbish, as such are defined herein, and all
other waste materials which are thrown or deposited as herein prohibited
and tend to create a danger to the public health, safety and welfare.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
PRIVATE PREMISES — Any dwelling, house, building or other structure
designed or used either wholly or in part for residential purposes, whether
inhabited or temporarily or continuously inhabited or vacant, and shall
include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, step, vestibule or mailbox
belonging to or appurtenant to such dwelling, house or building or other
structure.
PUBLIC PLACE — Includes all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or
other public walkways and all public parks, squares, spaces, docks, grounds
and buildings.
PUTRESCIBLE — Decomposing organic matter usually composed of rotten
or foul-smelling solid waste.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, except body
wastes, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals,
abandoned automobiles and boats and solid market and industrial waste,
specifically including abandoned furniture, household equipment, scrap
building materials, scrap lawn and garden tools and machinery and other
such similar items.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible
and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrapping, cigarettes, cigars and
tobacco wastes, cardboard, tin cans, yard, garden or lawn clippings, leaves,
wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar material.
SOLID WASTE — Any garbage, refuse and other discarded materials from
industrial, commercial and agricultural operation and from domestic and
§ 216-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-50
1:537
community activities, and includes all other waste material, including
liquids.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
§ 216-51. Improper disposal; violations and penalties.
§ 216-52. Liquid waste; violations and penalties.
§ 216-53. Littering prohibited; violations and penalties.
A. Prohibition of dumping. No person shall, regardless of intent, engage or
be permitted to engage in the disposal of any garbage, litter, refuse,
rubbish or solid waste in any amount greater than 0.148 cubic yard of
solids or 30 United States gallons of liquids, each of which is roughly
equivalent to one thirty-gallon trash bag or garbage container, at any
site within any private premises or public place in the Township of
Jackson which has not received authorization from the Department of
Environmental Protection and Energy and/or the Board of Public
Utilities for the acceptance of such materials. Any person found to have
engaged in the improper disposal of more than 0.148 cubic yard of
solids or 30 United States gallons of liquids shall be subject to the
penalties as provided in Subsection B of this section. In the event that
the amount disposed of is less than the amount mentioned in this
section, the provisions of this article which follow shall apply.
B. Violations and penalties. Any person violating provisions of Subsection
A of this section shall be subject to a fine of a minimum amount of
$2,500 or a maximum of $10,000, or a term of imprisonment in the
county jail not to exceed 90 days, or both, or community service as
ordered by the court, which shall not reduce the fine imposed by more
than 50%. Each and every violation of Subsection A of this section or
each day that the provisions of Subsection A are violated shall be
construed as a separate and distinct violation thereof. [Amended
4-9-2001 by Ord. No. 11-01; 5-8-2018 by Ord. No. 10-18]
A. Improper disposal of liquid waste. No person shall, regardless of intent,
be permitted to engage in the disposal of any liquid waste, such as
antifreeze, transmission fluid, vehicle battery acid or motor oil, on any
residential or public property by permitting said fluids and/or
substances to drain onto the ground or into a storm sewer.
B. Violations and penalties. Any person found to have permitted such
drainage from any vehicle of any of the above-mentioned fluids shall be
subject to a fine of a minimum amount of $250 and a maximum amount
of $1,000 or community service as ordered by the Court, which shall not
reduce the fine imposed by more than 50%.
§ 216-50 JACKSON CODE § 216-53
1:538
§ 216-54. Accidental spills.
Any person found to have accidentally caused the improper disposal of
any liquids or solids through any incidental spills, automobile accidents
or otherwise, provided that said spill does not concern hazardous or toxic
waste otherwise controlled by state statute, shall have 48 hours from the
time of such accident to take corrective action to fully clean up the
accidental spill. In the event that said person fails to take the necessary
corrective action to clean up the accidental spill, the other provisions of this
article shall take full force and effect as if the spill were not of an accidental
nature.
§ 216-55. Property maintenance; violations and penalties.
A. Littering in public or private places prohibited. No person shall sweep,
throw, deposit or dump any garbage, litter, refuse, rubbish, solid waste
or other waste material on any street or sidewalk or any public or
private premises, whether vacant or not, except in public or private
receptacles for the collection of such materials. No person shall use any
private receptacle which is owned or rented by another without the
express permission of the person who owns or rents the private
receptacle.
B. Violations and penalties. Any person violating provisions of Subsection
A of this section shall be subject to a fine in a minimal amount of $100
and a maximum amount of $1,000 or imprisonment in the county jail for
a term not exceeding 90 days, or both, or community service as ordered
by the court, which shall not reduce the fine imposed by more than
50%. Each and every violation of Subsection A of this section or each
day that the provisions of Subsection A are violated shall be construed
as a separate and distinct violation thereof. [Amended 8-9-1999 by
Ord. No. 16-99]
A. Maintenance of property from litter. No person shall establish, maintain
or permit any other dump or area for the disposal of garbage, litter,
refuse, rubbish or solid waste or other waste material of any nature or
kind in any private premises or public place located with the Township
of Jackson. The owner or person in control of any private premises shall
at all times maintain the premises free of garbage, litter, refuse, rubbish
or solid waste or other waste material, with the exception of storage of
such materials in approved receptacles designated for collection.
B. Violations and penalties. Any person violating provisions of Subsection
A of this section shall be subject to a fine in a minimum amount of $100
or imprisonment in the county jail for a term not to exceed 90 days, or
both, or community service as ordered by the Court, which shall not
reduce the fine imposed by more than 50%. Each and every violation of
Subsection A of this section or each day that the provisions of
Subsection A are violated shall be construed as a separate and distinct
violation thereof.
§ 216-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-56
1:539
§ 216-56. Enforcement.
All provisions contained within this article shall at all times be subject
to enforcement by the Police Department of the Township of Jackson and
by the Jackson Township Code Enforcement Officer or his duly designated
agent of the Township of Jackson.
§ 216-57. Removal of waste; notice to comply.
A representative of either the Police Department or the Code Enforcement
Department of the Township of Jackson is authorized and empowered to
order the immediate removal and proper disposal of any garbage, litter,
refuse, rubbish or solid waste or any waste material. In the event that such
material is not immediately removed, either department is authorized to
notify the appropriate owner of any private premises or vacant land, or the
tenant or agent of such owner, or the person or persons responsible for the
disposal of any garbage, litter, refuse, rubbish, solid waste or other waste
material upon any public property, to properly remove and dispose of such
material within seven days after the receipt of notice. Any written notice
shall be by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed
to the responsible person or his agent at his last known address or serviced
personally upon such responsible person. This section shall apply to cleanup
of the affected property only and shall not preclude enforcement of any
other section of this article.
§ 216-58. Removal by Township.
Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of owner, tenant or agent so notified
to dispose properly of said garbage or litter within 10 days after the date
of such notice or in the event that said notice is returned to the Township
by the Post Office Department because of an inability to make delivery
thereof, provided that the notice was properly addressed to the last known
address of the owner, tenant or agent, the Code Enforcement Officer or his
duly designated agent is authorized and empowered to pay for disposing
of such litter or to order its disposal by the Township, after obtaining the
appropriate authorization from the Township Committee.
§ 216-59. Costs to become lien.
A. When the Township has effected the removal of garbage or litter or has
paid for its removal, the actual cost thereof shall be chargeable to the
property owner responsible for the removal and disposal. When the full
amount due the Township is not paid by the owner within 30 days after
the disposal of such garbage or litter, as specified in §§ 216-57 and
216-58 of this article, then and in that case the Code Enforcement
Officer shall certify the cost thereof to the Township Committee, which
shall examine the certificate and, if found to be correct, shall cause the
cost as shown thereon to be charged against said lands. The amount so
charged shall constitute a lien on the property and shall remain in full
§ 216-56 JACKSON CODE § 216-59
1:540
§ 216-60. Repealer.
The following chapters or parts thereof of the Township of Jackson are
hereby repealed:
§ 216-61. Applicability.
This article does not concern the dumping or spillage of any hazardous or
toxic waste insofar as it is recognized that state and/or federal law would
be controlling in such instances and would preempt any provision of this
article. This article shall only apply to those matters in which there is no
complete preemption by either state or federal law.
force and effect for the amount due in the principal and interest, plus
costs of court, if any, for collection, until final payment has been made.
B. Said costs and expenses shall be collected in the manner fixed by law
for the collection of taxes and shall be subject to a delinquent penalty at
the same rate as in the case of taxes in the event they are not paid in full
on or before the date the tax bill upon which the charge appears
becomes delinquent. The certification of the Code Enforcement Officer
in accordance with the provisions hereof shall be prima facie evidence
that all legal formalities have been complied with and that the work has
been done properly and satisfactorily and shall be full notice to every
person concerned that the amount of the statement, plus interest,
constitutes a charge against the property designated or described in
the statement and that the same is due and collectible as provided by
law. Any legal costs associated with said collection shall also be borne
by the responsible party or owner and shall likewise be assessed as a
lien.
A. Chapter 63, Garbage, Rubbish and Waste Material, §§ 63-1 through
63-15 and 63-21.
B. Chapter 74, Littering, §§ 74-1 through 74-14.
C. Chapter 87, Sanitary Landfill.
D. Chapter 134, Sanitary Landfill.
§ 216-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-61
1:541

ARTICLE VIII
Refuse Containers and Dumpsters
[Adopted 10-26-2010 by Ord. No. 24-10 (Ch. 90A, Art. II, of the
1972 Code)]
§ 216-62. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to require dumpsters and other refuse
containers that are outdoors or exposed to stormwater to be covered at all
times and to prohibit the spilling, dumping, leaking, or other discharge of
liquids, semiliquids or solids from the containers to the municipal separate
storm sewer system(s) operated by the Township of Jackson and/or the
waters of the state so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to
prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 216-63. Word usage; definitions.
A. For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein, unless their use
in the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning.
When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future, words in the plural number include the singular
number, and words used in the singular number include the plural
number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
B. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A
conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade
channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by the
Township of Jackson or other public body, and is designed and used for
collecting and conveying stormwater. MS4s do not include combined
sewer systems, which are sewer systems that are designed to carry
sanitary sewage at all times and to collect and transport stormwater
from streets and other sources.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
REFUSE CONTAINER — Any waste container that a person controls,
whether owned, leased, or operated, including dumpsters, trash cans,
garbage pails, and plastic trash bags.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain
and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the
subsurface, is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or
drainage facilities, or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs,
streams and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether natural
§ 216-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-63
1:543
§ 216-64. Discharge from containers prohibited.
§ 216-65. Exceptions to discharge prohibitions.
The following are excepted from the discharge prohibitions:
§ 216-66. Enforcement.
All provisions contained within this article shall at all times be subject
to enforcement by the Police Department of the Township of Jackson and
by the Jackson Township Code Enforcement Officer, or his or her duly
designated agent of the Township of Jackson.
§ 216-67. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating provisions of this article shall be subject to a fine in a
minimum amount of $100 or imprisonment in the county jail for a term not
to exceed 90 days, or both, or community service as ordered by the court,
which shall not reduce the fine imposed by more than 50%. Each and every
violation of this article, or each day that the provisions of this article are
violated, shall be construed as a separate and distinct violation thereof.
or artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject
to its jurisdiction.
A. Any person who controls, whether owned, leased, or operated, a refuse
container or dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster is
covered at all times and shall prevent refuse from spilling out or
overflowing.
B. Any person who owns, leases or otherwise uses a refuse container or
dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster does not leak or
otherwise discharge liquids, semiliquids or solids to the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Township of Jackson.
A. Permitted temporary demolition containers.
B. Litter receptacles (other than dumpsters or other bulk containers).
C. Individual homeowner trash and recycling containers.
D. Refuse containers at facilities authorized to discharge stormwater
under a valid NJPDES permit.
E. Large bulky items (e.g., furniture, bound carpet and padding, white
goods) placed curbside for pickup).
§ 216-63 JACKSON CODE § 216-67
1:544
ARTICLE IX
Private Storm Drain Inlet Retrofitting
[Adopted 10-26-2010 by Ord. No. 24-10 (Ch. 90A, Art. III, of the
1972 Code)]
§ 216-68. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to require retrofitting of existing storm drain
inlets which are in direct contact with repaving, repairing, reconstruction,
or resurfacing or alterations of facilities on private property, to prevent
the discharge of solids and floatables (such as plastic bottles, cans, food
wrappers and other litter) to the municipal separate storm sewer system(s)
operated by the Township of Jackson so as to protect public health, safety
and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 216-69. Word usage; definitions.
A. For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein, unless their use
in the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning.
When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future, words in the plural number include the singular
number, and words used in the singular number include the plural
number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
B. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A
conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade
channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by the
Township of Jackson or other public body, and is designed and used for
collecting and conveying stormwater. MS4s do not include combined
sewer systems, which are sewer systems that are designed to carry
sanitary sewage at all times and to collect and transport stormwater
from streets and other sources.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORM DRAIN INLET — An opening in a storm drain used to collect
stormwater runoff and includes, but is not limited to, a grate inlet, curbopening
inlet, slotted inlet, and combination inlet.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs,
streams and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether natural
or artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject
to its jurisdiction.
§ 216-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-70
1:545
§ 216-70. Meeting design standards required.
No person in control of private property (except a residential lot with one
single-family house) shall authorize the repaving, repairing (excluding the
repair of individual potholes), resurfacing (including top coating or chip
sealing with asphalt emulsion or a thin base of hot bitumen), reconstructing
or altering any surface that is in direct contact with an existing storm drain
inlet on that property unless the storm chain inlet either:
§ 216-71. Design standard established.
Storm drain inlets identified in § 216-70 above shall comply with the
following standard to control passage of solid and floatable materials
through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this section, "solid and floatable
materials" means sediment, debris, trash, and other floating, suspended, or
settleable solids. For exemptions to this standard, see § 216-71C below.
A. Already meets the design standard below to control passage of solid
and floatable materials; or
B. Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard in § 216-71 below prior
to the completion of the project.
A. Grates.
(1) Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever
they use a grate in pavement or another ground surface to collect
stormwater from that surface into a storm drain or surface water
body under that grate:
(a) The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT)
bicycle-safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the
NJDOT Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways Planning
and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
(b) A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate
has an area of no more than 7.0 square inches, or is no greater
than 0.5 inch across the smallest dimension.
(2) Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates in grate
inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening portion) of combination
inlets, grates on storm sewer manholes, ditch grates, and grates of
spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground surfaces include
surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways, parking areas,
bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open channels, and
stormwater basin floors.
B. Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear space in
that curb opening (or each individual clear spare, if the curb opening
has two or more clear spaces) shall have an area of no more than 7.0
square inches, or be no greater than 2.0 inches across the smallest
dimension.
§ 216-70 JACKSON CODE § 216-71
1:546
§ 216-72. Enforcement.
All provisions contained within this article shall at all times be subject
to enforcement by the Police Department of the Township of Jackson and
by the Jackson Township Code Enforcement Officer, or his or her duly
designated agent of the Township of Jackson.
§ 216-73. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating provisions of this article shall be subject to a fine in a
minimum amount of $100 or imprisonment in the county jail for a term not
to exceed 90 days, or both, or community service as ordered by the court,
which shall not reduce the fine imposed by more than 50%. Each and every
violation of this article, or each day that the provisions of this article are
violated, shall be construed as a separate and distinct violation thereof.
C. This standard does not apply:
(1) Where the municipal engineer agrees that this standard would
cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could not practicably
be overcome by using additional or larger storm drain inlets that
meet these standards.
(2) Where flows are conveyed through any device (e.g., end-of-pipe
netting facility, manufactured treatment device, or a catch basin
hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all
solid and floatable materials that could not pass through one of the
following:
(a) A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches wide
(This option does not apply for outfall netting facilities.); or
(b) A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inch.
(3) Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars; or
(4) Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
determines, pursuant to the New Jersey Register of Historic Places
Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet this standard is an
undertaking that constitutes an encroachment or will damage or
destroy the New Jersey Register listed historic property.
§ 216-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-73
1:547
Chapter 222
GRAFFITI
§ 216-73 JACKSON CODE § 216-73
1:548
ARTICLE I
Placement
[Adopted 8-14-1995 by Ord. No. 30-95 (Ch. 64, Art. I, of the 1972
Code)]
§ 222-1. Purpose.
The purpose of the within article is to recognize that graffiti on public or
private property is an aesthetic, blighting factor which not only depreciates
the value of property but also the value of adjacent and surrounding
properties and the community as a whole. The Township Committee intends
to provide for the prohibition of the placement of graffiti on public or private
property.
§ 222-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GRAFFITI — The unauthorized inscribing, spraying of paint or marking
of ink, chalk, dye, paint, crayon or other similar substances on buildings,
structures, vehicles, equipment, places and similar things or locations.
§ 222-3. Prohibited acts; responsibility of parent or guardian.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to paint, mark, chalk or otherwise
apply graffiti or other inscribing materials on buildings, structures,
vehicles, equipment, places or other similar locations or things within
the Township without the consent of the owner of said property.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his or her possession any
aerosol spray can containing any substance commonly known as "paint"
or containing any other opaque liquid capable of being propelled by an
aerosol can while on or about public property or on or about private
property without the consent of the owner of such property and to
willfully use such aerosol spray can or allow the same to be used to
write, paint or draw any inscription, figure or mark of any type on any
building, public or private, without the express permission of the owner
or operator of such property.
C. Any unlawful conduct of a minor resulting from the unauthorized
application of graffiti to the property of another shall be imputed to the
parent or guardian having custody of the minor. A parent or guardian
having custody of a minor found guilty under the provisions of this
section shall be liable for any penalties being financial or by community
service. This subsection shall be applied in the sole discretion of the
Judge hearing said matter.
§ 222-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-4
1:549
§ 222-4. Reward for detection and apprehension.
The Township of Jackson hereby establishes a reward not exceeding $100
for the detection and apprehension of any person guilty of purposely or
knowingly damaging tangible property of another by an act of graffiti in
violation of the within article. The reward is to be payable after conviction
out of those funds of the municipality made available therefor. The reward
shall be paid to any person who the governing body, acting upon the
recommendation of the municipal Chief of Police or other principal law
enforcement officer, may deem entitled thereto, but no reward shall be paid
to any public employee whose duty it is to investigate or to enforce the law
or to the employee's spouse, child or parent, living in the same household.
§ 222-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-27-2011 by Ord. No.
28-11]
A. Any person who violates §§ 222-1 through 222-4 of this article shall be
subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 for each separate offense and/
or confinement in the Ocean County Jail for a period of not more than
90 days.
B. In the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge hearing a violation of
§§ 222-1 through 222-4 of this article, the governing body encourages
and authorizes the implementation of community service for the
individual or individuals convicted of said violation.
C. The implementation of the provisions concerning the payment of
rewards is subject to adequate funding by the governing body in
accordance with the Local Budget Law.105
105. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:4-1 et seq.
§ 222-4 JACKSON CODE § 222-5
1:550
ARTICLE II
Removal
[Adopted 9-27-2011 by Ord. No. 28-11 (Ch. 64, Art. II, of the 1972
Code)]
§ 222-6. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GRAFFITI — Any drawing, painting or making of any mark or inscription
on public or private real or personal property without the permission of the
owner.
§ 222-7. Graffiti prohibited.
No person shall place graffiti by any means on any building or structure
located in the Township of Jackson.
§ 222-8. Removal required.
The owner of any building or structure located in the Township upon which
graffiti has been placed shall remove such graffiti immediately from the
building or structure.
§ 222-9. Failure to remove; notice from Township.
If the property owner of the building or structure upon which graffiti has
been placed fails to remove the graffiti from the building or structure,
the Township shall notify the property owner by certified and regular mail
that such graffiti shall be removed from the building or structure by the
property owner within 90 days of the date of the notice from the Township.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.59, the State Department of Transportation
shall be afforded 120 days from the date a notice is sent to remove graffiti
from property owned by the Department. The notice to remove graffiti
shall contain a form to be utilized by the property owner to inform the
municipality that the graffiti has been removed. The form shall contain a
provision stating that by affixing a signature to the form, indicating that
graffiti has been removed, the owner is certifying that the facts set forth
therein are true and that the certification shall be considered as if made
under oath and subject to the same penalties as provided by law for perjury.
§ 222-10. Response by property owner.
An owner who has been ordered to remove graffiti shall respond to the
municipality by personal delivery or by certified mail:
A. Of any objection to the order, within 30 days of the date of the order; an
owner who objects to an order to remove graffiti pursuant to § 222-9 of
this article may institute an action challenging the order before a court
of competent jurisdiction within 60 days of the date of the order.
§ 222-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-10
1:551
§ 222-11. Removal by Township; costs.
If a property owner does not undertake the removal of graffiti within
90 days of the date of the order or, in the case of the Department of
Transportation, within 120 days of the date of the order, unless an action
challenging the order to remove graffiti is still pending, the municipality
may remove the graffiti from that property and present the property owner,
via certified and regular mail, with a detailed itemization of the costs
incurred by the municipality, for reimbursement from the property owner. If
no payment of such reimbursement is received within 30 days of the date of
mailing of the itemized cost of removal, the Township may recoup the costs
of removal as follows:
§ 222-12. Violations and penalties.
B. Of notice that the graffiti has been removed, within 90 days of the date
of the order or, in the case of the Department of Transportation, within
120 days of the date of the order.
A. The municipal officer of the Township in charge of the removal of said
graffiti shall certify the cost thereof to the Mayor and Township Council.
Upon receipt and review of the certification of cost, the Mayor and
Township Council shall cause the cost as shown thereon to be charged
against the property from which said graffiti was removed.
B. In addition to assessing the cost of such removal as a municipal lien
against the premises, the Township may enforce the payment of such
assessment, together with interest, as a debt of the owner of the
premises and may authorize the institution of an action at law for the
collection thereof in the Superior Court in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:48-1.
A. Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of
this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not
more than $2,000, by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days or
by community service of not more than 90 days, or any combination of
fine, imprisonment and community service, as determined in the
discretion of the Municipal Court Judge. The continuation of such
violation for each successive day shall constitute a separate offense,
and the person or persons allowing or permitting the continuation of
the violation may be punished as provided above for each separate
offense.
B. The violation of any provision of this article shall be subject to
abatement summarily by a restraining order or injunction issued by a
court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 222-10 JACKSON CODE § 222-12
1:552
Chapter 227
HANDICAPPED PARKING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 103. Permit parking — See Ch. 315.
§ 227-1. Vehicle identification markers required.
No person shall park a vehicle in any parking space designated and marked
as being set aside for the physically handicapped in any parking facility
unless said vehicle shall have affixed thereto a special handicapped vehicle
identification certificate or marker issued by the New Jersey Director of
the Division of Motor Vehicles or by the appropriate official or agency of
another state or local government. Parking in a handicapped space without
the aforesaid vehicle identification shall create a rebuttable presumption
that use of the space was not for the physically handicapped.
§ 227-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person who parks a motor vehicle in a parking space which is restricted
for handicapped parking without a special vehicle identification card shall
be, upon conviction, fined the sum of $250 for the first such offense and,
for subsequent offenses, shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of at
least $250 and shall be subject to a period of community service upon such
terms and in such form as the court may deem appropriate, or both, at the
discretion of the Municipal Court Judge.
§ 227-3. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Jackson Township Police Department.
§ 222-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 227-3
1:553
Chapter 233
HOUSING STANDARDS, RESALE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 80.
Unsafe buildings and structures — See Ch.
133.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 162.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 204.
Garbage, rubbish and waste material — See
Ch. 216.
Mobile home parks — See Ch. 280.
Mobile homes and trailers — See Ch. 285.
Trailers and campsites — See Ch. 400.
Board of Health housing standards — See Ch.
469.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 474.
Individual sewage disposal systems — See Ch.
493.
Individual and semipublic water
supplies — See Ch. 505.
§ 233-1. Purpose. [Amended 8-13-2019 by Ord. No. 20-19106]
The provisions of this chapter shall constitute the standards to guide the
Housing Officer or his/her officers in determining the fitness of a building
for human habitation, use or occupancy.
§ 233-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the words, terms or phrases listed below
shall be defined and interpreted as follows:
ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY — The department, branch or agency of
this municipality which is authorized by the adopting ordinance to
administer the provisions of this code.
BUILDING — Any building or structure, or part thereof, used for human
habitation, use or occupancy and includes any necessary buildings and
appurtenance belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith.
DWELLING — A building or structure or part thereof containing one or
more dwelling units or lodging units. For the purposes of this chapter, a
mobile home shall be deemed to be a dwelling.
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms or any part thereof located
within a building and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which
are used, or designed to be used, for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
GARBAGE — The animal and vegetable and other organic waste resulting
from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
106. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also changed the title of this chapter from "Housing
Standards," to "Housing Standards, Resale."
§ 227-3 JACKSON CODE § 233-2
1:554
HABITABLE ROOM — A room or enclosed floor space within a dwelling unit
used or designed to be used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes,
excluding bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, pantries,
foyers or communicating corridors, closets and storage spaces.
HOUSING OFFICER — The officer or officers who are authorized by the
adopting ordinance to exercise powers prescribed by this chapter.
INFESTATIONS — The presence, within or around a building, of any insects,
rodents or other pests.
LODGING HOUSE — Any building or that part of any building containing
one or more lodging units, each of which is rented by one or more persons
not related to the owner.
LODGING UNIT — A rented room or group of rooms containing no cooking
facilities used for living purposes by a separate family or group of persons
living together or by a person living alone, within a building.
OCCUPANT — Any person or persons in actual possession of and living in
the building or dwelling unit, including the owner.
OWNER — Any person properly authorized to exercise powers of or for
an owner of property for purposes of its purchase, sale, use, occupancy or
maintenance.
PERSON — Shall be given the same meaning as defined in N.J.S.A. 1:1-2.
PLUMBING FIXTURES — Includes all installed receptacles or devices which
are supplied with water or which receive or discharge liquid waste or
sewage into the drainage system with which they are directly or indirectly
connected.
RUBBISH — Includes all combustible and noncombustible waste material,
except garbage.
UTILITIES — Includes electric, gas, heating, water and sewerage services
and equipment therefor.
§ 233-3. Water supply.
Every dwelling unit and lodging house shall be provided with a safe supply
of potable water meeting the standards as set forth in Potable Water
Standards as published by the New Jersey State Department of Health. The
source of such water supply shall be approved by the New Jersey State
Department of Health and/or the Township Board of Health. The minimum
rate of flow of hot or cold water issuing from a faucet or fixture shall be not
less than one gallon per minute.
§ 233-4. Facilities.
Every building or dwelling shall provide the following facilities:
A. Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen sink of nonabsorbent
impervious material, at least one flush-type water closet, a lavatory and
§ 233-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 233-4
1:555
§ 233-5. Waste materials.
Garbage or other organic waste shall be stored in watertight receptacles of
metal or other approved material. Such receptacles shall be provided with
tight-fitting covers. At least one approved-type garbage receptacle shall be
provided for each dwelling unit in accordance with § 233-12 of this chapter.
Rubbish shall be stored in receptacles of metal or other approved material.
At least one rubbish receptacle shall be provided for each dwelling unit in
accordance with § 233-12 of this chapter.
§ 233-6. Lighting.
Every building or dwelling shall comply with the following lighting
requirements:
a bathtub or shower, available only for the use of the occupants of that
dwelling unit.
B. Every lodging house shall be provided with a minimum of one flush-type
water closet, lavatory and a bathtub or shower for every eight persons
or part thereof.
C. Every water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower for each dwelling
unit or lodging house shall be accessible from within the building
without passing through any part of any other dwelling unit or lodging
unit and in a lodging house shall be located no farther than one floor
above or below the lodging units served. Such water closet, lavatory
and bathtub or shower shall be contained in a room or rooms which are
separated from all other rooms by wall, doors or partitions that afford
privacy.
D. Every plumbing fixture shall be connected to water and sewer systems
approved by the Board of Health and shall bee maintained in good
working condition.
E. Every kitchen sink, lavatory and bathtub or shower required by this
code shall be connected to both hot and cold waterlines.
F. Every dwelling shall have water heating facilities which are installed
and maintained in good and safe working condition, connected with the
hot waterlines required under the provisions of Subsection E of this
section and capable of delivering water at a minimum temperature of
not less than 120° F.
A. Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight facing
directly to the outdoors. The minimum total window or skylight area
measured between stops, for every habitable room shall be 10% of the
floor area of such room. Whenever walls or other portions of structures
face a window of any habitable room and are located less than three
feet from the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of
the room, such window shall not be included in calculating the required
minimum total window area.
§ 233-4 JACKSON CODE § 233-6
1:556
§ 233-7. Ventilation.
Every building or dwelling shall comply with the following standards for
ventilation:
B. Every dwelling shall be provided with electric service.
C. Every habitable room shall contain at least two separate wall-type
electric convenience outlets or one such convenience outlet and one
ceiling or wall-type electric light fixture, therefore meeting the code
requirement at the time of construction. Pursuant to the National
Electrical Code, § 210.52, every bathroom and kitchen shall have a GFI
receptacle. Every such outlet and fixture shall be maintained in good
and safe condition and shall be connected to the source of electric
power. No temporary wiring shall be used except extension cords which
run directly from portable electrical fixtures to convenience outlets,
and which do not lie under rugs or other floor coverings, nor extend
through doorways, transoms or other openings through structural
elements. [Amended 8-13-2019 by Ord. No. 20-19]
D. Every portion of each staircase, hall, cellar, basement, landing, furnace
room, utility room, and all similar nonhabitable space located in a
dwelling shall have either natural or artificial light available at all times
with an illumination of at least two lumens per square foot. (two
footcandles) in the darkest portions.
E. Every portion of any interior or exterior passageway or staircase
common to two or more families in a dwelling shall be illuminated
naturally or artificially at all times with an illumination of at least two
lumens per square foot (two footcandles) in the darkest portion of the
normally traveled stairs and passageways. In dwellings comprising two
dwelling units, such illumination shall not be required at all times if
separate switches, convenient and readily accessible to each dwelling
unit, are provided for the control of such artificial light by the occupants
thereof.
F. Every bathroom and water closet compartment shall have either
natural or artificial light available at all times with an illumination of at
least three lumens per square foot (three footcandles). Such light shall
be measured 36 inches from the floor at the center of the room.
Artificial lighting shall be controlled by a wall switch so located as to
avoid danger of electrical hazards.
A. Means of ventilation shall be provided for every habitable room. Such
ventilation may be provided either by an easily operable window or
skylight having an openable area of at least 45% of the minimum
window area or minimum skylight area as required in § 233-6 of this
chapter or by other means acceptable to the Administrative Authority
which will provide at least six air changes per hour.
§ 233-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 233-7
1:557
§ 233-8. Heating equipment.
Every dwelling shall have heating facilities which are properly installed,
maintained in good and safe working condition and are capable of safely
and adequately heating all habitable rooms, bathrooms and water closet
compartments located therein to a temperature of at least 65° F. when the
outside temperature is 0° F. The temperature shall be read at a height of
three feet above floor level at the center of the room. Every space heater,
except electrical, shall be properly vented to a chimney or duct leading to
outdoors. Unvented portable space heaters burning solid, liquid or gaseous
fuels shall be prohibited.
§ 233-9. Egress.
Every dwelling, dwelling unit or lodging unit shall have safe and
unobstructed means of egress. Such means of egress shall not be through
any other dwelling unit or part thereof and shall lead to a safe and open
space at ground level accessible to a street. A room used for sleeping
purposes under the provisions of § 233-11 of this chapter shall be provided
with a safe and unobstructed means of egress leading directly to an outside
area accessible to a street.
§ 233-10. Maintenance.
Every building, dwelling, dwelling unit and premises upon which such
building, dwelling or dwelling unit is located shall comply with the following
maintenance standards, as appropriate:
B. Means of ventilation shall be provided for every bathroom or water
closet compartment. Such ventilation may be provided either by an
easily operable window or skylight having an openable area of at least
45% of the minimum window area or minimum skylight area as
required in § 233-6 of this chapter or by other means acceptable to the
Administrative Authority which will provide at least six air changes per
hour.
A. Every foundation, floor, wall, ceiling, door, window, roof or other part of
a building shall be kept in good repair and capable of the use intended
by its design, and any exterior part or parts thereof subject to corrosion
or deterioration shall be kept well painted.
B. Every inside and outside stairway, every porch and every appurtenance
thereto shall be so constructed as to be safe to use and capable of
supporting the load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon
and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair. Every stairway
having three or more steps shall be properly banistered and safely
balustraded.
C. Every porch, balcony, roof and/or similar place higher than 30 inches
above the ground used for egress or for use by occupants shall be
provided with adequate railings or parapets. Such protective railings or
§ 233-7 JACKSON CODE § 233-10
1:558
§ 233-11. Use and occupancy.
Every dwelling unit shall comply with the following use and occupancy
space requirements:
parapets shall be properly balustraded and be not less than three feet
in height.
D. Every roof, wall, window, exterior door and hatchway shall be free from
holes or leaks that would permit the entrance of water within a dwelling
or be a cause of dampness.
E. Every foundation, floor and wall of a dwelling shall be free from chronic
dampness.
F. Every dwelling shall be free from rodents, vermin and insects. Rodent
or vermin extermination and rodentproofing and verminproofing may
be required by the Board of Health. Rodent and vermin extermination
shall be carried out in accordance with § 233-12 of this chapter. Every
openable window, sliding exterior door or storm door, skylight and
other opening to the outdoors shall be supplied with properly fitting
screens in good repair from May 1 until October 1 of each year. Such
screens shall have a mesh of not less than No. 16. [Amended
4-26-2004 by Ord. No. 18-04]
G. Every building, dwelling, dwelling unit and all other areas of the
premises shall be clean and free from garbage or rubbish and hazards
to safety. Lawns, hedges and bushes shall be kept trimmed and shall not
be permitted to become overgrown and unsightly. Fences shall be kept
in good repair.
H. The Housing Officer or his/her officers may order the owner to clean,
repair, paint, whitewash or paper such walls or ceilings within a
dwelling when such have deteriorated so as to provide a harborage for
rodents or vermin or when such a wall or ceiling has become stained or
soiled or the plaster, wallboard or other covering has become loose or
badly cracked or missing. Nothing in this subsection shall be so
construed as to place upon the nonresident owner responsibilities for
cleanliness contained in § 233-12 of this chapter. [Amended
8-13-2019 by Ord. No. 20-19]
I. Every water closet compartment floor and bathroom floor shall be so
constructed and maintained as to be reasonably impervious to water so
as to permit such floor to be kept in a clean condition.
A. Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 150 square feet of floor space
for the first occupant thereof and at least 100 additional square feet of
floor space for every additional occupant thereof, the floor space to be
calculated on the basis of total habitable room area.
B. In every dwelling unit of two or more rooms, every room occupied for
sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 70 square feet
§ 233-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 233-11
1:559
§ 233-12. Responsibilities of owners and occupants.
The owners and occupants of buildings, dwellings and surrounding
premises shall have the following responsibilities and duties:
of floor space and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more
than one occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor space for
each occupant thereof. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in every lodging
unit, every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall
contain at least 80 square feet of floor space, and every room occupied
for sleeping purposes by more than one occupant shall contain at least
60 square feet of floor space for each occupant thereof.
C. At least 1/2 of the floor area of every habitable room shall have a ceiling
height of at least seven feet. The floor area of that part of any room
where the ceiling is less than five feet shall not be considered as part of
the floor area in computing the total floor area of the room for the
purpose of determining the maximum permissible occupancy thereof.
D. No room in a dwelling may be used for sleeping if the floor level of the
room is lower than 3 1/2 feet below the average grade of the ground
adjacent to and within 15 feet of the exterior walls of the room.
E. A room located below the level of the ground but with floor level less
than 3 1/2 feet below the average grade of the ground adjacent to and
within 15 feet of the exterior walls of the room may be used for
sleeping, provided that the walls and floor thereof in contact with the
earth have been damp-proofed in accordance with a method approved
by the Administrative Authority, and provided that the windows thereof
are at least 15 feet from the nearest building or wall.
A. No owner or occupant shall cause any services, facilities, equipment or
utilities which are required under this code to be removed from, shut off
or discontinued in any occupied dwelling let or occupied by him, except
for such temporary interruption as may be necessary while actual
repairs or alterations are in process or during temporary emergencies
when discontinuance of service is authorized by the Housing Officer. In
the event that any service or utility which the owner has agreed to
supply is discontinued, the owner shall take immediate steps to cause
the restoration of such service or utility.
B. The owner of a dwelling located in an area found by the Housing Officer
to be infested by rats, insects or other vermin shall carry out such rat
stoppage, verminproofing or other means of preventing infestations of
said dwellings as may be required by the Board of Health.
C. No owner shall occupy or let to an occupant any vacant dwelling unit or
lodging unit unless it is clean and sanitary.
D. Every owner of a dwelling containing two or more dwelling units or
lodging units shall be responsible for maintaining in a clean and
§ 233-11 JACKSON CODE § 233-12
1:560
sanitary condition the common areas of the dwellings and premises
thereof.
E. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, unless otherwise provided for
under lease agreement, to provide for the orderly maintenance of the
premises. The storage of objects or materials not covered in
Subsections G and H of this section or not otherwise prohibited by
municipal ordinances shall be done in an orderly manner so as to not
constitute a health, safety or fire hazard.
F. Every occupant of a dwelling shall keep in a clean and sanitary
condition that part of the dwelling which he occupies and controls.
G. Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall dispose of all his garbage and
any other organic waste which might provide food for rodents by
placing it in the garbage disposal facilities or garbage storage
receptacles required by § 233-5 of this chapter.
H. Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall dispose of all his rubbish in a
clean sanitary manner by placing it in the rubbish containers required
by § 233-5 of this chapter.
I. In dwellings containing no more than three dwelling units, it shall be
the responsibility of the occupant of each dwelling unit to furnish the
receptacles outside the dwelling unit as are needed for the storage of
garbage and rubbish until removal from the premises. In lodging
houses and in dwellings containing four or more dwelling units, it shall
be the responsibility of the owner to furnish such receptacles outside
the lodging units or dwelling units as are needed for the storage of
garbage and rubbish until removal from the premises.
J. Every occupant of a dwelling unit in a dwelling containing no more than
three dwelling units shall be responsible, unless provided for otherwise
under a lease agreement, for the periodic removal of all garbage and
rubbish from the premises each week in accordance with such
regulations of this municipality for the collection of garbage and
rubbish.
K. Every occupant of a dwelling comprising a single dwelling unit shall be
responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents or other pests
therein or on the premises, and every occupant of a dwelling unit in a
dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit shall be responsible
for such extermination whenever his dwelling unit is the only one
infested. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this subsection,
whenever infestation is caused by failure of the owner to maintain a
dwelling in a ratproof or reasonably insectproof condition,
extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner. Whenever
infestation exists in two or more of the dwelling units, extermination
thereof shall be the responsibility of the owner.
§ 233-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 233-12
1:561
§ 233-13. Position of Housing Officer created. [Amended 4-26-2004
by Ord. No. 18-04; 8-13-2019 by Ord. No. 20-19]
There is hereby created the position of Housing Officer of the Township. The
appointee shall work under the direction of the Construction Official within
the Construction Department. The appointee may receive compensation as
determined by the Mayor and Township Council.
§ 233-14. Powers and duties of Housing Officer. [Amended
8-13-2019 by Ord. No. 20-19]
The Housing Officer or his/her officers is hereby authorized and empowered
to exercise all powers as may be necessary to carry out and effectuate the
purpose and provisions of this chapter, including the following, in addition
to other powers herein granted:
L. Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all plumbing fixtures
therein in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be responsible for
the exercise of reasonable care in the proper use and operation thereof.
M. In dwellings containing two or more dwelling units having a common
source of heat for domestic hot water, it shall be the responsibility of
the owner to make provision for the proper operation of such facilities
at all times.
N. Every owner of a dwelling shall supply heat adequate to maintain
therein a minimum inside temperature of 65° F. in all habitable rooms,
bathrooms and water closet compartments between the hours of 6:00
a.m. and 11:00 p.m. throughout the year. [Amended 8-13-2019 by
Ord. No. 20-19]
O. (Reserved)107
P. The owner shall be responsible for compliance with all provisions of this
chapter not specified as the responsibility of occupants.
A. To investigate the dwelling conditions of the Township in order to
determine which dwellings are unfit for human habitation.
B. To administer oaths, affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence.
C. To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations,
provided that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the
least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession.
D. To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees as
he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter.
107. Editor's Note: Former Subsection O, regarding obligation to provide heat, was repealed
8-13-2019 by Ord. No. 20-19.
§ 233-12 JACKSON CODE § 233-14
1:562
§ 233-15. Search warrant. [Amended 8-13-2019 by Ord. No. 20-19]
The Housing Officer or his/her officers may, upon affidavit, apply to the
Judge of the Municipal Court of the Township for a search warrant setting
forth factually the actual conditions and circumstances that provide a
reasonable basis for believing that a nuisance or violation of this chapter
exists on the premises, and if the Municipal Judge is satisfied as to the
matter set forth in the affidavit, he shall authorize the issuance of a search
warrant permitting access to and inspection of that part of the premises
on which the nuisance or violation may exist. A search warrant may also
be issued for the routine, periodic inspection of all structures in a given
area based upon possible cause such as passage of time since the last
inspection, the nature of the buildings and structures involved, observable
deterioration of the general area and the like.
§ 233-16. Compliance required; reinspection fee.
§ 233-17. Prevalence of higher standards.
In any case where the provisions of this chapter impose a higher standard
than set forth in any other ordinance or law, then the standards as set forth
herein shall prevail; but if the provisions of this section impose a lower
standard than any other ordinance or law, the higher standard contained in
such other ordinance or law shall prevail.
§ 233-18. Certificates of occupancy for existing buildings or
dwellings. [Amended 4-26-2004 by Ord. No. 18-04; 8-22-2017 by
Ord. No. 17-17; 8-13-2019 by Ord. No. 20-19]
No single-family dwelling or individual unit of a multifamily dwelling, shall
be occupied by the vendee after such sale until a certificate of occupancy
has been secured from the Housing Officer.
E. To delegate any functions and powers under this chapter to such
officers and agents as he may designate where such delegation is
allowed by law.
A. No person shall occupy as owner or occupantany dwelling or dwelling
unit for the purpose of living therein which does not conform to the
provisions of this chapter as the standard to be used in determining
whether a dwelling is safe, sanitary and fit for human habitation.
[Amended 8-13-2019 by Ord. No. 20-19]
B. Any additional reinspection of the subject premises after the first
reinspection, caused by a lack of compliance with the provisions of this
chapter or the provisions of the New Jersey State Housing Code, shall
require a fee of $25 to be paid prior to the reinspection. [Amended
9-11-2000 by Ord. No. 21-00; 4-26-2004 by Ord. No. 16-04]
A. Procedures.
§ 233-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 233-18
1:563
(1) Application must first be made to the Housing Officer of the
Township of Jackson on a form to be provided for a certificate of
occupancy. Inspection shall be made to determine whether there
are any violations of this or any other applicable ordinance of the
Township of Jackson. If no such violation is found, a certificate of
occupancy shall be issued; otherwise, the owner shall be notified in
writing of any such violations found.
(2) The aforesaid inspection shall be made and either a certificate of
occupancy or a notice of violation shall be issued within 10
business days from the date of application for a certificate of
occupancy. If no such inspection is accomplished within the
aforesaid ten-business-day period, the dwelling may be occupied
but subject to the right of the Township to cause said dwelling to be
inspected and, if a violation is found, to cause said premises to be
vacated within 10 days' notice thereof.
B. Standards.
(1) No certificate of occupancy shall be reissued for any single-family
dwelling or for any individual unit of a multifamily dwelling that is
not fit for human habitation, occupancy or use and in full
compliance with this chapter or any other ordinance of the
Township of Jackson relating to building, health, safety or general
welfare, and no certificate of occupancy shall reissue if there are
found on the premises defects causing the hazard of fire, accident
or other calamities, lack of adequate ventilation, lack of adequate
light or sanitary facilities, dilapidation, disrepair or structural
defects or uncleanliness so as to tend to cause or spread disease or
harbor insects, rodents or vermin.
(2) The following specific standards shall apply when an inspection is
being made for the issuance of a certificate of occupancy:
(a) The stairways and platforms constituting the entrance to the
dwelling or structure shall be of sturdy construction and shall
have stairway guards and handrails designed to withstand an
applied load of 200 pounds in any direction at any given point.
The stairways shall be free of obstructions and debris.
(b) Interior floors, walls and ceilings shall be clean and free of
cracks, holes or crevices, and any windows shall operate
properly and shall be free of any cracks or broken glass.
(c) Plumbing fixtures in the kitchen and bathroom shall be
structurally sound and shall be sealed so as to prevent the
leaking of moisture. Every bath and toilet room shall be lighted
and ventilated in accordance with the provisions of the code
most recently adopted by the Township's Building Department
in accordance with the Department of Community Affairs,
Uniform Construction Code.
§ 233-18 JACKSON CODE § 233-18
1:564
(d) Fire doors shall be required where a garage area for the
storage of a motor vehicle is attached to a residential dwelling
or dwellings and shall meet N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119, FTO-13. The
door between the garage and the adjacent space shall be a
minimum of 1 3/8-inch solid core wood, or 1 3/8-inch solid or
honeycomb steel. There is no requirement for the door to be
provided with a labeled jamb or with a door closer; in addition,
overhead garage doors shall be in proper operating condition
and shall be properly strung or counterbalanced so as to
permit their being opened by a lifting force of 50 pounds or
less.
(e) Heating ducts shall be properly installed and shall be tightfitting
with no cracks or openings. Chimney and vents used in
connection with heating systems shall comply with the
provisions of the code most recently adopted by the Township's
Building Department in accordance with the Department of
Community Affairs, Uniform Construction Code. All heating
systems shall have an emergency on-off switch in a readily
accessible location.
(f) Basements or cellars.
[1] Basements and cellars shall have structurally sound
stairways with railings meeting the requirements of
Subsection B(2)(a) above.
[2] Basements and cellars should be free of standing water or
water leaks or cracks in the foundation or flooring. All
pipes for the electrical, heating or plumbing systems shall
be properly supported and free of breaks, cracks or other
defects. Structural girders and floor joists shall be
structurally sound.
(g) The premises shall be in a clean and sanitary condition, free of
debris, junk cars or other violations of the Township of Jackson.
In addition, a certificate as required by § 469-8 of the Jackson
Code shall be obtained from the Board of Health.
(h) Smoke detectors shall be installed within every building,
dwelling and dwelling unit, on each level and within 10 feet of
every bedroom. Battery-operated devices are permitted within
buildings, dwellings and dwelling units constructed prior to the
adoption of the code requiring electrical devices.
(i) Carbon monoxide detectors shall be installed in the immediate
vicinity of all sleeping rooms within every building, dwelling
and dwelling unit that contain fuel-burning appliances or have
attached garages.
C. Each residential single-family, two-family and multiple-dwelling unit
shall have installed in each individual dwelling unit and shall meet the
§ 233-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 233-18
1:565
§ 233-19. Certificates of occupancy for mobile homes in senior
citizen adult mobile home parks.
required standard for detection at the time the dwelling unit was
constructed or, minimum of one approved smoke detector installed on
each level and within 10 feet of each bedroom in a manner and location
approved by the Housing Officer or his/her officers. When actuated, the
detector shall provide an alarm suitable to warn the occupants within
the dwelling unit.
D. The fee for the issuance of a certificate of occupancy applicable to the
rental of an existing single-family dwelling shall be $100; the fee for
issuance of a certificate of occupancy applicable to the rental of an
individual unit to an existing multifamily dwelling shall be $100, which
covers the initial inspection and first reinspection.
A. The owner or operator of a mobile home park shall not permit any
mobile home or trailer located in a mobile home park, whether such
mobile home is sold, to be occupied by the vendee until a certificate of
occupancy has been secured from the Housing Officer or his/her
officers of the Township of Jackson certifying that said mobile home or
trailer complies with the provisions of this chapter and with all
applicable state laws and regulations, as well as with all applicable
ordinances of the Township of Jackson. [Amended 12-27-1982 by
Ord. No. 60-82; 8-13-2019 by Ord. No. 20-19]
B. Application shall be made by the owner of the mobile home or operator
of the mobile home park to the Housing Officer or his/her officers on a
form to be provided for a certificate of occupancy. Inspections shall be
made by the Housing Officer or his designee. A fee of $100 shall
accompany such application, which covers the initial inspection and
first reinspection. [Amended 4-26-2004 by Ord. No. 18-04;
8-22-2017 by Ord. No. 17-17; 8-13-2019 by Ord. No. 20-19]
C. At the time of application for the issuance of a certificate of occupancy
under this section, there shall be submitted with the application a
statement signed and sworn to by both the mobile home park owner
and by any prospective tenants of the mobile home which shall be the
subject of the issuance of the certificate of occupancy certifying that the
prospective tenants of the mobile home which shall be the subject of the
issuance of the certificate of occupancy, certifying that the prospective
tenants and occupants of said mobile home are in compliance with the
age requirements set forth in § 280-15 of Chapter 280, Mobile Home
Parks. In the event that such certification does not accompany the
application, the application for a certificate of occupancy shall be
deemed incomplete, and the application for such certificate of
occupancy shall be denied.
D. Concrete pier required. No mobile home shall be installed or occupied
in any mobile home park unless it is located upon and supported by a
§ 233-18 JACKSON CODE § 233-19
1:566
§ 233-20. Certificates of occupancy for mobile homes in family
mobile home parks.
concrete pier or platform of sufficient size and width to accommodate
the mobile home to be installed.
E. Inspection. No mobile home shall be occupied in any mobile home park
until an inspection is made by an inspector of the Township certifying
that said mobile home is properly located upon and supported by a
concrete pier or platform of sufficient size and width as indicated above
and that said mobile home is otherwise occupiable in accordance with
any applicable laws, ordinances or regulations.
F. Prior to occupancy of a mobile home or trailer, the owner or operator
shall notify and advise prospective tenants that a certificate of
occupancy is required prior to actual occupancy of the mobile home or
trailer. [Added 12-27-1982 by Ord. No. 60-82]
G. At the time of occupancy by a vendee, tenant or lessee of a mobile home
or trailer located in a mobile home park, the owner or operator of the
mobile home park shall provide to such vendee, tenant or lessee a copy
of the certificate of occupancy issued by the Township Housing Officer.
[Added 12-27-1982 by Ord. No. 60-82]
A. The owner or operator of a mobile home park licensed to operate
pursuant to Chapter 400, Trailers and Campsites, of the Jackson Code
shall not permit any mobile home or trailer located in such mobile home
park, whether such mobile home or trailer is sold or rented, to be
occupied by the vendee until a certificate of occupancy has been
secured from the Housing Officer or his/her officers of the Township of
Jackson certifying that said mobile home or trailer complies with this
chapter and all applicable state laws and regulations as well as with all
applicable provisions of the Jackson Code. [Amended 12-27-1982 by
Ord. No. 60-82; 8-13-2019 by Ord. No. 20-19]
B. Application shall be made by the owner of the mobile home or operator
of the mobile home park to the Housing Officer or his/her officers on a
form to be provided for a certificate of occupancy. A fee of $100 shall
accompany such application, which covers the initial inspection and the
first reinspection. [Amended 4-26-2004 by Ord. No. 18-04;
8-22-2017 by Ord. No. 17-17; 8-13-2019 by Ord. No. 20-19]
C. No mobile home or trailer shall be installed or occupied by any mobile
home park unless it is located upon and supported by a concrete pier or
platform of sufficient size and width to accommodate the mobile home
or trailer to be installed.
D. No mobile home or trailer shall be occupied in any mobile home park
until an inspection is made by an Inspector of the Township certifying
that said mobile home or trailer is properly located upon and supported
by a concrete pier or platform of sufficient size and width as indicated
§ 233-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 233-20
1:567
§ 233-21. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed
$500 or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed 90
days, or by both such fine and imprisonment; and each violation of any
of the provisions of this chapter, and each day the same is violated, shall
be deemed and taken to be a separate and distinct offense. The Township
of Jackson may, at its discretion, seek injunctive relief from a court of
competent jurisdiction of the State of New Jersey.
Chapter 234
HOUSING STANDARDS, RENTAL/LEASE
§ 234-1. Purpose.
The provisions of this chapter shall constitute the standards to guide the
Code Enforcement Supervisor or his/her officers in determining the fitness
of a building for human habitation, use or occupancy.
§ 234-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the words, terms or phrases listed below
shall be defined and interpreted as follows:
ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY — The department, branch or agency of
this municipality which is authorized by the adopting ordinance to
administer the provisions of this code.
BUILDING — Any building or structure, or part thereof, used for human
habitation, use or occupancy and includes any necessary buildings and
appurtenance belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith.
CODE ENFORCEMENT SUPERVISOR — The Code Enforcement Supervisor
or his/her officers who are authorized by the adopting ordinance to exercise
powers prescribed by this chapter.
above and that said mobile home or trailer is otherwise occupiable in
accordance.
E. Prior to the occupancy of a mobile home park the owner or operator
shall notify and advise prospective tenants that a certificate of
occupancy is required prior to actual occupancy of the mobile home
park. [Added 12-27-1982 by Ord. No. 60-82]
F. At the time of occupancy by a vendee of a mobile home or trailer located
in a mobile home park, the owner or operator of the mobile home park
shall provide to such vendee a copy of the certificate of occupancy
issued by the Township Housing Officer. [Amended 12-27-1982 by
Ord. No. 60-82; 8-13-2019 by Ord. No. 20-19]
§ 233-20 JACKSON CODE § 234-2
1:568
DWELLING — A building or structure or part thereof containing one or
more dwelling units or lodging units. For the purposes of this chapter, a
mobile home shall be deemed to be a dwelling.
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms or any part thereof located
within a building and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which
are used, or designed to be used, for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
GARBAGE — The animal and vegetable and other organic waste resulting
from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
HABITABLE ROOM — A room or enclosed floor space within a dwelling unit
used or designed to be used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes,
excluding bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, pantries,
foyers or communicating corridors, closets and storage spaces.
INFESTATIONS — The presence, within or around a building, of any insects,
rodents or other pests.
LODGING HOUSE — Any building or that part of any building containing
one or more lodging units, each of which is rented by one or more persons
not related to the owner.
LODGING UNIT — A rented room or group of rooms containing no cooking
facilities used for living purposes by a separate family or group of persons
living together or by a person living alone, within a building.
OCCUPANT — Any person or persons in actual possession of and living in
the building or dwelling unit, including the owner.
OWNER — Any person properly authorized to exercise powers of or for
an owner of property for purposes of its purchase, sale, use, occupancy or
maintenance.
PERSON — Shall be given the same meaning as defined in N.J.S.A. 1:1-2.
PLUMBING FIXTURES — Includes all installed receptacles or devices which
are supplied with water or which receive or discharge liquid waste or
sewage into the drainage system with which they are directly or indirectly
connected.
RUBBISH — Includes all combustible and noncombustible waste material,
except garbage.
UTILITIES — Includes electric, gas, heating, water and sewerage services
and equipment therefore.
§ 234-3. Water supply.
Every dwelling unit and lodging house shall be provided with a safe supply
of potable water meeting the standards as set forth in potable water
standards as published by the New Jersey State Department of Health. The
source of such water supply shall be approved by the New Jersey State
Department of Health and/or the Township Board of Health. The minimum
rate of flow of hot or cold water issuing from a faucet or fixture shall be not
less than one gallon per minute.
§ 234-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-4
1:569
§ 234-4. Facilities.
Every building or dwelling shall provide the following facilities:
§ 234-5. Waste materials.
Garbage or other organic waste shall be stored in watertight receptacles of
metal or other approved material. Such receptacles shall be provided with
tight-fitting covers. At least one approved-type garbage receptacle shall be
provided for each dwelling unit in accordance with § 234-12 of this chapter.
Rubbish shall be stored in receptacles of metal or other approved material.
At least one rubbish receptacle shall be provided for each dwelling unit in
accordance with § 234-12 of this chapter.
§ 234-6. Lighting.
Every building or dwelling shall comply with the following lighting
requirements:
A. Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen sink of nonabsorbent
impervious material, at least one flush-type water closet, a lavatory and
a bathtub or shower, available only for the use of the occupants of that
dwelling unit.
B. Every lodging house shall be provided with a minimum of one flush-type
water closet, lavatory and a bathtub or shower for every eight persons
or part thereof.
C. Every water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower for each dwelling
unit or lodging house shall be accessible from within the building
without passing through any part of any other dwelling unit or lodging
unit and in a lodging house shall be located no farther than one floor
above or below the lodging units served. Such water closet, lavatory
and bathtub or shower shall be contained in a room or rooms which are
separated from all other rooms by wall, doors or partitions that afford
privacy.
D. Every plumbing fixture shall be connected to water and sewer systems
approved by the Board of Health and shall be maintained in good
working condition.
E. Every kitchen sink, lavatory and bathtub or shower required by this
code shall be connected to both hot and cold waterlines.
F. Every dwelling shall have water heating facilities which are installed
and maintained in good and safe working condition, connected with the
hot waterlines required under the provisions of Subsection E of this
section and capable of delivering water at a minimum temperature of
not less than 120° F.
A. Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight facing
directly to the outdoors. The minimum total window or skylight area
§ 234-4 JACKSON CODE § 234-6
1:570
§ 234-7. Ventilation.
Every building or dwelling shall provide means of ventilation for every
habitable room. Such ventilation may be provided either by an easily
operable window or skylight having an openable area of at least 45% of the
minimum window area or minimum skylight area as required in § 234-6 of
measured between stops, for every habitable room shall be 10% of the
floor area of such room. Whenever walls or other portions of structures
face a window of any habitable room and are located less than three
feet from the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of
the room, such window shall not be included in calculating the required
minimum total window area.
B. Every dwelling shall be provided with electric service.
C. Every habitable room shall contain at least two separate wall-type
electric convenience outlets or one such convenience outlet and one
ceiling or wall-type electric light fixture, therefore meeting the code
requirement at the time of construction. Pursuant to the National
Electrical Code, § 210.52, every bathroom and kitchen shall have a GFI
receptacle. Every such outlet and fixture shall be maintained in good
and safe condition and shall be connected to the source of electric
power. No temporary wiring shall be used except extension cords which
run directly from portable electrical fixtures to convenience outlets,
and which do not lie under rugs or other floor coverings, nor extend
through doorways, transoms or other openings through structural
elements.
D. Every portion of each staircase, hall, cellar, basement, landing, furnace
room, utility room, and all similar nonhabitable space located in a
dwelling shall have either natural or artificial light available at all times
with an illumination of at least two lumens per square foot (two
footcandles) in the darkest portions.
E. Every portion of any interior or exterior passageway or staircase
common to two or more families in a dwelling shall be illuminated
naturally or artificially at all times with an illumination of at least two
lumens per square foot (two footcandles) in the darkest portion of the
normally traveled stairs and passageways. In dwellings comprising two
dwelling units, such illumination shall not be required at all times if
separate switches, convenient and readily accessible to each dwelling
unit, are provided for the control of such artificial light by the occupants
thereof.
F. Every bathroom and water closet compartment shall have either
natural or artificial light available at all times with an illumination of at
least three lumens per square foot (three footcandles). Such light shall
be measured 36 inches from the floor at the center of the room.
Artificial lighting shall be controlled by a wall switch so located as to
avoid danger of electrical hazards.
§ 234-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-7
1:571
this chapter or by other means acceptable to the administrative authority
which will provide at least six air changes per hour.
§ 234-8. Heating equipment.
Every dwelling shall have heating facilities which are properly installed,
maintained in good and safe working condition and are capable of safely
and adequately heating all habitable rooms, bathrooms and water closet
compartments located therein to a temperature of at least 65° F. when the
outside temperature is 0° F. The temperature shall be read at a height of
three feet above floor level at the center of the room. Every space heater,
except electrical, shall be properly vented to a chimney or duct leading to
outdoors. Unvented portable space heaters burning solid, liquid or gaseous
fuels shall be prohibited.
§ 234-9. Egress.
Every dwelling, dwelling unit or lodging unit shall have safe and
unobstructed means of egress. Such means of egress shall not be through
any other dwelling unit or part thereof and shall lead to a safe and open
space at ground level accessible to a street. A room used for sleeping
purposes under the provisions of § 234-11 of this chapter shall be provided
with a safe and unobstructed means of egress leading directly to an outside
area accessible to a street.
§ 234-10. Maintenance.
Every building, dwelling, dwelling unit and premises upon which such
building, dwelling or dwelling unit is located shall comply with the following
maintenance standards, as appropriate:
A. Every foundation, floor, wall, ceiling, door, window, roof or other part of
a building shall be kept in good repair and capable of the use intended
by its design, and any exterior part or parts thereof subject to corrosion
or deterioration shall be kept well painted.
B. Every inside and outside stairway, every porch and every appurtenance
thereto shall be so constructed as to be safe to use and capable of
supporting the load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon
and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair. Every stairway
having three or more steps shall be properly bannistered and safely
balustraded.
C. Every porch, balcony, roof and/or similar place higher than 30 inches
above the ground used for egress or for use by occupants shall be
provided with adequate railings or parapets. Such protective railings or
parapets shall be properly balustraded and be not less than three feet in
height.
§ 234-7 JACKSON CODE § 234-10
1:572
§ 234-11. Use and occupancy.
Every dwelling unit shall comply with the following use and occupancy
space requirements:
D. Every roof, wall, window, exterior door and hatchway shall be free from
holes or leaks that would permit the entrance of water within a dwelling
or be a cause of dampness.
E. Every foundation, floor and wall of a dwelling shall be free from chronic
dampness.
F. Every dwelling shall be free from rodents, vermin and insects. Rodent
or vermin extermination and rodent-proofing and vermin-proofing may
be required by the Board of Health. Rodent and vermin extermination
shall be carried out in accordance with § 234-12 of this chapter. Every
openable window, sliding exterior door or storm door, skylight and
other opening to the outdoors shall be supplied with properly fitting
screens in good repair from May 1 until October 1 of each year. Such
screens shall have a mesh of not less than No. 16.
G. Every building, dwelling, dwelling unit and all other areas of the
premises shall be clean and free from garbage or rubbish and hazards
to safety. Lawns, hedges and bushes shall be kept trimmed and shall not
be permitted to become overgrown and unsightly. Fences shall be kept
in good repair.
H. The Code Enforcement Supervisor or his/her officers may order the
owner to clean, repair, paint, whitewash or paper such walls or ceilings
within a dwelling when such have deteriorated so as to provide a
harborage for rodents or vermin or when such a wall or ceiling has
become stained or soiled or the plaster, wallboard or other covering has
become loose or badly cracked or missing. Nothing in this subsection
shall be so construed as to place upon the nonresident owner
responsibilities for cleanliness contained in § 234-12 of this chapter.
I. Every water closet compartment floor and bathroom floor shall be so
constructed and maintained as to be reasonably impervious to water so
as to permit such floor to be kept in a clean condition.
A. Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 150 square feet of floor space
for the first occupant thereof and at least 100 additional square feet of
floor space for every additional occupant thereof, the floor space to be
calculated on the basis of total habitable room area.
B. In every dwelling unit of two or more rooms, every room occupied for
sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 70 square feet
of floor space and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more
than one occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor space for
each occupant thereof. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in every lodging
unit, every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall
contain at least 80 square feet of floor space, and every room occupied
§ 234-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-11
1:573
§ 234-12. Responsibilities of owners and occupants.
The owners and occupants of buildings, dwellings and surrounding
premises shall have the following responsibilities and duties:
for sleeping purposes by more than one occupant shall contain at least
60 square feet of floor space for each occupant thereof.
C. At least 1/2 of the floor area of every habitable room shall have a ceiling
height of at least seven feet. The floor area of that part of any room
where the ceiling is less than five feet shall not be considered as part of
the floor area in computing the total floor area of the room for the
purpose of determining the maximum permissible occupancy thereof.
D. A room located below the level of the ground but with floor level less
than 3 1/2 feet below the average grade of the ground adjacent to and
within 15 feet of the exterior walls of the room may be used for
sleeping, provided that the walls and floor thereof in contact with the
earth have been damp-proofed in accordance with a method approved
by the administrative authority, and provided that the windows thereof
are at least 15 feet from the nearest building or wall.
A. No owner or occupant shall cause any services, facilities, equipment or
utilities which are required under this code to be removed from, shut off
or discontinued in any occupied dwelling let or occupied by him, except
for such temporary interruption as may be necessary while actual
repairs or alterations are in process or during temporary emergencies
when discontinuance of service is authorized by the Code Enforcement
Supervisor or his/her officers. In the event that any service or utility
which the owner has agreed to supply is discontinued, the owner shall
take immediate steps to cause the restoration of such service or utility.
B. The owner of a dwelling located in an area found by the Code
Enforcement Supervisor or his/her officers to be infested by rats,
insects or other vermin shall carry out such rat stoppage, vermin
proofing or other means of preventing infestations of said dwellings as
may be required by the Board of Health.
C. No owner shall permit or lease to an occupant any vacant dwelling unit
or lodging unit unless it is clean and sanitary.
D. Every owner of a dwelling containing two or more dwelling units or
lodging units shall be responsible for maintaining in a clean and
sanitary condition the common areas of the dwellings and premises
thereof.
E. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, unless otherwise provided for
under lease agreement, to provide for the orderly maintenance of the
premises. The storage of objects or materials not covered in
Subsections G and H of this section or not otherwise prohibited by
municipal ordinances shall be done in an orderly manner so as to not
constitute a health, safety or fire hazard.
§ 234-11 JACKSON CODE § 234-12
1:574
F. Every occupant of a dwelling shall keep in a clean and sanitary
condition that part of the dwelling which he occupies and controls.
G. Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall dispose of all his garbage and
any other organic waste which might provide food for rodents by
placing it in the garbage disposal facilities or garbage storage
receptacles required by § 234-5 of this chapter.
H. Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall dispose of all his rubbish in a
clean sanitary manner by placing it in the rubbish containers required
by § 234-5 of this chapter.
I. In dwellings containing no more than three dwelling units, it shall be
the responsibility of the occupant of each dwelling unit to furnish the
receptacles outside the dwelling unit as are needed for the storage of
garbage and rubbish until removal from the premises. In lodging
houses and in dwellings containing four or more dwelling units, it shall
be the responsibility of the owner to furnish such receptacles outside
the lodging units or dwelling units as are needed for the storage of
garbage and rubbish until removal from the premises.
J. Every occupant of a dwelling unit in a dwelling containing no more than
three dwelling units shall be responsible, unless provided for otherwise
under a lease agreement, for the periodic removal of all garbage and
rubbish from the premises each week in accordance with such
regulations of this municipality for the collection of garbage and
rubbish.
K. Every occupant of a dwelling comprising a single dwelling unit shall be
responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents or other pests
therein or on the premises, and every occupant of a dwelling unit in a
dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit shall be responsible
for such extermination whenever his dwelling unit is the only one
infested. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this subsection,
whenever infestation is caused by failure of the owner to maintain a
dwelling in a ratproof or reasonably insectproof condition,
extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner. Whenever
infestation exists in two or more of the dwelling units, extermination
thereof shall be the responsibility of the owner.
L. Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all plumbing fixtures
therein in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be responsible for
the exercise of reasonable care in the proper use and operation thereof.
M. In dwellings containing two or more dwelling units having a common
source of heat for domestic hot water, it shall be the responsibility of
the owner to make provision for the proper operation of such facilities
at all times.
N. Every owner of a dwelling who permits to be occupied any dwelling unit
therein under any agreement, expressed or implied, to supply or furnish
heat to the occupants thereof shall supply heat adequate to maintain
§ 234-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-12
1:575
§ 234-13. Position of Code Enforcement Supervisor.
The Code Enforcement Supervisor shall work under the direction of the
Township Administrator. The Code Enforcement Supervisor may receive
compensation as determined by the Township Council.
§ 234-14. Powers and duties of Code Enforcement Supervisor.
The Code Enforcement Supervisor or his/her officers are hereby authorized
and empowered to exercise all powers as may be necessary to carry out
and effectuate the purpose and provisions of this chapter, including the
following, in addition to other powers herein granted:
§ 234-15. Search warrant.
The Code Enforcement Supervisior or his/her officers may, upon affidavit,
apply to the Judge of the Municipal Court of the Township for a search
warrant setting forth factually the actual conditions and circumstances that
provide a reasonable basis for believing that a nuisance or violation of this
chapter exists on the premises, and if the Municipal Judge is satisfied as
to the matter set forth in the affidavit, he shall authorize the issuance of
a search warrant permitting access to and inspection of that part of the
premises on which the nuisance or violation may exist. A search warrant
therein a minimum inside temperature of 65° F. in all habitable rooms,
bathrooms and water closet compartments between the hours of 6:00
a.m. and 11:00 p.m. throughout the year.
O. In the absence of a contract or agreement to the contrary, an owner
shall be obliged to provide heat wherever heating facilities are under
the control of the owner or whenever two or more dwelling units or
lodging units are heated by a common facility.
P. The owner shall be responsible for compliance with all provisions of this
chapter not specified as the responsibility of occupants.
A. To investigate the dwelling conditions of the Township in order to
determine which dwellings are unfit for human habitation.
B. To administer oaths, affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence.
C. To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations,
provided that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the
least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession.
D. To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees as
he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter.
E. To delegate any functions and powers under this chapter to such
officers and agents as he may designate where such delegation is
allowed by law.
§ 234-12 JACKSON CODE § 234-15
1:576
may also be issued for the routine, periodic inspection of all structures in a
given area based upon possible cause such as passage of time since the last
inspection, the nature of the buildings and structures involved, observable
deterioration of the general area and the like.
§ 234-16. Compliance required; reinspection fee.
§ 234-17. Prevalence of higher standards.
In any case where the provisions of this chapter impose a higher standard
than set forth in any other ordinance or law, then the standards as set forth
herein shall prevail; but if the provisions of this section impose a lower
standard than any other ordinance or law, the higher standard contained in
such other ordinance or law shall prevail.
§ 234-18. Certificates of occupancy for existing buildings or
dwellings.
No single-family dwelling or individual unit of a multifamily dwelling, rented
or leased, shall be occupied by the tenant or lessee, as the case may be,
after such rental until a certificate of occupancy has been secured from the
Code Enforcement Supervisor or his/her officers.
A. No person shall occupy a rental dwelling or dwelling unit for the
purpose of living therein which does not conform to the provisions of
this chapter as the standard to be used in determining whether a
dwelling is safe, sanitary and fit for human habitation.
B. Any additional reinspection of the subject premises after the first
reinspection, caused by a lack of compliance with the provisions of this
chapter or the provisions of the New Jersey State Housing Code, shall
require a fee of $50 to be paid prior to the reinspection.
A. Procedures.
(1) Application must first be made to the Code Enforcement Supervisor
or his/her officers of the Township of Jackson on a form to be
provided for a certificate of occupancy. Inspection shall be made to
determine whether there are any violations of this or any other
applicable ordinance of the Township of Jackson. If no such
violation is found, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued;
otherwise, the owner shall be notified in writing of any such
violations found.
(2) The aforesaid inspection shall be made and either a certificate of
occupancy or a notice of violation shall be issued within 10 days
from the date of application for a certificate of occupancy. If no
such inspection is accomplished within 10 business days, the
dwelling may be occupied but subject to the right of the Township
to cause said dwelling to be inspected and, if a violation is found, to
cause said premises to be vacated within 10 days' notice thereof.
§ 234-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-18
1:577
B. Standards.
(1) No certificate of occupancy shall be reissued for any single-family
dwelling or for any individual unit of a multifamily dwelling that is
not fit for human habitation, occupancy or use and in full
compliance with this chapter or any other ordinance of the
Township of Jackson relating to building, health, safety or general
welfare, and no certificate of occupancy shall reissue if there are
found on the premises defects causing the hazard of fire, accident
or other calamities, lack of adequate ventilation, lack of adequate
light or sanitary facilities, dilapidation, disrepair or structural
defects or uncleanliness so as to tend to cause or spread disease or
harbor insects, rodents or vermin.
(2) The following specific standards shall apply when an inspection is
being made for the issuance of a certificate of occupancy:
(a) The stairways and platforms constituting the entrance to the
dwelling or structure shall be of sturdy construction and shall
have stairway guards and handrails designed to withstand an
applied load of 200 pounds in any direction at any given point.
The stairways shall be free of obstructions and debris.
(b) Interior floors, walls and ceilings shall be clean and free of
cracks, holes or crevices, and any windows shall operate
properly and shall be free of any cracks or broken glass.
(c) Plumbing fixtures in the kitchen and bathroom shall be
structurally sound and shall be sealed so as to prevent the
leaking of moisture. Every bath and toilet room shall be lighted
and ventilated in accordance with the provisions of the code
most recently adopted by the Township's Building Department
in accordance with the Department of Community Affairs,
Uniform Construction Code.
(d) Fire doors shall be required where a garage area for the
storage of a motor vehicle is attached to a residential dwelling
or dwellings and shall meet N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119, FTO-13. The
door between the garage and the adjacent space shall be a
minimum of 1 3/8-inch solid core wood, or 1 3/8-inch solid or
honeycomb steel. There is no requirement for the door to be
provided with a labeled jamb or with a door closer; in addition,
overhead garage doors shall be in proper operating condition
and shall be properly strung or counterbalanced so as to
permit their being opened by a lifting force of 50 pounds or
less.
(e) Heating ducts shall be properly installed and shall be tightfitting
with no cracks or openings. Chimney and vents used in
connection with heating systems shall comply with the
provisions of the code most recently adopted by the Township's
Building Department in accordance with the Department of
§ 234-18 JACKSON CODE § 234-18
1:578
§ 234-19. Certificates of occupancy for mobile homes in senior
citizen adult mobile home parks.
Community Affairs, Uniform Construction Code. All heating
systems shall have an emergency on-off switch in a readily
accessible location.
(f) Basements or cellars.
[1] Basements and cellars shall have structurally sound
stairways with railings meeting the requirements of
Subsection B(2)(a)above.
[2] Basements and cellars should be free of standing water or
water leaks or cracks in the foundation or flooring. All
pipes for the electrical, heating or plumbing systems shall
be properly supported and free of breaks, cracks or other
defects. Structural girders and floor joists shall be
structurally sound.
(g) The premises shall be in a clean and sanitary condition, free of
debris, junk cars or other violations of the Township of Jackson.
In addition, a certificate as required by § 469-8 of the Jackson
Code shall be obtained from the Board of Health.
(h) Smoke detectors shall be installed within every building,
dwelling and dwelling unit, on each level and within 10 feet of
every bedroom. Battery-operated devices are permitted within
buildings, dwellings and dwelling units constructed prior to the
adoption of the code requiring electrical devices.
(i) Carbon monoxide detectors shall be installed in the immediate
vicinity of all sleeping rooms within every building, dwelling
and dwelling unit that contain fuel-burning appliances or have
attached garages.
C. Each residential single-family, two-family and multiple-dwelling unit
shall have installed in each individual dwelling unit and shall meet the
required standard for detection at the time the dwelling unit was
constructed or, minimum of one approved smoke detector installed on
each level and within 10 feet of each bedroom in a manner and location
approved by the Code Enforcement Officer. When actuated, the
detector shall provide an alarm suitable to warn the occupants within
the dwelling unit.
D. The fee for the issuance of a certificate of occupancy applicable to the
rental of an existing single-family dwelling shall be $100; the fee for
issuance of a certificate of occupancy applicable to the rental of an
individual unit to an existing multifamily dwelling shall be $100, which
covers the initial inspection and first reinspection.
§ 234-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-19
1:579
A. The owner or operator of a mobile home park shall not permit any
mobile home or trailer located in a mobile home park, whether such
mobile home is rented or leased, to be occupied by the tenant or lessee,
as the case may be, until a certificate of occupancy has been secured
from the Code Enforcement Supervisor or his/her officers of the
Township of Jackson certifying that said mobile home or trailer
complies with the provisions of this chapter and with all applicable
state laws and regulations, as well as with all applicable ordinances of
the Township of Jackson.
B. Application shall be made by the owner of the mobile home or operator
of the mobile home park to the Code Enforcement Supervisor or his/her
officers on a form to be provided for a certificate of occupancy.
Inspections shall be made by the Code Enforcement Supervisor or his
designee. A fee of $100 shall accompany such application, which covers
the initial inspection and first reinspection.
C. At the time of application for the issuance of a certificate of occupancy
under this section, there shall be submitted with the application a
statement signed and sworn to by both the mobile home park owner
and by any prospective tenants of the mobile home which shall be the
subject of the issuance of the certificate of occupancy certifying that the
prospective tenants of the mobile home which shall be the subject of the
issuance of the certificate of occupancy, certifying that the prospective
tenants and occupants of said mobile home are in compliance with the
age requirements set forth in § 280-15 of Chapter 280, Mobile Home
Parks. In the event that such certification does not accompany the
application, the application for a certificate of occupancy shall be
deemed incomplete, and the application for such certificate of
occupancy shall be denied.
D. Concrete pier required. No mobile home shall be installed or occupied
in any mobile home park unless it is located upon and supported by a
concrete pier or platform of sufficient size and width to accommodate
the mobile home to be installed.
E. Inspection. No mobile home shall be occupied in any mobile home park
until an inspection is made by an inspector of the Township certifying
that said mobile home is properly located upon and supported by a
concrete pier or platform of sufficient size and width as indicated above
and that said mobile home is otherwise occupiable in accordance with
any applicable laws, ordinances or regulations.
F. Prior to occupancy of a mobile home or trailer, the owner or operator
shall notify and advise prospective tenants that a certificate of
occupancy is required prior to actual occupancy of the mobile home or
trailer.
G. At the time of occupancy by a tenant or lessee of a mobile home or
trailer located in a mobile home park, the owner or operator of the
§ 234-19 JACKSON CODE § 234-19
1:580
§ 234-20. Certificates of occupancy for mobile homes in family
mobile home parks.
§ 234-21. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed
$500 or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed 90
days, or by both such fine and imprisonment; and each violation of any
mobile home park shall provide to such tenant or lessee a copy of the
certificate of occupancy issued by the Township Housing Officer.
A. The owner or operator of a mobile home park licensed to operate
pursuant to Chapter 400, Trailers and Campsites, of the Jackson Code
shall not permit any mobile home or trailer located in such mobile home
park, whether such mobile home or trailer is rented to be occupied by
the tenant or lessee, as the case may be, until a certificate of occupancy
has been secured from the Code Enforcement Supervisor or his/her
officers of the Township of Jackson certifying that said mobile home or
trailer complies with this chapter and all applicable state laws and
regulations as well as with all applicable provisions of the Jackson
Code.
B. Application shall be made by the owner of the mobile home or operator
of the mobile home park to the Code Enforcement Supervisor or his/her
officers on a form to be provided for a certificate of occupancy. A fee of
$100 shall accompany such application, which covers the initial
inspection and the first reinspection.
C. No mobile home or trailer shall be installed or occupied by any mobile
home park unless it is located upon and supported by a concrete pier or
platform of sufficient size and width to accommodate the mobile home
or trailer to be installed.
D. No mobile home or trailer shall be occupied in any mobile home park
until an inspection is made by an inspector of the Township certifying
that said mobile home or trailer is properly located upon and supported
by a concrete pier or platform of sufficient size and width as indicated
above and that said mobile home or trailer is otherwise occupiable in
accordance.
E. Prior to the occupancy of a mobile home park the owner or operator
shall notify and advise prospective tenants that a certificate of
occupancy is required prior to actual occupancy of the mobile home
park.
F. At the time of occupancy by a tenant or lessee of a mobile home or
trailer located in a mobile home park, the owner or operator of the
mobile home park shall provide to such vendee, tenant or lessee a copy
of the certificate of occupancy issued by the Township Housing Officer.
§ 234-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-21
1:581
of the provisions of this chapter, and each day the same is violated, shall
be deemed and taken to be a separate and distinct offense. The Township
of Jackson may, at its discretion, seek injunctive relief from a court of
competent jurisdiction of the State of New Jersey.
Chapter 239
JUNK AND JUNK DEALERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Charitable clothing bins — See Ch. 148.
Garbage, rubbish and waste material — See
Ch. 216.
Secondhand dealers — See Ch. 338.
Abandoned or inoperable vehicles and other
machinery — See Ch. 418.
§ 234-21 JACKSON CODE § 234-21
1:582
ARTICLE I
Junkyards and Salvage Yards
[Adopted 12-7-1971 by Ord. No. 30-71 (Ch. 71 of the 1972 Code)]
§ 239-1. License required; exception.
No person or persons, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of
keeping a junkyard or salvage yard, that is, no person or persons, firm
or corporation shall keep and maintain a yard, space or place, covered or
uncovered, in the Township of Jackson for the purpose of buying, taking
in trade, selling, exchanging or storing rags, old metals, old bottles, old
glassware, old tinware, old iceboxes, old refrigerators, old paper, old
lumber, old building supplies, old furniture, old plumbing fixtures, old
unlicensed automobiles, dismantled old automobiles or parts thereof, motor
vehicle junk or any other old material commonly called junk or salvage,
without being licensed so to do by the governing body of this municipality;
provided, however, that this shall not prohibit the storage of old material to
be used by the person or persons, firm or corporation storing the same for
manufacturing purposes upon the same subject premises.
§ 239-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
JUNK or SALVAGE — The items described in § 239-1 heretofore.
JUNK OR SALVAGE DEALERS — Any person, firm association, partnership
or corporation who buys, takes in, sells, exchanges or otherwise acquires
junk or salvage for commercial purposes within the Township of Jackson
or who collects or stores junk or salvage therein, and shall include any
automobile wrecking business, the sale or storage of used auto parts and
the sale or storage of used lumber, used plumbing fixtures or appliances or
other used or secondhand articles.
JUNKYARDS or SALVAGE YARDS — Any land within the Township of Jackson
upon which junk or salvage is placed, collected, stored, traded in or
exchanged or kept for commercial purposes.
SEPARATE AND DISTINCT LOCATION TO BE LICENSED — Any open-air
plot of ground, yard or parcel of land consisting of part of one lot, or one
or more lots, as set forth in the Tax Map of the Township of Jackson, and
which parts of the lot or lots are adjacent and contiguous to each other
and, if described by metes and bounds, would have one continuous and
uninterrupted boundary line.
§ 239-3. Application for license; information required.
A. No such license shall be issued until the applicant shall have made and
filed with the Township Clerk written application in triplicate on forms
furnished by the Township, and which application shall provide:
§ 239-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 239-3
1:583
§ 239-4. Inspections.
(1) The name and address or residence of the applicant, and if a firm,
association, partnership, limited partnership or corporation, the
names and addresses of the officers, registered offices and
registered officer, if any. In the event the applicant is an
association, partnership, limited partnership or corporation, it shall
also list the names and addresses of all active and inactive
members, partners, stockholders and any person who has or holds
any beneficial interest in and to the capital stock of any such entity
or corporation. Where the applicant is a corporation, a certificate of
good standing of the corporation attested to by the Secretary of
State shall also be furnished with the application. In the event the
applicant is an individual, he shall set forth his interest in the
business and list the names and addresses of any other person or
entity that has an interest directly or indirectly in the business to
be conducted upon the subject premises.
(2) The street address and lot and block numbers on the Township Tax
Map of the premises desired to be licensed.
(3) If the applicant is not the owner of the site where the business is to
be licensed and conducted, the owner's consent to conduct the
business on his land shall accompany the application.
(4) Each application shall have attached thereto an accurate sketch or
drawing of the property desired to be licensed, showing the names
and locations of all public highways adjoining the premises, the
dimensions in feet of the said premises, the lot and block numbers
on the Tax Map of said premises and the names and addresses of all
real property owners within 200 feet of the premises sought to be
licensed.
(5) A detailed summary of the nature of the business to be carried on
on the premises.
(6) A receipted real estate tax bill for the subject premises.
B. In making his application for a license or renewal, the applicant shall
give written notice to all property owners within 200 feet of the
proposed licensed premises of his intention to apply for such license.
Such notice shall be served either personally or by registered mail,
return receipt requested, at least 10 days before the application is filed
with the Township Clerk. Written proof of such service in affidavit form
shall accompany the application for a license.
A. The licensed premises shall be subject to official inspection at any time
by the governing body of the municipality, as well as its agent and
employees acting in an official capacity, and by any police officer or the
Health Inspector, members of the local Board of Health, the local Fire
§ 239-3 JACKSON CODE § 239-4
1:584
§ 239-5. Rules and regulations.
The licensee shall:
Commissioner and representatives of the local fire company desiring to
make an inspection of the licensed premises.
B. Every license issued hereunder shall be kept in a conspicuous place on
the licensed premises and shall be procured and made available for
inspection by authorized officials as herein provided.
C. Prior to the issuance of any license or renewal thereof, the Building
Inspector or his assistant shall inspect the licensed premises as soon as
practicable upon receipt of the application for a license or renewal
thereof, and he shall make his written report to the Township
Committee of approval or disapproval of the operation at the subject
premises, setting forth his reason for any disapproval. The Township
Clerk shall notify the applicant in writing of any disapproval and
transmit the reason thereof to the applicant. Thereafter, the applicant
shall rectify any and all conditions in violation of this article forthwith,
and, upon correction, the applicant shall notify the Township Clerk and
the Building Inspector in writing of the corrections made, and the
Building Inspector or his assistant shall reinspect the premises as soon
as practicable and make his written report to the Township Committee.
No license shall issue unless and until the applicant has complied with
all the requirements of this article and corrected any deficiency as
determined by the Building Inspector or his associate pursuant to this
article.
D. Upon receipt of the application, the Township Clerk shall forward a
copy of same to the Township Police Department, which shall forthwith
investigate the character and background of the applicant or, if the
applicant is a legal entity, the character and background of the
principals, partners, stockholders or any person holding a beneficial
interest therein, or of a firm or limited partnership holding a benefit in
such entity. The investigation shall be concluded as soon as practicable
and a written report thereof shall be transmitted to the Township Clerk
by the Police Chief or such official as designated by the Chief of Police.
E. Upon receipt of written approval from the Building Inspector or his
assistant and from the Police Department and subject to the approval as
required hereunder, the Township Clerk may place the application on
the agenda for consideration by the Township Committee. A license or
renewal thereof may only be granted by the Township Committee at a
public meeting and upon compliance by the applicant with this article
and such other applicable ordinances of Jackson Township.
A. Maintain the licensed premises in a safe manner, and particularly the
premises shall be kept free of rats, weeds, brush, dry leaves, unbound
or loose papers and stagnant water in such quantity as to be a hazard to
§ 239-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 239-5
1:585
the health or well-being of the general public or the comfort of adjacent
or nearby property owners or residents.
B. Maintain the licensed premises in a sightly manner, with due regard to
the public safety of persons and property in the vicinity in which the
junkyard is located, and particularly the junk shall not be so piled or
placed as to endanger any person upon the licensed premises, on
adjacent property or on any public highway. The junk and debris on the
licensed premises shall be so secured that it may not escape said
premises or be permitted to be promiscuously blown about on the
licensed or other premises.
C. Not set or permit any outdoor fire on the licensed premises.
D. Stack, pile or arrange the merchandise and personal property on the
licensed premises in such manner that a fire truck, police car or first-aid
ambulance may have at least one open and unobstructed driveway to
and across each licensed premises, with appropriate open space for
turnaround or other means of entrance and exit in all cases. The
licensee shall not stack junk or salvage material, including automobiles,
higher than six feet.
E. Be a citizen of the United States of America if the licensee is a natural
person or persons. If the licensee is a corporation, it shall be a
corporation of New Jersey or be duly licensed to do business in New
Jersey, have a principal office in this state and have a registered agent
in charge thereof upon whom process of service can be made.
F. Construct a solid fence at least seven feet high so that the contents of
any junk- or salvage yard are entirely enclosed on all sides. Said fence
shall be sightly and shall not be constructed from materials of different
quality, types or dimensions and shall be maintained and painted so as
not to detract from the surroundings. Said fence shall be kept in good
repair at all times and shall have no openings through which persons or
animals may enter, except for doors or gates necessary for ingress and
egress to said junkyard, which said doors or gates shall be kept closed
at all times except when actually needed for ingress or egress. The
doors or gates herein described shall not exceed 15 feet in width, and
there shall be no more than two such openings. Where the topography,
natural growth of timber or other considerations create a natural
barrier which accomplishes the purposes of this section in whole or in
part, the fencing requirements hereunder may be reduced by the
Township Committee at the time of the granting of the annual license;
provided, however, that such natural barrier conforms with the
purposes of this section. [Amended 4-26-1977 by Ord. No. 11-77]
G. Make certain that each entrance and exit to the licensed premises is
well-marked as such by appropriate signs and permit automobiles to
enter and leave the licensed premises only at established entrances and
exits, respectively. The purposes of the provisions of this subsection are
to prevent cars from promiscuously or surreptitiously entering and
§ 239-5 JACKSON CODE § 239-5
1:586
leaving the licensed premises, thus preventing interference with traffic
upon the adjacent public highway and lessening the likelihood of
accidents and injuries, and to permit observation of the licensee's
operation by those municipal officials who are charged hereunder.
No damaged or disabled vehicle, junk or salvage materials shall be
parked, stored or placed outside the limits of this fence. Said fence
shall be constructed by each licensee within six months from the date
of adoption of this article and shall otherwise comply with all zoning
requirements respecting setbacks and side yard requirements for
structures.
H. Not purchase anything from a person under the age of 18 years, unless
accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or person standing in the
place and stead of parent or guardian to such minor.
I. Not make or permit excessive noise on the licensed premises so as to
unreasonably disturb adjacent or nearby residents in the quiet
enjoyment of their properties or so as to be detrimental to the health
and well-being of the residents in the immediate vicinity of the licensed
premises. No motor vehicle or junk or salvage shall be stored, bought,
sold, exchanged, traded in or dismantled within 500 feet of any dwelling
house, place of residence, church, school, auditorium, place of public
gathering or like place, except such dwelling house as may be situated
on the licensed premises.
J. Take precaution to safeguard all inflammable, combustible or explosive
materials from fire, and no licensee shall stack, pile or place junk upon
the licensed premises in such manner as to create a fire hazard. In
addition, all gasoline, fuel or other explosive material shall be drained
and removed from any motor vehicle within eight hours after it is
received on any premises licensed as a junkyard, conducted by a junk
dealer, located in the Township of Jackson, and said gasoline, fuel or
other explosive material shall be either removed from said premises or
kept in a leakproof tank buried on said premises at a point not closer
than 100 feet from any dwelling house and to a sufficient depth so that
the top of the tank shall not be nearer to the ground level than 2 1/2
feet, which tank shall be located within the permissible portion of the
premises, as hereinafter set forth in this article, at which said business
is conducted.
K. Not conduct his business in any junkyard or salvage yard as defined in
this article at any point on said premises which shall be located nearer
than 150 feet from any street or highway nor nearer than 50 feet to any
of the side lines of said premises where said side lines are more than
150 feet from any street or highway which does not run parallel with or
along the front of said premises; provided, however, that these setback
provisions shall not apply to junkyards already in existence and
operating prior to the adoption of this article. [Amended 12-5-1972
by Ord. No. 34-72]
§ 239-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 239-6
1:587
§ 239-6. Recordkeeping requirements.
Every licensee shall be required to keep a written book or record in bound
form at the licensed premises. Said book or record shall contain a legible
daily record of the description of all articles purchased, the name and
address of the person from whom each was purchased and the price paid.
Said book or record shall be open to inspection at any reasonable time
requested by any of the persons or officials named in or referred to in
§ 239-4 hereof.
§ 239-7. Fees.
§ 239-8. License term and renewal.
All licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this article shall expire at
12:00 midnight on December 31. An application for renewal shall be filed
with the Township Clerk on or before November 1 of the year of expiration.
§ 239-9. Separate licenses for separate locations; transfer of
location.
A. Such application shall be accompanied by cash or a certified check,
payable to the order of the Township of Jackson, in a sum equal to the
entire annual license fee, which is hereby fixed at the sum of $350. In
the event the license is refused, said fee, less $150 to defray and cover
the cost of inspections and processing the application, shall be returned
to the applicant. If the application for the original license is for part of
the licensed year only, the fee shall be prorated on a monthly basis, but
in no event shall it be less than $200.
B. The license fee imposed herein is expressly declared to be imposed for
regulation and for revenue.
A. A separate license shall be obtained for each separate location at which
the business of the licensee is conducted and the license shall authorize
the licensee to conduct the said business only at the place specified in
the license.
B. No license shall be transferable from one location to another unless and
until:
(1) The latter location complies with this article.
(2) Written application has been made for such transfer, which
application shall show the same general items as to the applicant
and the premises as are required for the original license.
(3) A transfer fee of $250 has been paid to the Township of Jackson.
(4) A sketch or drawing such as is required by § 239-3A(4) hereof shall
accompany the application.
§ 239-6 JACKSON CODE § 239-9
1:588
§ 239-10. Location restriction.
No license shall be granted for or transferred to any land site or premises
where such business is forbidden by any legal ordinance.
§ 239-11. Transfer of license.
No transfer of license from one person or entity to another person or entity
shall be made except upon written application signed by the person or
entity desiring to secure the transfer and bearing the written consent of the
then licensee. Such application shall be accompanied by a transfer fee of
$250. The proposed transferee shall be capable of qualifying as an original
licensee and shall file an application as provided for in this article.
§ 239-12. Licensing and employment of criminals.
§ 239-13. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm, association, partnership or corporation, or agent, servant
or employee thereof, who shall violate any provision of this article shall,
upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not more than $500 or
imprisonment in the county jail for a term not to exceed 90 days, or both.
(5) The landowner's consent to the license, such as is required by
§ 239-3A(3), where the applicant is not the owner of the land site
for the license, shall also accompany the application for transfer.
(6) The license has been endorsed by the Township Clerk of the
Township of Jackson after adoption of a resolution by the Mayor
and Township Committee approving the same, which approval shall
be granted upon the licensee's satisfying all of the requirements of
this article as to the new location, and with the further provision
that the licensee is not at the time of the application in violation of
any provision of this article.
A. No license shall be issued to or be outstanding in the name of any
person convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude, breaking and
entering, robbery, larceny or receiving stolen goods. In the event the
applicant or licensee is a limited partnership, firm or corporation, no
license shall be issued or be outstanding where any principal of the
entity or stockholder of such corporation would not qualify individually
for a license pursuant to this subsection.
B. No person convicted of any of the foregoing crimes shall be employed
by any licensee without prior approval of the Township Committee.
Prior to such approval being given, the Jackson Township Committee
shall request the Jackson Township Police Chief to make an
investigation regarding such person, and the Chief shall file his reports
and recommendations with the Township Committee within 30 days of
receipt of such written request.
§ 239-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 239-14
1:589
§ 239-14. Separate offenses.
In connection with the violation of this article, each day such violation
shall be continued shall be deemed and taken to be a separate and distinct
offense and violation thereof.
§ 239-15. Suspension or revocation of license; emergency orders.
A. Whenever the authorized Jackson Township official shall determine that
there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation
of any provision of this article or of any rule or regulation adopted
pursuant thereto, he shall give notice of such alleged violation to the
person or persons responsible therefor as hereinafter provided, and
said official shall also notify the Township Clerk and the Township
Committee of such alleged violation in writing.
(1) Such notice shall:
(a) Be put in writing.
(b) Include a statement of the reasons why it is being issued.
(c) Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it
requires.
(d) Be served upon the owner or his agent, provided that such
notice shall be deemed to be properly served upon such owner
or agent if a copy thereof is served upon him personally, or if a
copy thereof is sent by certified mail to his last known address,
or if a copy thereof is posted in a conspicuous place in or about
the junkyard or salvage yard affected by the notice or if he is
served with such notice by any other method authorized or
required under the laws of the state.
(2) Such notice may contain an outline of remedial action which, if
taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of this article and
with rules and regulations adopted thereto. Any person affected by
any notice which has been issued in connection with the
enforcement of any of the provisions of this article or any rule or
regulation adopted pursuant thereto may request and shall be
granted a hearing on the matter before the Township Committee,
provided that such person shall file in the office of the Township
Clerk a written petition requesting such hearing and setting forth a
brief statement of the grounds therefor within seven days after the
day the notice was served. Upon receipt of such petition, the
Township Clerk shall set a time and place for such hearing and
shall give the petitioner written notice thereof. At such hearing, the
petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show
why such notice should be modified or withdrawn. The hearing
shall be commenced not later than seven days after the day on
which the petition was filed, provided that, upon application of the
petitioner, the Township Committee may postpone the date of the
§ 239-14 JACKSON CODE § 239-15
1:590
§ 239-16. Number of licenses restricted. [Amended 11-23-1987 by
Ord. No. 39-87; 5-13-1991 by Ord. No. 18-91]
There shall be no more than four junkyard or salvage yard licenses issued
in and for the Township of Jackson.
hearing for a reasonable time beyond such seven-day period if, in
its judgment, the petitioner has submitted a good and sufficient
reason for such postponement. After such hearing, the Township
Committee shall sustain, modify or withdraw the notice, depending
upon its findings as to whether the provisions of this article and
the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto have been
complied with. If the Township Committee sustains or modifies
such notice, it shall be deemed to be an order, which, at the
discretion of the Township Committee, may operate as a revocation
of a junkyard or salvage license. Any notice served pursuant to this
article shall automatically become an order if a written petition for
a hearing is not filed in the office of the Township Clerk within
seven days after such notice is served. The proceedings at such
hearing, including the findings and decision of the Township
Committee, shall be summarized, reduced to writing and entered
as a matter of public record in the office of the Township Clerk.
Such record shall also include a copy of every notice or order
issued in connection with the matter. Any person aggrieved by the
decision of the Township Committee may seek relief therefrom in
any court of competent jurisdiction, as provided by the laws of this
state.
B. Whenever the authorized official of the Township of Jackson shall find
that an emergency exists which requires immediate action to protect
the public health or safety, he may, without notice or hearing, issue an
order reciting the existence of such an emergency and requiring that
such action be taken as he deems necessary to meet the emergency.
Notwithstanding the other provisions of this article, such order shall be
effective immediately. Any person to whom such order is directed shall
comply therewith immediately but, upon filing a petition with the
Township Clerk, shall be afforded a hearing within 72 hours of the
receipt by the Clerk of such petition. After such hearing, depending
upon its findings as to whether the provisions of this article and the
rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto have been complied
with, the Township Committee shall continue such order in effect,
modify it or revoke it.
§ 239-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 239-16
1:591

ARTICLE II
Secondhand Vehicle Dealers
[Adopted 9-21-1954 (Ch. 104 of the 1972 Code)]
§ 239-17. License required.
No person shall, after the effective date of this article, begin or continue to
deal in secondhand motor vehicles and parts thereof in this Township unless
and until a license for each such dealer is procured pursuant hereto.
§ 239-18. Application for license; fee.
No license shall be considered or issued hereunder to any such dealer
unless and until:
§ 239-19. Adequate fencing.
No such dealer shall be granted a license where the premises on which
he intends to conduct his business shall be within 500 feet of any public
highway, unless and until a tight, nontransparent fence six feet in height
shall be constructed and maintained between said business site and
highway. Said fence may have opening or openings for ingress or egress,
which opening or openings shall be made of same or comparable material
as fence.
§ 239-20. Number of licenses restricted.
No more than four such licenses shall be in effect at the same time. If any
side or rear line of any such premises on which a dealer is to operate his
business shall be within 75 feet of the property line of another person, such
side or rear line and the motor vehicles and parts on the licensed premises
A. A written, signed application is made by such dealer on forms therefor
to be provided by the Township. Said forms shall make provision for
applicant to furnish information giving the area, dimensions, location,
road frontage, name and address of owner of land where business is
proposed to be conducted, name and address of applicant, consent of
owner of said lands for the conduct of such business thereon, the
precise location on premises where business will be located and
conducted, reference to deed by which owner acquired said land and its
recordation when recorded, and showing all dwellings within 500 feet
of proposed site on which business shall be conducted. Said applicant
shall also state in his application whether he has ever been convicted of
crime, and if so, when, where, nature of crime and penalty imposed.
B. A fee of $25 is paid to the Township. Said fee shall be an annual fee for
each license granted. If application is rejected, $10 of said $25 shall be
retained by the Township to cover its charge for investigating
application, and the remaining $15 shall be returned by the Township to
applicant.
§ 239-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 239-20
1:593
shall be shielded from view by similar fence as provided for in § 239-19 or
by evergreen trees or otherwise.
§ 239-21. Issuance of licenses. [Amended 4-13-1976 by Ord. No.
18-76]
Licenses shall be issued by the Township Clerk for such secondhand vehicle
dealers as shall hereafter be approved for such licenses by the Township
Committee. Such licenses shall be issued on an annual basis with a term
commencing as of April 1 and terminating as of March 31 following.
§ 239-22. Noise restrictions.
The licensee shall conduct his business with minimum noise, consistent
with efficient operation of his business. The purpose of this provision is to
prevent, so far as practical, annoyance from noise by dealer in the operation
of his business to adjacent residents.
§ 239-23. Fire hazards.
Licensee shall at all times keep the premises on which he conducts his
business in such manner that same shall not constitute a fire hazard or
menace.
§ 239-24. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Includes an individual, individuals, partnership and corporation.
§ 239-25. Interpretation.
Nothing herein shall be construed to conflict with any state law regarding
automobile or motor vehicle junkyards.
§ 239-26. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-5-1972 by Ord. No.
34-72]
Any person convicted of a violation of this article shall, upon conviction, be
subjected to a penalty of a fine not exceeding $500 or imprisonment in the
Common Jail of the County of Ocean for a term not exceeding 90 days, or
both, in the discretion of the Judge before whom said conviction is had.
§ 239-20 JACKSON CODE § 239-26
1:594
Chapter 244
LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Campgrounds — See Ch. 145.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 162.
Excavations, mining and dredging — See Ch.
185.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 210.
Housing standards — See Ch. 233.
Mobile home parks — See Ch. 280.
Mobile homes and trailers — See Ch. 285.
Parks and recreation facilities — See Ch. 304.
Sanitary sewers — See Ch. 336.
Soil erosion and sediment control — See Ch.
363.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 372.
Trailers and campsites — See Ch. 400.
Tree removal — See Ch. 405.
Water — See Ch. 437.
Private campgrounds — See Ch. 456.
Individual sewage disposal systems — See Ch.
493.
§ 239-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 239-26
1:595

ARTICLE I
Title; Purpose
§ 244-1. Title.
The title of this chapter is "An Ordinance Establishing a Planning Board
and a Zoning Board of Adjustment Pursuant to the Provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.; Providing for the Powers and Duties of Said Boards; Fixing
Procedures Governing Applications to Said Boards, Review and Action on
Such Applications and Appeals Therefrom; and Providing for the Adoption
of Development Regulations."
§ 244-2. Short title.
This chapter shall hereafter be cited or referred to, for purposes of
amendment or otherwise, as "Chapter 244, Land Use and Development
Regulations, of the Code of the Township of Jackson, County of Ocean, New
Jersey."
§ 244-3. Intent; purpose.
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to establish a pattern for the
uses of land and of buildings and structures thereon based on the land use
element of the Master Plan, as adopted and as may be amended from time
to time, to effectuate the Master Plan and to encourage municipal action to
guide the appropriate and orderly development of land in a manner which
will promote the public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the
people. This chapter is intended to:
A. Guide the appropriate use or development of all lands in the Township
in a manner which will promote the public health, safety, morals and
general welfare.
B. Secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other natural and man-made
disasters.
C. Provide adequate light, air and open space.
D. Ensure that the development of Jackson Township does not conflict with
the development and general welfare of neighboring municipalities, the
county and the state as a whole.
E. Promote the establishment of appropriate population densities and
concentrations that will contribute to the well-being of persons,
neighborhoods, communities and regions and preservation of the
environment.
F. Encourage the appropriate and efficient expenditure of public funds by
the coordination of public development with land use policies.
G. Provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for a variety of
agricultural, residential, recreational, commercial and industrial uses
§ 244-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-3
1:597
and open space, both public and private, according to their respective
environmental requirements in order to meet the needs of all New
Jersey citizens.
H. Encourage the location and design of transportation routes which will
promote the free flow of traffic while discouraging location of such
facilities and routes which result in congestion or blight.
I. Promote a desirable visual environment through creative development
techniques and good civic design and arrangements.
J. Promote the conservation of historic sites and districts, open space,
energy resources and valuable natural resources in the state and to
prevent urban sprawl and degradation of the environment through
improper use of land.
K. Encourage planned unit developments which incorporate the best
features of design and relate the type, design and layout of residential,
commercial, industrial and recreational development of the particular
site.
L. Encourage senior citizen community housing construction.
M. Encourage coordination of the various public and private procedures
and activities shaping land development with a view of lessening the
cost of such development and to the more efficient use of land.
N. Promote utilization of renewable energy sources.
O. Promote the maximum practicable recovery and recycling of recyclable
materials from municipal solid waste through the use of planning
practices designed to incorporate the State Recycling Plan goals and to
complement municipal recycling programs.
§ 244-3 JACKSON CODE § 244-3
1:598
ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 244-4. Statutory definitions.
Wherever a term which is defined in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. and/or the
New Jersey State Uniform Construction Code108 is used in this article, such
term is intended to include and have the meaning set forth in the definition
of such term found in said statute, in addition to the definition for such term
which may be included below in § 244-6 of this article, unless the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
§ 244-5. Word usage.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms or words used herein shall be
interpreted or defined as follows:
§ 244-6. Definitions.
A. Words used in the present tense include the future; the singular number
includes the plural, and the plural the singular; the word "lot" includes
the word "plot"; the word "building" includes the word "structure"; the
word "zone" includes the word "district"; the word "occupied" includes
the word "designed" and the phrase "intended to be occupied"; the
word "use" includes the words "arranged" and "designed" and the
phrase "intended to be used"; the word "shall" is mandatory and not
directory; and the word "abut" shall include the words "directly across
from," "adjacent" and "next to."
B. The term "such as," where used herein, shall be considered as
introducing typical or illustrative, rather than an entirely exclusive or
inclusive designation of, permitted or prohibited uses, activities,
establishments or structures.
A. Certain words, phrases and terms in this chapter are defined for the
purpose herein as follows:
ACCESSORY BUILDING — See "building, accessory."
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — See "structure, accessory."
ACCESSORY USE — See "use, accessory."
ACTIVE RECREATION — See "recreation, active."
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The Director of Planning and Zoning
of the Township of Jackson; provided, however, that for the purpose of
issuing certificates of completeness, the administrative officer shall be
the Planning Board Engineer or Board of Adjustment Engineer.
AGRICULTURAL USE — A land use to derive income from the
production of crops and/or raising of livestock.
108. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
§ 244-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-6
1:599
ALTERATIONS — As applied to a building or structure, a change or
rearrangement in the structural supports; or a change in height, width
or depth; or moving a building or structure from one location or
position to another; or changing, adding to or removing from or
otherwise affecting the exterior appearance of a building or structure.
ANIMAL CARE FACILITY — Veterinary clinics, hospitals, boarding and
training kennels, pounds and similar facilities operated either as
commercial facilities or on a nonprofit or philanthropic basis.
ANIMATED SIGN — See "sign, animated."
APARTMENT UNIT — One or more rooms with private bath, kitchen
and sleeping facilities constituting an independent, self-contained
dwelling unit in a building containing three or more dwelling units or
nonresidential use(s) on the ground floor.[Added 5-9-2017 by Ord.
No. 06-17]
APPLICANT — A developer submitting an application for development.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — The application form and all
accompanying documents required by ordinance for approval of a
subdivision plat, site plan, planned development, conditional use,
zoning variance or direction of the issuance of a permit pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 or N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36.
APPROVING AUTHORITY — The Planning Board of the Township of
Jackson, unless a different agency is designated by ordinance when
acting pursuant to this chapter.
ARTERIAL, MAJOR — See "street hierarchy, major arterial."
ARTERIAL, MINOR — See "street hierarchy, minor arterial."
ARTERIAL, PRINCIPAL — See "street hierarchy, major arterial."
AUTOMOBILE BODY SHOP — A building or portion of a building in
which body work or refinishing work performed on motor vehicles is the
principal purpose.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR SHOP — The same as "motor vehicle repair
garage."
AUTOMOBILE SALES AGENCY — A place of business where the
primary purpose is the sale of new motor vehicles, having a building
with either showrooms, office space, repair and/or maintenance
facilities, with or without a used car lot on the same business premises
or immediately adjacent thereto.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION — The same as "motor vehicle
service station."
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION — The elevation, based on mean sea level,
of a flood that has a one-percent or greater chance of occurrence in
any given year, as established by the Federal Insurance Administration
of the Department of Housing and Urban Development and as shown
§ 244-6 JACKSON CODE § 244-6
1:600
on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps of the Federal Insurance
Administration.
BASEMENT — A space having 1/2 or more of its floor-to-ceiling height
above the average level of the finished grade of the adjoining ground
with a floor-to-ceiling height of not less than six and 1/2 feet.
BERM — A mound of soil, either natural or man-made, topped with
deciduous and/or evergreen trees, used as a view and/or sound
obstruction or landscape feature.
BICYCLE-COMPATIBLE ROADWAY — A road designed to accommodate
the shared use of the roadway by bicycles and motor vehicles.109
BILLBOARD — See "sign, billboard."
BOARDINGHOUSE — Any dwelling for hire in which more than two
persons are housed or lodged, with or without meals.
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT — The Board established pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-69. The term "Board of Adjustment," as used in this chapter,
also means the Planning Board when it is acting pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-60.
BUFFER — An area within a property or site, generally adjacent to
and parallel to the property line, either consisting of natural existing
vegetation or created by the use of trees, shrubs, fences and/or berms,
designed to continuously limit view of and/or sound from the site to
adjacent sites or properties.
BUILDABLE AREA — The area of a lot remaining after the minimum
yard, setback, buffer, wetlands and other open space requirements
established by this chapter have been met.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a construction
adapted to permanent, temporary or continuous occupancy and having
a roof.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY — A building which is customarily associated
with and subordinate and incidental to a principal building, and which
is located on the same lot therewith. An accessory building attached to
the principal building shall comply in all respects with the requirements
applicable to the principal building.
BUILDING AREA — The total of all areas of outside dimensions on
a horizontal plane at ground level of the principal building and all
accessory buildings, exclusive of unroofed porches, patios, terraces or
steps having vertical faces, which at all points are less than three feet
above the level of the ground.
109. Editor's Note: The original definitions of "bicycle lane," "bicycle path" and "bikeway,"
which immediately followed this definition, were repealed 6-8-1998 by Ord. No. 15-98. See
now "bicycle lane," "bicycle path" and "bikeway" in Subsection B of this section.
§ 244-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-6
1:601
BUILDING COVERAGE — The horizontal area measured within the
outside of the exterior walls of all principal and accessory buildings on
a lot.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the
average elevation of the finished grade at all corners of the building
to the highest point of the roof for flat roofs; to the mean height level
of the distance measured between the eaves and ridge for gable and
hipped roofs; to the deckline for mansard roofs. Where berms or other
man-made land forms are proposed at the base of the building, building
height shall be measured from the finished grade beyond said berm or
man-made land forms.
BUILDING LINE — A line formed by the intersection of a horizontal
plane with a vertical plane that coincides with the exterior surface of
the building on any side. In case of a cantilevered or projected section
of the building, the vertical plane shall coincide with the most projected
surface. All setbacks shall be measured to the building line.
BUILDING, NONCONFORMING — A building which, in its design or
location upon a lot, does not conform to the regulations of this chapter
for the zoning district in which it is located.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building in which is conducted the main or
principal use of a lot on which said building is located.
BULK STORAGE — The stockpiling or warehousing of materials, which
may or may not be enclosed within a structure, including but not limited
to sand, gravel, dirt, asphalt, lumber, pipes, plumbing supplies, metal,
concrete and insulation.
BUSINESS OFFICE — A business establishment which does not offer a
product or merchandise for sale to the public, but which offers a service
to the public. However, personal services, such as barbershops and
beauty shops, and repair services, such as radio and television repair
shops, are not to be included within the definition of "business office."
CAMPGROUND — A plot of ground upon which two or more campsites
are located, established or maintained for occupancy by camping units
of the general public as temporary living quarters for children or adults,
or both, for a total of 15 days or more in any calendar year, for
recreation, education or vacation purposes.
CAMPING UNIT — Any tent or camping vehicle located temporarily
on a campsite, or a cabin, lean-to or similar structure established or
maintained and operated in a campground as temporary living quarters
for children or adults, or both, for recreational, educational or vacation
purposes, but not including any camping unit kept by its owner on land
occupied by him in connection with his dwelling or any camping unit
which is not occupied and which is kept at a campground for storage
purposes only at a location reserved for the storage of such camping
units.
§ 244-6 JACKSON CODE § 244-6
1:602
CAMPSITE — Any plot of ground, within a campground, intended for
the exclusive temporary occupation by a camping unit or units under
the control of a camper.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT — A governmental acquisition of real
property or a major construction project.
CARPORT — A roofed structure, or portion of a building or structure
attached to the principal building on the same lot, which provides space
for the parking and storage of vehicles and is enclosed on not more than
three sides.
CARTWAY — The actual street surface area from curbline, which may
include travel lanes, parking lanes and deceleration and acceleration
lanes. Where there are no curbs, the cartway is that portion between
the edge of the paved or hard surface width.
CELLAR — A space with less than 1/2 of its floor-to-ceiling height above
the average finished grade of the adjoining ground, or with a floor-toceiling
height of less than 6 1/2 feet.
CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL — A certificate issued by the construction
official pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23-2 upon completion of work that
requires a construction permit but not a certificate of
occupancy.[Added 5-9-2017 by Ord. No. 06-17]
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETENESS — A certificate issued by the
Planning Board Engineer, after all required submissions have been
made in proper form, certifying that an application for development is
complete.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — A certificate issued upon completion
of construction and/or alteration of any building or the change in
occupancy of a commercial or industrial building indicating compliance
with the Uniform Construction Code.[Amended 7-23-2001 by Ord.
No. 29-01]
CERTIFICATE OF ZONING — A certificate issued by the administrative
officer stating the zoning district within which a parcel is located.
CHANGE IN USE —
Any change from an industrial use to any other industrial use or to
any other use category;
(1)
Any increase in the number of dwelling units in a structure which
would result in three or more total units;
(2)
Any change from nonresidential use to any other use for which any
standard set forth in this chapter is greater or more restrictive;
(3)
(4) Any change from a residential use to any nonresidential use; or
Any change in use from any existing or permitted use to any
conditional use.
(5)
§ 244-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-6
1:603
CHILD-CARE CENTER — A child-care facility for which a license is
required from the Department of Human Services pursuant to P.L.
1983, c. 492 (N.J.S.A. 30:5B-1 et seq.).
CHURCH — A building or group of buildings, including customary
accessory buildings, designed or intended for worship on a permanent
or continuous basis.
CIVIC USE — A publicly or privately owned space or building available
to the general public for recreation, cultural and/or community
purposes.[Added 5-9-2017 by Ord. No. 06-17]
COMMERCIAL NURSERY — The same as "nursery."
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE FOR THE DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED
— Any community residential facility licensed pursuant to P.L. 1977,
c. 448 (N.J.S.A. 30:11B-1 et seq.), providing food, shelter and personal
guidance, under such supervision as required, to not more than 15
developmentally disabled or mentally ill persons, who require
assistance, temporarily or permanently, in order to live in the
community, and shall include but not be limited to group homes,
halfway houses, intermediate care facilities, supervised apartment
living arrangements and hostels. Such a residence shall not be
considered a health care facility within the meaning of the "Health Care
Facilities Planning Act" (P.L. 1971, c. 136; N.J.S.A. 26:2H-1 et seq.) and
this chapter.
COMMUNITY SHELTER FOR VICTIMS OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE —
Any shelter approved for a purchase of service contract and certified
pursuant to standards and procedures established by regulation of the
Department of Human Services pursuant to P.L. 1979, c. 337 (N.J.S.A.
30:14-1 et seq.), providing food, shelter, medical care, legal assistance,
personal guidance and other services to not more than 15 persons who
have been victims of domestic violence, including any children of such
victims, who temporarily require shelter and assistance in order to
protect their physical or psychological welfare.
COMPLETE APPLICATION — An application for development which
complies in all respects with the appropriate submission requirements
set forth in this chapter.
CONCEPT PLAN — A preliminary presentation and attendant
documentation of a proposed subdivision or site plan of sufficient
accuracy to be used for the purpose of discussion and classification.
CONDITIONAL USE — See "use, conditional."
CONSERVATION EASEMENT — An easement precluding future or
additional development of land and prohibiting filling or grading of
lands and the disposal of refuse or waste material of any type and
the removal of trees within the limits of the easement.[Amended
3-12-2001 by Ord. No. 07-01]
CONTRIBUTION — Every loan, gift, subscription, advance or transfer
of money or other thing of value, including any item of real property
§ 244-6 JACKSON CODE § 244-6
1:604
or personal property, tangible or intangible (but not including services
provided without compensation by individuals volunteering a part or all
of their time on behalf of a candidate, committee or organization), made
to or on behalf of any candidate, candidate committee, joint candidates'
committee, political committee, continuing political committee or
political party committee and any pledge, promise or other commitment
or assumption of liability to make such transfer. For purposes of reports
required under the provisions of this chapter, any such commitment or
assumption shall be deemed to have been a contribution upon the date
when such commitment is made or liability assumed.[Added 8-8-2005
by Ord. No. 32-05]
CONTRIBUTION DISCLOSURE STATEMENT — A list specifying the
amount, date, and the recipient of any and all contributions made to
or on behalf of any candidate, candidate committee, joint candidates'
committee, political committee, continuing political committee or
political party committee of, or pertaining to, this municipality, made
up to one year prior to filing the variance application and/or during
the pendency of the application process, and required to be reported
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 19:44A-1 et seq.[Added 8-8-2005 by Ord. No.
32-05]
CONVENTIONAL DEVELOPMENT — Development other than planned
development.
CORNER LOT — See "lot, corner."
CURB — A vertical or sloping edge of a roadway.
DAY-CARE CENTER — The same as "child-care center."
DAYS — Calendar days.
DENSITY — The same as "residential density."
DETENTION BASIN — A pond, pool or dry basin used for the storage of
stormwater runoff, having a structure or structures to control the rate
of stormwater outflow from the pond, pool or dry basin.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of
any land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase, or any other person
having enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more
parcels; the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural
alteration or relocation or enlargement of any building or other
structure; and any use or change in the use of any building or other
structure or land or extension of use of land for which permission may
be required pursuant to this chapter.
DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED PERSON — A person who is
developmentally disabled as defined in Section 2 of P.L. 1977, c. 448
(N.J.S.A. 30:11B-2).
§ 244-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-6
1:605
DEVELOPMENT PERMIT — A document, signed by the Director of
Planning and Zoning, which is required as a condition precedent to the
commencement of a use or the erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, conversion or installation of a structure or building and
which acknowledges that such use, structure or building complies with
the provisions of this chapter or variance therefrom, duly authorized by
a municipal agency.
DEVELOPMENT REGULATION — This chapter or other municipal
regulation of the use and development of land, or amendment thereto,
adopted and filed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
DIAMETER BREAST HEIGHT (DBH) — The diameter of a tree
measured at 4 1/2 feet above the existing grade.
DISTRICT — See "zone."
DORMITORY — Any building, or portion thereof, designed or converted
to contain living quarters which are provided as residences or for
overnight sleeping for individuals or groups, operated as an accessory
use to a school, college, university, boarding school, convent,
monastery, nonprofit educational institution, religious order, or
other.[Added 3-16-2017 by Ord. No. 03-17; 3-16-2017 by Ord. No.
04-17]
DRAINAGE — The removal of surface water or groundwater from land
by drains, grading or other means, and which shall include control
of runoff during and after construction or development to minimize
erosion and sedimentation to assure the adequacy of existing and
proposed culverts and bridges, to induce water recharge into the
ground where practical, to lessen nonpoint pollution and to maintain
the integrity of stream channels for their biological functions as well as
for drainage and the means necessary for water supply preservation or
prevention or alleviation of flooding.
DRAINAGE FACILITY — Any component of the drainage system.
DRAINAGE FLOW, NATURAL — The pattern of surface and stormwater
drainage from a particular site, or portion thereof, before the
construction or installation of improvements or prior to any grading,
excavation or filling.
DRAINAGE RIGHT-OF-WAY — The lands required for the installation of
stormwater sewers or drainage channels or required along a natural
stream or watercourse for preserving the channel and providing for the
flow of water therein to safeguard the public against flood damage.
DRIPLINE — An vertical line extending from the outermost edge of a
tree canopy or shrub branch to the ground.[Amended 3-12-2001 by
Ord. No. 07-01]
DRIVEWAY — A paved or unpaved area used for the ingress or egress
of vehicles and allowing access from a street to a building or other
structure, facility or use.
§ 244-6 JACKSON CODE § 244-6
1:606
DUPLEX — See "dwelling, two-family."
DWELLING — Any building or portion thereof designed for and
containing one or more dwelling units used exclusively for human
habitation.
DWELLING, ATTACHED — A single-family dwelling attached to two
or more single-family dwellings by one or more common fire-resistant
unpierced walls, exclusive of floors and stairways.
DWELLING, DETACHED — A dwelling physically detached from other
dwelling buildings or portions of dwellings or buildings.
DWELLING, DUPLEX — See "dwelling, two-family."
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A building designed for or containing
three or more dwelling units.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY — A building containing one dwelling
unit.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A dwelling on a single lot containing two
dwelling units, each of which is totally separated from the other by
a common vertical unpierced wall extending from ground to roof or
an unpierced ceiling and floor extending from exterior wall to exterior
wall, except for a common stairwell exterior to both dwelling units.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms containing cooking, eating,
living, sleeping and sanitary facilities or a combination thereof,
provided within the dwelling unit, which are entirely separated from
any other dwelling unit, which do not require access through another
dwelling unit and which are designed for and occupied and used
exclusively by a single family.
DWELLING UNIT, EFFICIENCY — A dwelling unit consisting of not
more than one habitable room, together with a kitchen or kitchenette
and sanitary facilities.
EASEMENT — A grant of property rights by the property owner to and/
or for use by the Township, county, state, Municipal Utilities Authority
or other public or quasi-public agency, private parties or their agents.
ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION — The Jackson Township advisory
body created pursuant to P.L. 1968, c. 245 (N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 et seq.).
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments
by water, ice, wind and gravity.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — Underground gas, electrical, telephone,
telegraph, steam or water transmission or distribution systems,
including mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits and cables and
including normal aboveground appurtenances such as fire alarm boxes,
police call boxes, light standards, poles, traffic signals, hydrants and
other similar equipment and accessories in connection therewith,
reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by public
§ 244-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-6
1:607
utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies or for the public
health or safety or general welfare.
EXECUTIVE RESIDENCE — A detached dwelling containing up to eight
bedrooms with common kitchen, dining and living areas and not
available to the general public.[Added 3-2-1993 by Ord. No. 6-93]
EXEMPT DEVELOPMENT — Development of a property where site plan
and/or subdivision approval shall not be required for the following:
EXTRAORDINARY TREE — See "tree, extraordinary."
FAMILY — One or more persons occupying a dwelling unit and living
together as a single entity or nonprofit housekeeping unit, as
Construction, additions or alterations related to single-family
detached or two-family detached dwellings on individual lots.
(1)
Interior alterations which do not increase the required number of
off-street parking spaces.
(2)
Any change of use of land or structure to a use for which the
standards of this chapter are the same or less restrictive or
stringent.
(3)
Any increase in the total number of employees, number of
employees in any shift or the number of vehicles to be stored or
parked on the site not exceeding 15% of the amount existing at
the time of passage of this chapter, or as set forth at the time of a
previous site plan approval; provided, however, that only one such
exemption for any property shall be allowed under this subsection.
(4)
Construction or installation of underground facilities which do not
alter the general use, appearance or grade of the site, provided
that the underground installation of fuel-oil tanks or tanks for the
storage of flammable or combustible liquids or materials shall have
been approved by the Jackson Township Bureau of Fire Prevention.
(5)
The construction or alteration of or addition to any off-street
parking area which provides an increase of 10 or fewer vehicle
parking spaces; provided, however, that only one such exemption
for any property shall be allowed under this subsection.
(6)
Home professional offices of less than 500 square feet within
existing buildings located in districts where such home
professional offices are permitted accessory uses or conditional
uses, provided that such office does not require more than five offstreet
parking spaces pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
(7)
Farms and accessory farm buildings and structures, provided that
such buildings and structures are located on, operated in
conjunction with and necessary to the operation of a farm as
defined in this chapter.
(8)
§ 244-6 JACKSON CODE § 244-6
1:608
distinguished from individuals or groups occupying a hotel, club,
fraternity or sorority house.
FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME — Any private residence approved by the
Division of Youth and Family Services or an organization with which
the Division contracts for family day care in which child-care services
are regularly provided to no fewer than three and no more than five
children for no less than 15 hours per week. A child being cared for
under the following circumstances is not included in the total number
of children receiving child-care services:
FARM — Any parcel of land, three acres or larger in size, which is
used for gain in the raising of agricultural products, livestock or dairy
products.
FARMERS MARKET — The seasonal selling or offering for sale at
retail of vegetables or produce, flowers, orchard products, and similar
agricultural products, occurring in a predesignated area, where the
vendors are individuals who have raised the vegetables or produce or
have taken same on consignment for retail sale.[Added 5-9-2017 by
Ord. No. 06-17]
FENCE — An artificially constructed barrier of wood, masonry, stone,
wire, metal or other manufactured material or combination of
materials.
FENCE, OPEN — A fence in which 2/3 of the area between grade level
and the top cross member is open.
FINAL PLAT — The final map of all or a portion of the site plan or
subdivision which is presented to the Planning Board for final approval
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
FINISHED ELEVATION — See "grade, finished."
FLOOD HAZARD AREA, FLOODPLAIN and FLOODWAY — As defined
and regulated by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection (NJDEP) pursuant to the New Jersey Flood Hazard Area
Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:16A-50 et seq.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of all
floors of a building or structure, measured between the inside faces
of exterior walls or from the center line of a common wall separating
two uses, buildings, structures or dwelling units, including basements,
cellars and storage areas, but excluding interior vehicular parking or
loading areas, or any space where the floor-to-ceiling height is less than
six feet.
(1) The child being cared for is legally related to the provider; or
The child is being cared for as part of a cooperative agreement
between parents for the care of their children by one or more of the
parents, where no payment for the care is being provided.
(2)
§ 244-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-6
1:609
FLOOR AREA, NET — The total of all floor areas of a building or
structure, excluding stairwells, elevator shafts, equipment rooms,
interior vehicular parking or loading areas, and all floors below the first
or ground floor, except when designed, occupied, used or intended to
be used for human habitation or service to the public.
FLOOR AREA RATIO — The sum of the area of all floors of buildings or
structures compared to the total area of the site.
FOOTCANDLE — The unit of illumination when the foot is the unit of
the length.
FOREST MANAGEMENT PLAN — A plan which details the
management practices proposed to be employed on a site, including but
not limited to harvesting practices and reforestation, and setting forth
the following:
FREEWAY — See "street hierarchy, freeway."
FRESHWATER WETLAND — See "wetland."
FRONTAGE — See "lot frontage."
FRONT LOT LINE — See "lot line, front."
FRONT YARD — See "yard, front."
GARAGE — A building or structure, or portion thereof, designed, used
or intended to be used for the parking and storage of vehicles.
GARAGE, COMMUNITY — A garage designed, used or intended to
be used exclusively for the parking and storage of vehicles owned or
operated by residents of nearby dwelling units and their guests, which
is not operated as a commercial enterprise and is not available to the
general public and which is owned, leased or cooperatively operated by
such residents.
(1) Location and size of the tract.
(2) Type of ownership.
Map of the property showing what lands, types of vegetation cover,
receiving waters, location of stream crossings and alternatives,
locations of skid trails, location of access roads and landings,
cutting boundaries and size of filter or buffer strips.
(3)
Property description, including land use and acreage of open, crop
and wood land; general soil types and erodibility; range of percent
of slope; timber quality and age (forest type, species, age, DBH,
height, volume and reproduction); and understory.
(4)
(5) Description of the timber to be harvested.
(6) Description of the regeneration plans.
(7) Description of intermediate management practices to be applied.
§ 244-6 JACKSON CODE § 244-6
1:610
GARAGE, PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL — A building or structure which is
accessory to a principal residential building, which is designed, used
or intended to be used for the parking and storage of vehicles owned
and operated by the residents thereof and in which no commercial use,
enterprise, occupation, business or service occurs or is available to the
general public.
GAS STATION — The same as "motor vehicle service station."
GENERAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN — A comprehensive plan for the
development of a planned development, as provided for in the
Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-45.1 through 40:55D-45.8)
and within this chapter at §§ 244-29 and 244-53.[Amended
12-23-2002 by Ord. No. 50-02; 3-27-2006 by Ord. No. 07-06]
GOVERNING BODY — The Township Committee of the Township of
Jackson.
GRADE, EXISTING — The vertical location of the ground surface prior
to excavating or filling.
GRADE, FINISHED — The final elevation of the ground surface, walks,
streets or roads brought to grade after development, as shown on
approved plans or designs relating thereto, or as existing if no plans or
designs have been approved.
GRADE, NATURAL — The elevation of the ground surface in its natural
state before any grading, excavation or filling.
GREENWAY — A linear open space area designated on an approved
development plan connecting or linking natural features; recreational
features; bicycle and/or pedestrian facilities.[Added 5-9-2017 by Ord.
No. 06-17]
GROUND SIGN — See "sign, ground."
GROUND SURFACE, NATURAL — The ground surface in its original
state before the construction or installation of improvements or prior to
any grading, excavation or filling.
GROUP HOME — A single-family dwelling used in the placement of not
more than 12 children pursuant to law, recognized as a group home
by the Department of Institutions and Agencies in accordance with
rules and regulations adopted by the Commissioner of Institutions and
Agencies.
HABITABLE FLOOR AREA — The total floor area of all the habitable
rooms in a dwelling unit.
HABITABLE ROOM — Any room or other enclosed portion of a dwelling
unit, other than a kitchen, bathroom, closet, pantry, hallway, staircase,
storage space, garage, carport, unfinished or finished cellar or
unfinished or finished basement.
HALF STORY — See "story, half."
§ 244-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-6
1:611
HEALTH CARE FACILITY — The facility or institution, whether public
or private, engaged principally in providing services for health
maintenance organizations, diagnosis or treatment of human disease,
pain, injury, deformity or physical condition, including but not limited
to a general hospital, special hospital, mental hospital, public health
center, diagnostic center, treatment center, rehabilitation center,
extended care facility, skilled nursing home, nursing home,
intermediate care facility, tuberculosis hospital, chronic-disease
hospital, maternity hospital, outpatient clinic, dispensary, home health
care agency, boarding home or other home for the sheltered care of
adult persons, bioanalytical laboratory (except as specifically excluded
hereunder) or central services facility serving one or more such
institutions, but excluding institutions that provide healing solely by
prayer and excluding such bioanalytical laboratories as are
independently owned and operated and are not owned, operated,
managed or controlled, in whole or in part, directly or indirectly, by
any one or more health care facilities and the predominant source of
business of which is not by contract with health care facilities within the
State of New Jersey and which solicit or accept specimens and operate
predominantly in interstate commerce.
HEIGHT — See "building height."
HISTORIC SITE — Any building, structure, area or property that is
significant in the history, architecture, archaeology or culture of
Jackson Township, Ocean County, the State of New Jersey or the nation
and has been so designated pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
HISTORIC TREE — A tree which has been found by a professional
forester, horticulturist or other professional plantsman to be of notable
historic interest to the Township because of its age, type, size or
historic association and which has been so designated, and that
designation has been officially made and promulgated as part of the
official records of the Township, county or state.
HOME OCCUPATION — Such gainful employment or occupation of one
or more members of the resident family, which shall constitute, either
entirely or partly, the means of livelihood of such member or members
and which shall be conducted in clearly secondary or accessory use to
the primary residential use of the principal structure. Such occupation
may be pursued in the principal dwelling structure or in a secondary
building which is accessory to such principal structure. The retail sales
of goods or services in structures designed or altered to make such
activities the primary use of the site shall not be construed hereunder
to be a home occupation.
HOMEOWNERS' ASSOCIATION — An association organized in a
development in which individual property owners share common
interests in ownership, maintenance and operations of community
facilities and open space.
§ 244-6 JACKSON CODE § 244-6
1:612
HOME PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — A licensed professional's office
conducted entirely within the dwelling or accessory building to the
dwelling which is the bona fide residence of the practitioner.
HOSPITAL — A building or series of buildings primarily for the
treatment of patients to be housed on the premises and providing
health, medical and surgical care for sick or injured human beings,
including as an integral part of the buildings such related facilities as
laboratories, outpatient departments, clinics, training facilities, central
service facilities and staff offices. The definition of "hospital" shall not
include nursing homes, medical care centers and the like.
HOTEL — A building designed for and offering transient lodging
accommodations to the general public and providing additional services
such as restaurants, meeting rooms and recreation facilities; however,
no provision shall be made for cooking in any individual lodging room
or suite.
HOUSEHOLD — A family living together in a dwelling unit, with
common access to and common use of all living, sleeping and eating
areas and all areas and facilities for the preparation and storage of food
within the dwelling unit.
IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE — The total area of impervious surfaces on a
lot, expressed as a percentage of the lot area.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been compacted or
covered with a layer of material so that it is highly resistant to
infiltration by water.
IMPROVED LOT — A lot containing an improvement.
IMPROVED PUBLIC ROAD OR STREET — A street constructed in
accordance with the standards set forth in this chapter, or a street
which has been accepted and maintained by the Township, county or
state, meeting the minimum requirements set forth in § 244-155C(3).
IMPROVEMENT — Any man-made, immovable item which becomes
part of, placed upon or is affixed to land.
INGRESS — Access or entry.
INTERESTED PARTY — In a criminal or quasi-criminal proceeding,
any citizen of the State of New Jersey; and in the case of a civil
proceeding in any court or in an administrative proceeding before a
municipal agency, any person, whether residing within or without the
municipality, whose rights to use, acquire or enjoy property are or may
be affected by any action taken under this chapter and/or pursuant to
the provisions of P.L. 1975, c. 291,110 or whose rights to use, acquire or
enjoy property under the provisions of P.L. 1975, c. 291, or under any
other law of the State of New Jersey or of the United States have been
denied, violated or infringed by an action or a failure to act under this
chapter.
110. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 244-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-6
1:613
INTERIOR LOT — See "lot, interior."
JUNKYARD — Any lot, structure or building or portion thereof used
for the outdoor storage, collection, keeping, processing, purchase, sale
or abandonment of junk, including scrap materials; or used for the
dismantling, demolition or abandonment of structures, automobiles,
equipment, machinery or parts thereof. The term "junkyard," as defined
herein, includes automobile wrecking yards, salvage yards or recycling
centers. Any person, persons, firm or corporation who shall permit the
outdoor storage or keeping of more than one unregistered, inoperative
or abandoned vehicle not in a state of major disrepair, item of
equipment, machinery or parts thereof, except as may be part of an
allowed use of the premises, shall be deemed to be operating a
junkyard.
KIOSK — A small, freestanding structure upon which temporary
information and/or posters, notices and announcements are posed for
the benefit of the public.
LAND CLEARING STAGE — Those operations where trees and
vegetation are removed and which occur prior to the construction
of buildings; e.g., road right-of-way excavation and paving, lake and
drainage system excavation, utility excavation, grubbing and any other
necessary clearing operations.
LAND DISTURBANCE — Any activity involving the clearing, cutting,
grading, excavation, filling or transporting or any other activity which
alters land topography or vegetative cover.
LAND USE — A description of how land is occupied and/or utilized.
LARGE RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS — Single-occupant retail uses with
a gross floor area of 50,000 square feet or greater.[Added 5-9-2017
by Ord. No. 06-17]
LIFE CARE FACILITY OR DEVELOPMENT — A parcel of land developed
as a comprehensive and integrated system, combining independent
living accommodation for the elderly with the provision of recreational,
social, health care and support services and functions intended for the
residents and other users of such facility or development and their
guests.
LIGHT MANUFACTURING — The fabrication, assembly or processing
of goods or materials or the storage of bulk goods and materials where
such activities or materials create no hazard from fire or explosion
or produce no toxic or corrosive fumes, gas, smoke, obnoxious dust
or vapor, offensive noise or vibration, glare, flashes or objectionable
effluent.
LINER BUILDING — A building specifically designed to screen or mask
a parking lot or parking structure (garage) from a view or
frontage.[Added 5-9-2017 by Ord. No. 06-17]
LIVESTOCK — All animals kept or raised, including but not limited
to animals raised for slaughter or sale, animals kept for breeding,
§ 244-6 JACKSON CODE § 244-6
1:614
chickens kept for laying eggs, work animals and animals kept for
producing dairy products.
LIVE/WORK UNIT — Space within a mixed-use building, owned or
leased and utilized as a single unit, consisting of a dwelling unit (living
area) not on the ground level and a permitted nonresidential use
(working area) on the ground level, connected by a private internal
staircase.[Added 5-9-2017 by Ord. No. 06-17]
LOADING SPACE — An off-street space for the temporary parking of a
commercial vehicle while loading or unloading. Such space must have
clear means of ingress and egress to a public street at all times.
LOFT APARTMENT — An apartment unit, located on the upper floor of
a mixed-use building, characterized by large unpartitioned living areas
and high ceilings.[Added 5-9-2017 by Ord. No. 06-17]
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat
or otherwise permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon
as a unit.
LOT AREA — The total land area within the limits of the lot lines
bounding that area, and which is always expressed in terms of square
feet. Any portion of a lot included in a street right-of-way, existing or
proposed, shall not be included in calculating lot area. Portions of lots
encumbered by easements, wetlands and wetlands transition (buffer)
areas shall be included in calculating lot area. For all detached singlefamily
building lots within the non-Pinelands portion of the Township, a
minimum of 75% of the required minimum lot area shall be outside of
regulated wetlands, and a minimum of 50% of the required minimum lot
area shall be outside of regulated wetlands and the required wetlands
transition (buffer) areas.
LOT, CORNER — A lot or parcel of land abutting or fronting on two or
more intersecting streets. On corner lots, all yards facing on a street
shall be considered front yards and shall conform to the minimum front
yard requirements for the zone in which the lot is located, except as
otherwise provided in this chapter.
LOT COVERAGE — The percentage of the total lot area which is
covered by impervious surfaces, principal buildings, and accessory
buildings and uses.[Amended 10-26-2010 by Ord. No. 27-10]
LOT DEPTH — The shortest distance between the front lot line and a
line drawn parallel thereto through the midpoint of the rear lot line,
provided that in triangular lots having no rear lot line, the distance
shall be measured to the midpoint of a line parallel to the front lot line,
which shall not be less than 10 feet in length measured between its
intersections with the side lot lines. On corner lots having two side lot
lines, one side lot line shall be considered a rear lot line only for the
purpose of determining lot depth.
LOT FRONTAGE — The horizontal distance of lot lines or portions
thereof, which are coexistent with a street right-of-way line.
§ 244-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-6
1:615
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINE — Any line designating the extent or boundary of a lot, which
shall be further defined as follows:
LOT, NONCONFORMING — A lot of record which does not have the
minimum width, frontage or depth or contain the minimum area
required for the zoning district in which it is located.
LOT OF RECORD — A lot which exists as shown or described on a plat
or deed filed in the Ocean County Clerk's office.
LOT, THROUGH — A lot situated between and having frontage on two
streets which do not intersect at the boundaries of the lot.
LOT WIDTH — The shortest horizontal distance between the side lot
lines measured through the midpoint of a line parallel to the front lot
line located at the minimum building setback line required in the zoning
district where the lot is located. On corner lots, one front lot line shall
be considered a side lot line only for the purpose of determining lot
width. On through lots, the lot width shall be determined as described
herein, but only on that portion of the lot with frontage on the street
that the building or structure directly faces or addresses.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTY — Any security in the form of cash,
certified check or bond with sufficient surety in a form which is
approved by the Township Attorney and which is accepted by the
Township for the maintenance of any improvements required by this
chapter.
MAJOR ARTERIAL — See "street hierarchy, major arterial."
MAJOR COLLECTOR — See "street hierarchy, major collector."
MAJOR SITE PLAN — See "site plan, major."
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — See "subdivision, major."
MANUFACTURED HOME — A dwelling unit which:
FRONT LOT LINE — A lot line or portion thereof which is
coexistent with a street right-of-way line or, in the case of private
streets, with the street line.
(1)
REAR LOT LINE — The lot line most distant and generally opposite
and parallel to the front lot line. In the case of an irregularly shaped
lot, the lot line which is most nearly parallel to and at the greatest
average distance from the street right-of-way line, or, on private
streets, the street line shall be considered the rear lot line.
(2)
(3) SIDE LOT LINE — Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line.
Consists of one or more transportable sections which are
substantially constructed off site and, if more than one section, are
joined together on site;
(1)
(2) Is built on a permanent chassis;
§ 244-6 JACKSON CODE § 244-6
1:616
MANUFACTURING — The treatment or processing of raw products,
and the production of articles or finished products from raw or
prepared materials by giving them new forms or qualities.
MASTER PLAN — A composite of one or more written or graphic
proposals for the development of Jackson Township as set forth in and
adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28.
MAYOR — The Mayor of the Township of Jackson.
MEDIAN — That portion of a divided street separating the traveled
ways of traffic proceeding in opposite directions.
MENTALLY ILL PERSON — A person who is afflicted with a mental
illness as defined in N.J.S.A. 30:4-23,111 but shall not include a person
who has been committed after having been found not guilty of a
criminal offense by reason of insanity or having been found unfit to be
tried on a criminal charge by reason of insanity.
MINING — The cumulative extraction of minerals and other natural
resources, domestic potable water wells or farm irrigation wells from
any site, including solids, liquids and gases. The term "mining" shall
also include quarrying; well operation; milling, such as crushing,
screening, washing and flotation; and other preparation customarily
done at the mining site or as part of a mining activity.
MINOR ARTERIAL — See "street hierarchy, minor arterial."
MINOR COLLECTOR — See "street hierarchy, minor collector."
MINOR SITE PLAN — See "site plan, minor."
MINOR SOLAR OR PHOTOVOLTAIC ENERGY FACILITY OR
STRUCTURE — A fuel cell, solar or photovoltaic panel or system of
panels for the production of energy that uses solar energy as its fuel; is
located on the same property as the power beneficiary; is intended to
offset all or a portion of the beneficiary's on-site energy consumption;
is intended to mitigate electrical system improvement requirements;
and generates not more than 110% of the power consumed on the
Is designed to be used, when connected to utilities, as a dwelling
on a permanent or nonpermanent foundation; and
(3)
Is manufactured in accordance with the standards promulgated
for a manufactured home by the Secretary of the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development pursuant to the
National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety
Standards Act of 1974, P.L. 93-383 (42 U.S.C. § 5401 et seq.), and
the standards promulgated for a manufactured or mobile home
by the Commissioner of the Department of Community Affairs
pursuant to the State Uniform Construction Code Act, P.L. 1975, c.
217 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.).
(4)
111. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 30:4-23 was repealed by P.L. 1987, c. 116, § 30. See now N.J.S.A.
30:4-27.2.
§ 244-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-6
1:617
beneficiary's premises for any twelve-month period.[Added 5-9-2017
by Ord. No. 06-17]
MINOR SUBDIVISION — See "subdivision, minor."
MIXED-USE BUILDING — A building of two or more stories with a
minimum of the ground floor consisting exclusively of nonresidential
uses and a minimum of one floor of residential use over one or more
lower floors of nonresidential use.[Added 5-9-2017 by Ord. No.
06-17]
MOBILE HOME — A factory-assembled structure or structures
equipped with the necessary service connections and made so as to
be readily movable as a unit or units and designed to be used as a
dwelling unit for one or more persons or family unit and with or without
a permanent foundation, when located in a licensed mobile home park.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel of land, or two or more parcels of
land, containing no fewer than 10 sites equipped for the installation of
manufactured homes, where these sites are under common ownership
and control for the purpose of leasing each site to the owner of a
manufactured home for the installation thereof and where the owner
or owners provide services which are provided by the municipality in
which the park is located for property owners outside the park, which
services may include but shall not be limited to the construction and
maintenance of streets; lighting of streets and other common areas;
garbage removal; snow removal; and provisions for the drainage of
surface water from home sites and common areas. A parcel or any
contiguous parcels of land which contain, on the effective date of this
chapter, no fewer than three sites equipped for the installation of
manufactured homes and which otherwise conform to the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-102d shall qualify as a mobile home park for the
purposes of this chapter.
MOTEL — A building designed for and offering transient lodging
accommodations to the general public and containing five or more
rooms, with at least 25% having direct access to the outside without the
necessity of passing through the main lobby of the building. The term
"motel" shall include a motor court and motor hotel.
MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR GARAGE — A building or portion of a
building in which the maintenance, overhauling or replacement of
automobile parts is conducted as a business for profit. Such use shall
not include any auto body refinishing of any nature. The term "motor
vehicle repair garage" shall include an automobile repair shop.
MOTOR VEHICLE SERVICE STATION — Any area of land, including
structures thereon, which is used for the retail sale of gasoline or
any other motor vehicle fuel and oil and other lubricating substances,
including any sale of motor vehicle accessories. Such use may include
facilities for the lubricating, washing or servicing of motor vehicles.
Such use shall not include any auto body refinishing of any nature. The
term "motor vehicle service station" shall include a gas station.
§ 244-6 JACKSON CODE § 244-6
1:618
MUNICIPAL AGENCY — The Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment or Township Committee of the Township of Jackson when
acting pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. and this chapter.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Jackson.
NAMEPLATE SIGN — See "sign, nameplate."
NONCONFORMING BUILDING — See "building, nonconforming."
NONCONFORMING LOT — See "lot, nonconforming."
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — See "structure, nonconforming."
NONCONFORMING USE — See "use, nonconforming."
NO TREE VERIFICATION — A signed, notarized statement by the
owner or his agent stating that no trees exist upon the site.
NUISANCE — An interference with the use and enjoyment of property.
NURSERY — A place where trees, shrubs, vines and flowers and
ornamental plants are propagated and/or grown for sale to the general
public in the ordinary course of business.
NURSERY SCHOOL — The same as "child-care center."
NURSING HOME — See "health care facility."
OCCUPANCY — The specific purpose for which land, a structure or a
building is designed, maintained or used.
OCCUPANCY PERMIT — The same as a "certificate of occupancy."
OFFICIAL COUNTY MAP — The map, with changes and additions
thereto, adopted and established from time to time by resolution of
the Board of Chosen Freeholders of Ocean County pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-32 et seq.
OFFICIAL MAP — A map adopted by ordinance by the Township
Committee pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32 et seq.
OFF SITE — Located outside the lot lines of the lot in question but
within the property (of which the lot is a part) which is the subject of
a development application or contiguous portion of a street or right-ofway.
OFF TRACT — Not located on the property which is the subject of a
development application or on a contiguous portion of a street or rightof-
way.
ON SITE — Located on the lot in question.
ON TRACT — Located on the property which is the subject of a
development application or on a contiguous portion of a street or rightof-
way.
OPEN SPACE — Any parcel or area of land or water essentially
unimproved and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public
or private use and enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners
§ 244-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-6
1:619
and occupants of land adjoining or neighboring such open spaces,
provided that such areas may be improved with only those buildings,
structures, streets and off-street parking and other improvements that
are designed to be incidental to the natural openness of the land.
OPEN SPACE, COMMON — An open area within or related to a site
designated as a development and designated and intended for the use
and enjoyment of residents and owners of the development. Common
open space may contain such complementary buildings, structures or
improvements as are necessary and appropriate for the use and
enjoyment of residents and owners of the development.
OPEN SPACE, PRIVATE — Open space held in private ownership, the
use of which is normally limited to the occupants of a single dwelling or
building.
OPEN SPACE, PUBLIC — Open space conveyed or dedicated to the
Township of Jackson, a municipal agency, the Board of Education, a
state or county agency or other body for use and enjoyment by the
general public or for conservation purposes.
OPEN SPACE RATIO — The total area of open space divided by the total
site area in which the open space is located.
OUTDOOR STORAGE — The keeping, in an unenclosed or unroofed
area, of any goods, junk, material, merchandise or vehicles on a lot, or
any portion thereof, for more than 24 hours.
OWNER — See "property owner."
PARCEL — A lot or tract of land.
PARKING AISLE — The traveled way by which vehicles enter and
depart parking spaces.
PARKING AREA — Any public or private land area designed, used or
intended to be used for the parking of motor vehicles, including parking
lots, garages, private driveways and legally designated areas of public
or private streets.
PARKING AREA, PRIVATE — A parking area for the private use of the
owners or occupants of the lot on which the parking area is located.
PARKING AREA, PUBLIC — A parking area available to the public,
whether for a fee, for free or as an accommodation of clients, customers
or employees.
PARKING LOT — An off-street, ground-level area, usually surfaced and
improved, for the temporary parking of motor vehicles.
PARKING SPACE — An off-street space provided for the parking of a
motor vehicle, a minimum of nine feet in width and 18 feet in length,
exclusive of driveways, access drives, fire lanes and parking aisles.
PARTIAL DESTRUCTION — The destruction of a use, structure or
building by fire, storm or other natural causes, for which the cost of
§ 244-6 JACKSON CODE § 244-6
1:620
reconstruction is equal to less than 50% of the total market value of the
use, structure or building.
PARTY IMMEDIATELY CONCERNED — For purposes of notice, any
applicant for development, the owners of the subject property and all
owners of property and government agencies entitled to notice under
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12.
PASSIVE RECREATION — See "recreation, passive."
PATIO — An area of land not used for receiving or storing material,
where the ground has been surfaced with construction materials, such
as brick, stone, cement or lumber, which does not project significantly
above grade level and which is entirely uncovered by a roof or any
superstructure.
PAVEMENT — See "cartway."
PERFORMANCE GUARANTY — Any security in the form of cash, letter
of credit, certified check or bond with sufficient surety in a form which
is approved by the Township Attorney and which is accepted by the
Township Committee in lieu of a requirement that certain
improvements be made before final approval of a plat or site plan,
including performance bonds or cash deposits.
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS —
PERMITTED USE — See "use, permitted."
PERVIOUS SURFACE — Any material that permits full or partial
absorption of stormwater into previously unimproved land.
PLANNED INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area of a minimum
contiguous size, as may be specified in this chapter, to be developed
according to a plan as a single entity containing one or more structures
with appurtenant common areas to accommodate industrial uses and
any other uses incidental to the predominant use as may be permitted.
PLANNED RETIREMENT COMMUNITY — An area, with frontage on
an existing minor arterial or major collector with a minimum of 100
contiguous acres, to be developed according to a plan as a single
entity containing one or more residential clusters, which may include
a variety of dwelling unit types, recreational facilities and open spaces
and may include cultural and medical facilities and services and
Standards adopted by this chapter, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-65d, regulating noise levels, glare, earthborne or sonic
vibrations, heat, electronic or atomic radiation, noxious odors, toxic
matters, explosive and flammable matters, smoke and airborne
particles, waste discharge, screening of unsightly objects or
conditions and such other similar matters as may be reasonably
required by the Township; or
(1)
Required by applicable federal or state laws or municipal
ordinances.
(2)
§ 244-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-6
1:621
appropriate commercial, office or public or quasi-public uses for the
benefit of the permanent residents who are persons of 55 years of age
or older.
PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of Jackson Township as
established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23.
PLAT — A map or maps of a subdivision or site plan.
PLOT — A parcel of land that is identified and referenced on the Jackson
Township Tax Map or on a recorded instrument.
PORCH — A roofed and/or enclosed area with a percentage of window
area to wall area greater than 50%, not heated or air-conditioned or
designed, constructed, used or intended to be used year-round, and
which is attached to or is part of and has direct access to or from a
building.
POTABLE WATER SUPPLY — Water suitable for drinking or cooking
purposes.
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL — The conferral of certain rights, pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-46, 40:55D-48 and 40:55D-49, prior to final approval,
after specific elements of a development plan have been approved by
the Planning Board and/or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may
be.
PRELIMINARY FLOOR PLANS AND ELEVATIONS — Architectural
drawings prepared during early and introductory stages of the design
of a project, illustrating, in a schematic form, its scope, scale and
relationship to its site and immediate environs and exterior colors and
materials of construction.
PRINCIPAL ARTERIAL — See "street hierarchy, major arterial."
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — See "building, principal."
PRINCIPAL USE — See "use, principal."
PROFESSIONAL — Any person or entity whose principals are required
to be licensed by New Jersey law and who supplies legal representation,
expert testimony or written reports in support of an application.
Professionals shall include both any individuals supplying the
representation, testimonies or reports and the firms or entities in which
said individuals practice.[Added 8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 32-05]
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — The office of a member of a recognized
profession, which shall include but is not limited to the office of doctors
or physicians, dentists, insurance agents, optometrists, architects,
landscape architects, professional engineers, land surveyors,
professional planners, lawyers, attorneys, accountants and real estate
brokers.
PROHIBITED USE — See "use, prohibited."
PROJECTING SIGN — See "sign, projecting."
§ 244-6 JACKSON CODE § 244-6
1:622
PROPERTY OWNER — The individual, individuals, firm, association,
syndicate, partnership or corporation owning fee or title; or the
individual, individuals, firm, association, syndicate, partnership or
corporation in whose name or names the legal title to the property
appears by deed duly recorded in the Ocean County Clerk's office; or
the individual, individuals, firm, association, syndicate, partnership or
corporation in possession of the property or buildings under claim of
or exercising acts of ownership over the same for himself or itself, as
the case may be, or as the executor, administrator or guardian of the
property.
PROTECTIVE BARRIER — A physical structure limiting access to a
protected area, composed of wood or other suitable materials.
Variations of these methods may be permitted upon written request.
PUBLIC AREAS —
QUASI-PUBLIC — A building, structure or use owned or operated by
a nonprofit, religious or eleemosynary institution and providing
educational, cultural, recreational, religious or similar types of public
programs.
REAL ESTATE SIGN — See "sign, real estate."
REAPPROVAL —
Public parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational
areas.
(1)
(2) Other public open spaces.
(3) Scenic and historic sites.
(4) Sites for schools and other public buildings and structures.
An approved minor subdivision shall be the only type of application
for development that may be reapproved by the municipal agency.
A minor subdivision reapproval may be granted by the municipal
agency, provided that all of the following criteria are met:
The zoning district and/or zone requirements have not
changed.
(a)
No changes to the configuration, areas or dimensions of the
lots are proposed.
(b)
The bearings and distances of all proposed lot lines are not
being altered.
(c)
No variances or other types of relief requiring public notice
pursuant to this chapter are required.
(d)
The application for a reapproval of a minor subdivision shall be
received by the Office of Planning and Zoning within one year
of the date of the original approval.
(e)
(1)
§ 244-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-6
1:623
RECREATION, ACTIVE — Leisure-time activity, usually of a more formal
nature and performed with others, often requiring equipment and
taking place at prescribed places, sites or fields.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicular-type portable structure
without permanent foundation, which can be towed, hauled or driven,
and primarily designed as temporary living accommodations for
recreational, camping and travel use, and including but not limited
to travel trailers, truck campers, camping trailers and self-propelled
motor homes.
RECREATION FACILITY — A place designed and equipped for the
conduct of sports, leisure-time activities and other customary and usual
recreational activities.
RECREATION, PASSIVE — Any leisure-time activity not considered
active.
RESIDENTIAL AREA, GROSS — That portion of the net developable
tract area developed for residential purposes, plus contiguous open
space and contiguous passive and active recreation areas.
RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER — An area to be developed as a single entity
according to a plan containing residential housing units which have
common, private, public and/or green open space area as an
appurtenance.
RESIDENTIAL DENSITY — The number of dwelling units per gross acre
of residential land area, including streets, easements and open space of
a development.
RESIDENTIAL DENSITY, GROSS — The same as "residential density."
RESIDENTIAL DENSITY, NET — The number of dwelling units which
may be or are developed per acre of land, exclusive of areas used for
public access, streets, roads, easements and/or open space.
RESTAURANT — Any establishment, however designated, at which
food and beverages are sold for consumption on the premises, but
normally to patrons seated within an enclosed building. However, a
snack bar at a public or a community playground, play field, park or
swimming pool operated solely by the agency or group operating the
recreational facilities and for the convenience of patrons of the facility
shall not be deemed to be a restaurant.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN — An establishment where the majority of the
patrons purchase food, beverages, ice cream and similar confections
for takeout or consumption on the premises, but outside the confines
of the principal building or in automobiles parked upon the premises,
regardless of whether or not, in addition thereto, seats or other
accommodations are provided for the patrons.
Reapproval of a minor subdivision shall not preclude the applicant
from complying with all applicable local, county, state or federal
laws that were not in effect at the time of the original approval.
(2)
§ 244-6 JACKSON CODE § 244-6
1:624
RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD — Any establishment whose principal
business is the sale of foods, frozen desserts or beverages to the
customer in a ready-to-consume state for consumption, either within
the restaurant building or for carry-out with consumption on or off the
premises and whose design or method of operation may include any of
the following characteristics:
RESUBDIVISION: —
RETAINING WALL — A structure erected between lands of different
elevation to protect structures and/or to prevent the washing down or
erosion of earth from the upper slope level.
RETENTION BASIN — A pond, pool or dry basin used for the storage
and recharge of stormwater runoff, having no outlet other than an
emergency spillway.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied
by a street, crosswalk, railroad, road, electric transmission line, gas
pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer line main or shade trees
or for another special use or structure.
ROOF SIGN — See "sign, roof."
ROOM — As applied to multifamily dwellings as may be permitted
by this chapter, includes living rooms, dining rooms, kitchens and
bedrooms. Kitchenettes which do not include space for eating and
dining areas in which one full wall is open into a living room area shall
be counted as 1/2 room. Bathrooms shall not count as rooms.
ROOMING HOUSE — The same as "boardinghouse."
SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA — A dish-shaped, parabolic-shaped,
spherical or circular-shaped antenna for the reception and/or
Foods, frozen desserts or beverages are usually served in edible
containers or in paper, plastic or other disposable containers.
(1)
A limited or specialized list of quickly prepared or pre-prepared
food items, utilizing mechanized standardized preparation and
packaging techniques is offered for on and off the premises
consumption.
(2)
Drive-in or outside ordering and service via a separate drive-in
lane, call box and delivery window.
(3)
(4) No waitress table service.
The further division or relocation of lot lines of any lot or lots within
a subdivision previously made and approved or recorded according
to law; or
(1)
The alteration of any streets, or the establishment of any new
streets within any subdivision previously made and approved or
recorded according to law, but not including conveyances so as to
combine existing lots by deed or other instrument.
(2)
§ 244-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-6
1:625
transmission of satellite signals, including television signals, AM radio
signals, FM radio signals, telemetry signals, data communications
signals or any other reception or transmission signals using free air
space as a medium whether for commercial, public or private use.
Such objects shall also be known as "earth stations," "earth terminals,"
"home video earth stations," "microwave dish antennas," "satellite
dishes," "satellite earth stations" and "satellite radio frequency signal
reception and/or transmission devices."
SCREENING — Any concentration or grouping of trees, shrubbery or
other plantings as may be required by this chapter.
SEDIMENTATION — The depositing of soil or rock that has been
transported from its site of origin by water, ice, wind, gravity or other
natural means as a product of erosion.
SETBACK — The horizontal distance between a building or structure
and any front, rear or side lot line, measured perpendicular to such lot
lines at the point where the building or structure is closest to such lot
lines.
SHED, GARDEN, STORAGE OR TOOL — An accessory building used for
the storage of incidental items.
SHOPPING CENTER — An integrated development of such uses as
retail stores and shops, personal-service establishments, professional
business offices, banks, post offices and restaurants, housed in an
enclosed building or buildings, utilizing such common facilities as
customer parking, pedestrian walkways, truck loading and unloading
space, utilities and sanitary facilities, having a minimum total floor area
of 20,000 square feet.
SIGHT TRIANGLE — A triangular-shaped portion of land established
at street intersections in which nothing is erected, placed, planted or
allowed to grow in such a manner as to limit or obstruct the sight
distance of motorists entering or leaving the intersection.
SIGN — A visual communication that is used for the purpose of bringing
the subject thereof to the attention of others. The term does not include
buildings themselves, traffic signs or other official messages displayed
within the public right-of-way. "Sign" includes letters, numbers,
symbols, trademarks, illustrations or designs as they may appear on
signs, billboards, banners, storefronts, marquees, canopies and other
stationary visual media on or off the premises of the activity to which
the message pertains. A sign may also be described as a street graphic.
Types of signs include but shall not be limited to the following:
SIGN, ANIMATED OR MOVING — A sign or any part thereof which
utilizes motion of any part by mechanical means or displays
flashing, oscillatory or intermittent lights or appears to move due
to movement of the viewer.
(1)
AWNING, CANOPY OR MARQUEE SIGN — A sign that is mounted
or painted on or attached to an awning, canopy or marquee that
(2)
§ 244-6 JACKSON CODE § 244-6
1:626
is otherwise permitted by ordinance. Such sign shall not project
above, below or beyond the awning, canopy or marquee.
BANNER, FLAG or PENNANT — A sign having characters, letters
or illustrations applied to cloth, paper or fabric of any kind, with
only such material for backdrop, which is affixed to poles, wires or
ropes. Government flags shall be excluded from this definition.
(3)
BILLBOARD — A structure utilized for advertising an
establishment, an activity, a product, a service or an entertainment
which is sold, produced, manufactured, available or furnished at a
place other than on the property on which said sign is located.
(4)
BOX SIGN — A sign, the face of which is enclosed with a boxlike
structure.
(5)
BULLETIN BOARD SIGN — A sign which identifies an institution
or organization on the premises on which it is located and which
contains the name of the institution or organization, the names
of the individuals connected with it and general announcements
of events or activities occurring at the institution, or similar
messages.
(6)
BUSINESS SIGN — A sign which directs attention to a business,
profession or process conducted or to a commodity, service or
product sold, offered, manufactured or assembled or to an
entertainment offered on the premises where the sign is located.
(7)
CONSTRUCTION SIGN — A temporary sign erected on the
premises on which construction is taking place, during the period
of such construction, indicating the names of the architects,
engineers, planners, landscape architects, contractors or other
participants in construction and the owners, financial supporters,
sponsors and similar individuals or firms having a role or interest
with respect to the structure or project.
(8)
DIRECTIONAL SIGN — A sign limited to directional messages,
principally for pedestrian, bicycle or motor vehicular traffic,
including but not limited to "One-Way," "Entrance" and "Exit." No
such sign shall exceed four feet in area.
(9)
(10)FACADE SIGN — The same as "wall sign."
FLASHING SIGN — Any directly or indirectly illuminated sign
which exhibits changing natural or artificial light or color effects by
any means whatsoever.
(11)
FREESTANDING SIGN — Any nonmovable sign not affixed to a
building, that is supported by one or more columns, poles or
uprights which are firmly embedded in the ground. The height
of such signs shall be measured from the finished grade directly
below the sign to the top of the sign. Exposed guy wires, chains
(12)
§ 244-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-6
1:627
or other connections shall not be used in the support of such
signs. The base of the columns, poles or uprights supporting a
freestanding sign shall be landscaped so as to minimize the visual
effect and impact of said supports.
GOVERNMENTAL SIGN — A sign erected and maintained pursuant
to and in discharge of any governmental functions, or required by
law, ordinance or other governmental regulation.
(13)
GROUND SIGN — Any sign, other than a freestanding sign, placed
upon or supported by the ground, independent of any other
structure. A ground sign shall not exceed six feet in height,
measured from the finished grade directly below the sign to the top
of the sign, and shall be accented by landscaping at its base.
(14)
HOLIDAY DECORATION SIGN — A temporary sign, in the nature
of decorations, clearly incidental to and customarily and commonly
associated with any national, state, local or religious holiday.
(15)
HOME OCCUPATION SIGN — A sign containing only the name and
occupation of a permitted home occupation, which shall be affixed
directly to the building in which the home occupation is located,
shall be illuminated only by a shielded indirect light source or equal
light not offensive to surrounding uses, structures or properties
and shall not exceed a total area of two square feet.
(16)
IDENTIFICATION SIGN — A sign giving the nature, logo,
trademark or other identifying symbol, address of a structure,
building, business, development or establishment on the premises
where it is located.
(17)
ILLUMINATED SIGN — A sign lighted by or exposed to artificial
lighting either by lights on or in the sign or directed towards the
sign. An illuminated sign shall be arranged so as to reflect the
light and glare away from adjoining uses, structures, buildings or
properties and away from adjoining roadways. No sign with red,
green, orange, amber, white or blue illumination in a beam, beacon
or flashing form resembling an emergency light or traffic signal
shall be erected in any location.
(18)
MULTIPLE OCCUPANCY OR MULTIPLE TENANCY SIGN — A
single sign relating to a use or facility, such as a shopping center,
industrial park or office complex, where there is more than one
occupancy and/or tenancy of uses, where said multiple occupancy
and/or tenancy use a common parking facility or a common private
drive or roadway and where the names and professions or business
names of the various tenants are displayed on a single sign.
[Added 11-8-2004 by Ord. No. 39-04]
(19)
NAMEPLATE SIGN — A sign, located on the premises, giving the
name or address, or both, of the legal owner, occupant or tenant of
(20)
§ 244-6 JACKSON CODE § 244-6
1:628
a building or premises. No such sign shall exceed two square feet
in area.
(21)OFF-PREMISES SIGN — The same as "billboard."
ON-SITE INFORMATIONAL SIGN — A sign associated with, but not
limited to, information and directions necessary or convenient for
visitors coming on the property, including signs marking entrances
and exits, parking areas, circulation direction, rest rooms and
pickup and delivery areas. Such a sign shall not be considered in
calculating total sign area for a site. No such sign shall exceed four
square feet in area.
(22)
(23)OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGN — The same as "billboard."
POLITICAL SIGN — A temporary sign announcing or supporting
political candidates or issues in connection with any national, state,
county or local election. Such a sign shall not exceed 32 square feet
in area. A political sign shall be permitted within 60 days prior to
any national, state, county or local election and shall be removed
within 15 days after the election.
(24)
PORTABLE SIGN — A sign that is not permanent (affixed to a
building, structure or the ground), but instead is mounted on
wheels or movable vehicles, or that is easily made movable.
(25)
PRIVATE SALE OR SPECIAL EVENT SIGN — A temporary sign
advertising private sales of personal property such as house sales,
garage sales, rummage sales, yard sales and the like; or private
not-for-profit events such as picnics, carnivals, bazaars, game
nights, art fairs or craft shows. Private sale or special event signs
shall be removed within seven days of the termination or closing of
the event or occurrence advertised.
(26)
PROJECTING SIGN — A sign, other than a wall sign, which is
wholly or partially suspended from, attached to or dependent upon
a building or wall for support and which projects more than four
feet from said building or wall.
(27)
REAL ESTATE SIGN — A temporary sign advertising the sale,
rental or lease of the premises, or portion thereof, on which the
sign is located.
(28)
ROOF SIGN — A sign erected or constructed above the eaves,
roofline or parapet line of any building.
(29)
SNIPE SIGN — A sign which is tacked, nailed, posted, pasted,
glued or otherwise attached to trees or other natural features,
poles, stakes, fences or to other objects, with the message
appearing thereon not applicable to the present use of the premises
or structures upon which such sign is located.
(30)
§ 244-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-6
1:629
SIGNABLE AREA — The area on the facade of a building, usually below
the roofline, which is free of openings, such as doors and windows, and
which may be used for a sign without disrupting major architectural
details.
SIGN AREA — For purposes of this chapter and to calculate the amount
of area utilized by proposed signs, the total area of the rectangle which
encloses the message of a ground sign shall be counted, including
all ornamentation, embellishments and symbols, but excluding the
supporting structure which does not form part of the sign proper or of
the display. The area of a double or multifaced sign shall be the area of
the largest vertical plane within the outline of the sign as seen from any
one vantage point on a public right-of-way.
SIGN FACE — The area or display surface used for the message.
SITE — Any plot, parcel, piece or tract of land or combination of
contiguous lots or parcels of land.
SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots on which is
shown:
TEMPORARY SIGN — A sign or display constructed of cloth,
canvas, fabric, metal, aluminum, plywood, plastic or other light
material and designed or intended to be displayed for a period of
time which shall not exceed 60 days. No temporary sign shall be
illuminated.
(31)
TIME AND TEMPERATURE SIGN — A sign which indicates actual
time and/or current temperature.
(32)
WALL SIGN — A sign attached to or erected against an exterior
wall of a building or structure in such a manner that said wall
becomes the supporting structure for the sign. No wall sign shall
project more than 12 inches from the face of the building or
structure.
(33)
WINDOW SIGN — A sign that is affixed to a window or visible
through a window from the exterior. A window sign shall not
exceed 25% of the total window area within which it is located.
(34)
The existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including but
not necessarily limited to topography, vegetation, drainage,
floodplains, marshes, wetlands and waterways;
(1)
The location of all existing and proposed buildings, drives, parking
spaces, walkways, means of ingress and egress, drainage facilities,
utility services, landscaping, structures and signs, lighting and
screening devices; and
(2)
Any other information that may be reasonably required in order to
make an informal determination pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter requiring review and approval of site plans by the Planning
Board, adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-37 et seq.
(3)
§ 244-6 JACKSON CODE § 244-6
1:630
SITE PLAN, MAJOR — Any site plan not classified as a minor site plan.
SITE PLAN, MINOR — A development plan of one or more lots for which
site plan approval is required and which:
SKETCH PLAT — A map of a subdivision or site plan of sufficient
accuracy to be used for the purpose of discussion and classification and,
further, meeting the requirements set forth in this chapter for sketch
plats.
SPECIMEN TREE — See "tree, specimen."
SQUARE — An open space designated for unstructured recreation and
civic purposes. A square is spatially defined by building frontages.
Squares shall be located at the intersection of key thoroughfares and
range in size from 1/2 to four acres.[Added 5-9-2017 by Ord. No.
06-17]
STADIUM — A large enclosed place used for games and major events
and partly or completely surrounded by tiers of seats for spectators.
STANDARDS OF PERFORMANCE — See "performance standards."
STORAGE SHED — See "shed, garden, storage or tool."
STORMWATER DETENTION — A provision for storage and recharge of
stormwater runoff and the controlled release of such runoff during and
after a flood or storm.
STORMWATER RETENTION — A provision for storage and recharge of
stormwater runoff.
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of
any floor and the surface of that floor next above it or, if there is no floor
above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above
it. No story shall be deemed to be a first story if its floor level is more
than six feet above the level from which the height of the building is
measured.
Does not involve planned development, any new street or extension
of any off-street improvement which is to be prorated pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42.
(1)
Does not require the construction of drainage facilities as
determined by the Township Engineer.
(2)
Involves proposed exterior facade alterations and/or new building
construction and/or building additions which do not exceed 2,000
square feet of gross floor area or 10% of the gross floor area of the
existing building, whichever is greater.
(3)
Does not increase the parking requirements of a proposed
development by more than 50 spaces or increase the existing
parking by more than 20%, whichever is greater.
(4)
(5) Conforms to all standards and regulations of the Township.
§ 244-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-6
1:631
STORY, HALF — A space under a sloping roof which has the line of
intersection of the roof and wall face not more than three feet above the
floor level, and in which space the possible floor area with headroom of
five feet or less occupies at least 40% of the total floor area of the story
directly beneath. A basement shall also be included as a half story.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway, viaduct,
alley or other roadway which is:
STREET FURNITURE — Man-made aboveground items that are usually
found in street rights-of-way, including benches, kiosks, plants,
canopies, shelters and telephone booths.
STREET HIERARCHY — The conceptual arrangement of streets based
upon function. A hierarchical approach to street design classifies
streets according to function, from high-traffic freeways and arterial
roads to low-order streets whose function is residential access.
Systematizing street design into a road hierarchy promotes safety,
efficient land use and residential quality. The following types of streets
are within the function classification system:
(1) An existing state, county, Township or private roadway;
(2) Shown on a plat approved pursuant to law;
(3) Approved by other official action; or
Shown on a plat duly filed and recorded in the Ocean County
Clerk's office prior to the formation of the Planning Board and the
grant to such Board of the power to review plats, and includes the
land between the street lines, whether improved or unimproved,
and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, sidewalks,
parking areas and other areas within the street lines.
(4)
INTERSTATE HIGHWAY — A limited access highway, with grade
separations and no traffic stops, intended to provide regional
movement of people, goods and services.
(1)
MAJOR ARTERIAL (PRINCIPAL ARTERIAL) — A street with
controlled access, channelized and/or signalized intersections and
the prohibition of parking and whose purpose and design are to
collect and distribute traffic to and from other roads in the
functional classification system.
(2)
MINOR ARTERIAL — Street with traffic control signals or signs
where necessary and whose purpose and design are to collect and
distribute traffic to and from major arterials and collector streets.
(3)
MAJOR COLLECTOR — A street which collects and distributes
traffic between local streets (low-order residential streets) and
major and minor arterials and freeways (high-order streets) and
whose function is to promote a free flow of traffic, and where
(4)
§ 244-6 JACKSON CODE § 244-6
1:632
STREET LINE — That line determining the public right-of-way, existing
or proposed.
STREET, SPECIAL PURPOSE —
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS — The same as "alterations."
parking should be prohibited and direct access to residences
should be avoided.
MINOR COLLECTOR — A street which provides service from local
streets and neighborhood areas to major collectors or major or
minor arterials and is distinguished from a major collector in that it
transports fewer vehicles at slower speeds while furnishing direct
access to various uses and activities.
(5)
LOCAL STREET — A street whose purpose and design are to
provide direct vehicular access to abutting lots, to carry traffic
having destination or origin on the street itself and to channel
traffic to and from connecting local streets and streets classified as
collectors. Local streets provide immediate access to adjacent land
uses, primarily residential and offer the lowest level of mobility,
while carrying the least volumes of traffic at the slowest speeds.
Types of local streets shall also include:
ALLEY — A public or private local street designed to provide a
secondary means of access to immediately adjacent residential
lots whose principal frontage is on another street, and which
shall not be intended for general traffic circulation.
(a)
CUL-DE-SAC — A local street with a single common ingress
and egress and, at the end, with a round turnaround which
provides a radius to meet the turning requirements for
vehicles.
(b)
LANE — A local street which serves a very low-density
residential area, providing direct access to no more than 20
single-family detached dwelling units located in zoning
districts where the minimum required lot area is two acres and
the minimum required net density is 0.5 units per acre.
(c)
LOOP STREET — A local street which has its only ingress and
egress at two separate points on the same street, which may
be another local street or a collector.
(d)
(6)
DIVIDED STREET — A street having an island or other barrier
separating moving lanes.
(1)
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET — A service street that runs parallel
to a higher-order street which, for purposes of safety, provides
access to abutting properties and separation from through traffic.
It may be designed as a local street, as anticipated daily traffic
dictates.
(2)
§ 244-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-6
1:633
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction for
use, occupancy or ornamentation, whether installed on, above or below
the surface of a parcel of land.
STRUCTURE, ACCESSORY — A structure which is customarily
associated with and subordinate and incidental to the principal
structure and which is located on the same lot therewith. An accessory
structure attached to the principal structure shall comply in all respects
with the requirements applicable to the principal structure.
STRUCTURE, NONCONFORMING — A structure, the size, dimensions
or locations of which fails to conform to the minimum requirements of
the zoning district in which it is located.
SUBDIVISION —
SUBDIVISION, MAJOR — Any subdivision not classified as a minor
subdivision.
SUBDIVISION, MINOR —
The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or more lots,
tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for sale or development.
The following shall not be considered subdivisions within the
meaning of this chapter, if no new streets are created:
Divisions of land found by the Planning Board to be for
agricultural purposes where all resulting parcels are five acres
or larger in size;
(a)
(b) Divisions of property by testamentary or intestate provisions;
Divisions of property upon court order, including but not
limited to judgments of foreclosure;
(c)
Consolidation of existing lots by deed or other recorded
instrument; and
(d)
The conveyance of one or more adjoining lots, tracts or parcels
of land, owned by the same person or persons and all of
which are found and certified by the administrative officer to
conform to the requirements of this chapter and are shown and
designated as separate lots, tracts or parcels on the Tax Maps
of the Township.
(e)
(1)
(2) The term "subdivision" shall also include the term "resubdivision."
Any subdivision of land that does not result in the creating of more
than three lots, including the remainder of the original lot, wherein
the proposed subdivision and all such lots or parcels meet all of the
following requirements:
(a) All lots shall front on an improved street.
(b) The subdivision does not involve a planned development.
(1)
§ 244-6 JACKSON CODE § 244-6
1:634
SUBGRADE — The natural ground lying beneath a street.
SUBSOIL — The layer of soil just below the surface of the ground.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any expansion, extension, repair,
reconstruction or improvement of a use, structure or building, the
cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the use,
structure or building either before the expansion, extension, repair,
reconstruction or improvement is started or if the use, structure or
building has been damaged and is being reinstated or restored, as the
case may be. The term "substantial improvement" does not include
either any project for improvement of a use, structure or building
to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code
specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living
conditions or any alteration of a use, structure or building listed on the
National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic
Places.
SUBSURFACE INFILTRATION SYSTEM — A stormwater management
facility consisting of a subsurface perforated pipe and surrounding
stone aggregate for the purpose of temporary storage and infiltration
of stormwater runoff to the surrounding soil.[Added 2-9-1998 by Ord.
No. 5-98]
SWIMMING POOL — A water-filled enclosure, portable or permanently
constructed, having a depth of more than 18 inches below the level
of the surrounding land, or an above-surface pool having a depth of
(c) The subdivision does not involve any new street.
The subdivision does not require the extension of any off-tract
improvement, the cost of which is to be prorated pursuant to
§ 244-35 of this chapter.
(d)
The subdivision does not adversely affect the development of
the remainder of the parcel or adjoining properties.
(e)
The subdivision is not in conflict with any provision or portion
of the Jackson Township Master Plan, Official Map or this
chapter.
(f)
The lot or parcel being subdivided was not involved in a
previous minor subdivision within three years of filing of a
previous subdivision, and provided further that a lot which
is contiguous to the lot formed as the result of a subdivision
granted to a particular owner, and which is owned by the same
owner, may not be further subdivided by a subdivision granted
to the same owner or successor or assignee within three years
of the first minor subdivision.
(g)
Notwithstanding the above, a subdivision which adjusts or amends
lot lines between existing lots and which does not create a new lot
or lots shall be deemed a minor subdivision.
(2)
§ 244-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-6
1:635
more than 30 inches, designed, used and maintained for swimming and
bathing purposes.
THEATER — A building or portion thereof designed, used or intended
to be used for the presentation of motion pictures or dramatic, musical
or live entertainment.
THEME PARK — An entertainment or amusement facility built around
a single theme, which may be historical, architectural or cultural.
TRACT — An area, parcel, site, piece of land, lot or property which is
the subject of a development application.
TRANSPLANT — The digging up by a property owner of a tree from one
place on his property, and the planting of the same tree in another place
on the same property.
TRAVEL TRAILER — The same as "recreational vehicle."
TREE — Any self-supporting, woody plant of a species which normally,
in the area, grows at maturity to an overall height of a minimum of 15
feet.
TREE, EXTRAORDINARY — A tree 80% or greater of the diameter
(DBH) of the largest known individual tree of each species in New
Jersey as contained in New Jersey Outdoors, September/October 1984.
TREE FARM — The same as "nursery."
TREE, SPECIMEN — The largest known individual trees of each species
in New Jersey, as contained in New Jersey Outdoors, September/
October 1984. In addition, large trees approaching the diameter of the
known largest tree shall be considered specimen trees.
TREE SURVEY — An aerial photograph or drawing to scale (minimum
scale of one inch equals 200 feet) which provides the following
information: location of all forest types protected under the provisions
of this chapter, plotted by accurate techniques; the common name of all
trees; and the average diameter breast height.
TRIPLEX — See "dwelling, triplex."
TRUCK TERMINAL — A location at which the prime purpose or use is
the parking and/or servicing of trucks, which trucks transport goods
or materials not produced, received for sale, warehoused or used in
manufacturing at that location.
USE — The specific purpose for which a parcel of land, or a building
or a portion of a building, or a structure or a portion of a structure, is
designed, arranged, intended, occupied or maintained.
USE, ACCESSORY — A use of land, or of a building or portion of
a building, or of a structure or portion of a structure customarily
incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the land, building or
structure and located on the same lot with such principal use.
§ 244-6 JACKSON CODE § 244-6
1:636
USE, CONDITIONAL — A use permitted in a particular zoning district,
only upon a showing that such use in a specified location will comply
with the conditions and standards for the location or operation of
such use as contained in this chapter and upon the issuance of an
authorization therefor by the Jackson Township Planning Board.
USED AND NEW CAR LOT — An open area used primarily for the
storage and sale of operative new or used motor vehicles.
USE, NONCONFORMING — A use or activity occupying a building,
structure or lot which does not conform to the use regulations for the
zoning district in which the use or activity is located.
USE, PERMITTED — A use of land, building or structure, or portion
thereof, allowed in a zoning district and subject to the restrictions
applicable to that district. The term "permitted use" or its equivalent
shall not be deemed to include any nonconforming use.
USE, PRINCIPAL — The main purpose for which a lot, building or
structure is used.
USE, PROHIBITED — A use of any land, building or structure, or
portion thereof, that is not permitted in a zoning district.
VETERINARY CLINIC OR HOSPITAL — See "animal care facility."
VILLAGE GREEN — The primary open space area for public recreation
and public gathering, centrally located, and an integral part of the
core of the most intensely developed, mixed-use portion of an approved
mixed-use development neighborhood.[Added 5-9-2017 by Ord. No.
06-17]
WATERCOURSE — Any natural or artificial stream, river, creek, ditch,
channel, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine or wash
in which water flows in a definite direction or course, either
continuously or intermittently, and has a definite channel, bed and
banks, and includes any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by
reason of overflow or floodwater.
WETLANDS — The area that is inundated or saturated by surface
water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support,
and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of
vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
commonly known as "hydrophytic vegetation" regulated by NJDEP
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:9B-1 et seq.
WETLANDS TRANSITION AREA — An area of land adjacent to a
freshwater wetland which minimizes adverse impacts on the wetland or
services as an integral component of the wetlands ecosystem regulated
by NJDEP pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:9B-1 et seq.
YARD — An open space lying between the principal or accessory
building or buildings on the same lot and the nearest lot line, and which
is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except for the
presence of natural vegetation.
§ 244-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-6
1:637
YARD, FRONT — An open space on the same lot with a principal
building, extending the full width of the lot and situated between the
street line and the front yard setback line projected to the side lines
of that lot. A front yard shall be unoccupied and unobstructed from
the ground upward, except for the presence of natural vegetation,
driveways, or fences, and under no circumstances shall anything
obstruct safe vehicular visibility within the sight triangle.[Amended
2-8-2011 by Ord. No. 03-11]
YARD, FRONT (CORNER LOT) — On corner lots, all yards facing on
a street shall be considered front yards and shall conform to the
minimum front yard requirements for the zone in which the lot is
located, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.[Added 2-8-2011
by Ord. No. 03-11]
YARD, REAR — A space extending across the full width of the lot and
lying between the rear lot line and the nearest wall or part of the
building on the same lot and measured at right angles to the rear lot
line.
YARD, SIDE — An open space between a side lot line and the nearest
point of the principal building and extending from the front yard to
the rear yard or, in the absence of either such yards, to the street line
or rear lot line, as the case may be. The width of a side yard shall
be measured at right angles from the nearest point of the principal
building to the side lot line. A side yard shall be unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground upward, except for the presence of
natural vegetation.
ZONE — A specifically delineated area or district in the Township
within which regulations and requirements uniformly govern the use,
placement, spacing and size of land, buildings and structures.
ZONING DISTRICT — See "zone."
ZONING PERMIT — Same as "development permit."
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall apply to residential
development. The definitions of terms shall have the same meanings as
ascribed to each in Subchapter 1 of N.J.A.C. 5:21 (Residential Site
Improvement Standards), as amended.
AASHTO
ABS
ACI
ADT
Aggressive soils
Aisle
Alley
ANSI
§ 244-6 JACKSON CODE § 244-6
1:638
Arterial street
ASCE
ASTM
Average daily traffic
Barrier curb
Berm
Bicycle lane (bike lane)
Bicycle path (bike path)
Bikeway
CAFRA
Caliper
Center-line offset of adjacent intersections
Channel
Channelization
Cluster development
Common lateral
Cul-de-sac
Culvert
Curb
Cushions
Dams and embankments
Dedication
Design engineer
Design flood
Design professional
Design standards
Detention basin
Divided street
Drainage system
Driveway
Drop manhole
Easement
Edge definition
Emergency spillway
Escrow
Exempt subdivision
Final plat
§ 244-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-6
1:639
Flushing
Graded area
Granite block curb
Historic site
Hydrologic response
IES
Impervious surface
Impoundment
Improvement
Individual sewage disposal system
Island
ISO
ITE
Land
Main
Manhole
Marginal access street
Mixed use
MLUL
Mountable curb
Moving lane
Mulch
NFPA
Nonresidential major collector
Nonresidential minor collector
Nonresidential neighborhood street
Nonstructural management practices
Off-street parking space
On-street parking space
Parking lane
Parking loop
Parking space
Pavement
Pedestrian generator
Percolation test (perc test)
Performance guarantee
Pervious surface
§ 244-6 JACKSON CODE § 244-6
1:640
Preliminary floor plans and elevations
Preliminary subdivision plat
Principal basin
PUD
PVC
Residential access street
Residential major collector
Residential minor collector
Residential neighborhood street
Retaining wall
Retention basin
Right-of-way
Rural
SCS
SDR
Sedimentation
Septic system
Septic tank
Sewer
Shoulder
Sidewalk
Site improvements
Soil
Soil cement
Soil erosion
Stabilization
Stabilized base course (bituminous)
Stabilized earth
Stabilized turf
Stormwater detention
Stormwater management measures
Stormwater retention
Street hardware
Street, loop
Stub street
Surface course
Swale
§ 244-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-6
1:641
Topsoil
Traveled
ULI
USCGS
Utility area
Utility authority
Wet pond
§ 244-6 JACKSON CODE § 244-6
1:642
ARTICLE III
Administration
§ 244-7. Planning Board.
A. Establishment. The Planning Board, presently in existence pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., is hereby continued, to consist of nine
members of the following four classes:
(1) Class I: the Mayor.
(2) Class II: one of the officials of the Township other than a member of
the Township Committee, to be appointed by the Mayor, provided
that if there is an Environmental Commission, the member of the
Environmental Commission who is also a member of the Planning
Board as required by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 shall be deemed to be the
Class II Planning Board member if there are both a member of the
Zoning Board of Adjustment and a member of the Jackson Township
Board of Education among the Class IV members or alternate
members.
(3) Class III: a member of the Township Committee, to be appointed by
it.
(4) Class IV: six other citizens of the Township of Jackson, to be
appointed by the Mayor. The members of Class IV shall hold no
other municipal office, position or employment, except that one
member may be a member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment, and
one may be a member of the Jackson Township Board of Education.
A member of the Environmental Commission who is also a member
of the Planning Board as required by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 shall be a
Class IV Planning Board member unless there are among the Class
IV members of the Planning Board both a member of the Zoning
Board of Adjustment and a member of the Board of Education, in
which case the member of the Environmental Commission shall be
deemed to be the Class II member of the Planning Board.
B. Terms.
(1) The term of the member composing Class I shall correspond with
his official tenure. The terms of the members composing Class II
and Class III shall be for one year or terminate at the completion of
their respective terms of office, whichever occurs first, except for a
Class II member who is also a member of the Environmental
Commission. The term of a Class II or a Class IV member who is
also a member of the Environmental Commission shall be for three
years or terminate at the completion of his term of office as a
member of the Environmental Commission, whichever comes first.
(2) The term of a Class IV member who is also a member of the Zoning
Board of Adjustment or the Jackson Township Board of Education
shall terminate whenever he is no longer a member of such other
§ 244-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-7
1:643
body or at the completion of his Class IV term, whichever occurs
first.
(3) The terms of all Class IV members first appointed pursuant to this
chapter shall be so determined that, to the greatest extent
practicable, the expiration of such terms shall be evenly distributed
over the first four years after their appointment, as determined by
resolution of the Township Committee; provided, however, that no
term of any member shall exceed four years, and further provided
that nothing herein shall affect the terms of any present members
of the Planning Board, all of whom shall continue in office until the
completion of the terms for which they were appointed. Thereafter,
all Class IV members shall be appointed for terms of four years,
except as otherwise herein provided. All terms shall run from
January 1 of the year in which the appointment was made.
C. Alternate members.
(1) There are hereby authorized two alternate members of the
Planning Board, who shall be appointed by the Mayor for Class IV
members and shall meet the qualifications of Class IV members.
The alternate members shall be designated at the time of
appointment by the Mayor as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No.
2."
(2) The alternate members shall serve for terms of two years,
terminating as of December 31 of the year next following
appointment; provided, however, that in the event two alternate
members are appointed initially, their initial terms shall terminate
as of December 31 of the year next following appointment,
respectively. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of
term shall be filled by the Mayor for the unexpired term only. The
alternate members may participate in discussions of the
proceedings but may not vote, except in the absence or
disqualification of a regular member of any Class. A vote shall not
be delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead of an
alternate member. In the event that a choice must be made as to
which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote.
D. Vacancies. If a vacancy of any class shall occur otherwise than by
expiration of the Planning Board term, it shall be filled by appointment,
as above provided, for the unexpired term.
E. Conflicts. No member of the Planning Board shall be permitted to act on
any matter in which he has, either directly or indirectly, any personal or
financial interest.
F. Removal. Any member other than a Class I member, after a public
hearing if he requests one, may be removed by the Township Committee
for cause.
§ 244-7 JACKSON CODE § 244-7
1:644
G. Organization of the Planning Board. The Planning Board shall annually
elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman from the members of Class IV and
select a Secretary and Assistant Secretary, who may be either a
member of the Planning Board or a municipal employee designated by
it.
H. Planning Board Attorney. There is hereby created the position of
Planning Board Attorney. The Planning Board may annually appoint and
fix the compensation of or agree upon the rate of compensation of the
Planning Board Attorney, who shall be an attorney other than the
Municipal Attorney.
I. Experts and staff. The Planning Board may also employ or contract for
the services of experts and other staff and services as it may deem
necessary. The Planning Board shall not exceed, however, exclusive of
gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by the Township Committee
for its use.
J. Rules and regulations. The Planning Board shall adopt such rules and
regulations as may be necessary to carry into effect the provisions and
purposes of this chapter. In the issuance of subpoenas, administration
of oaths and taking of testimony, the provisions of the County and
Municipal Investigations Law of 1953 (N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq.) shall
apply.
K. Powers.
(1) The Planning Board shall have the following powers:
(a) To make and adopt, and from time to time amend, a Master
Plan for the physical development of the municipality, in
accordance with the provisions of Article 3 of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
et seq.
(b) To administer subdivision control and site plan review, in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter and Article 6 of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
(c) To grant exceptions from certain requirements for subdivision
and site plan approval, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-51.
(d) To make and adopt, and from time to time amend, an Official
Map, pursuant to Article 5 of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
(e) To approve conditional use applications, in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter and pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-67.
(f) To annually prepare a program of municipal capital
improvement projects over a term of six years, and
amendments thereto, and to recommend the same to the
Township Committee, pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-29.
§ 244-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-7
1:645
(g) To review capital projects, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-31.
(h) When reviewing applications for approval of subdivision plats,
site plans or conditional uses, to grant, to the same extent and
subject to the same restrictions as the Zoning Board of
Adjustment:
[1] Variances, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c, from lot areas,
dimensional, setback and yard requirements.
[2] Direction, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34, for issuance of
permits for buildings or structures in the bed of a mapped
street or public drainageway, flood-control basin or public
area reserved, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32.
[3] Direction, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36, for issuance of
permits for buildings or structures not related to a street.
Whenever relief is requested pursuant to this subsection,
notice of a hearing on the application for development
shall include reference to the request for a variance or
direction for issuance of a permit, as the case may be.
(i) To participate in the preparation and review of programs or
plans required by state or federal law or regulation.
(j) To assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuing
planning process.
(k) To perform such other advisory duties as are assigned to it by
ordinance or resolution of the governing body for the aid and
assistance of the Township Committee or other agencies or
officers.
(l) To consider and make report to the Township Committee
within 35 days after referral as to any proposed development
regulation submitted to it, pursuant to the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26a and also pass upon other matters
specifically referred to the Planning Board by the Township
Committee, pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26b.
(m) To establish subcommittees, as it sees fit, which shall be
composed of Planning Board members appointed by the
Planning Board Chairman.
(n) To exercise all the powers and perform all the duties set forth
in N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.153(a), including recommendations to the
Township Committee for designation of historic resources, in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., which are
determined to be significant pursuant to § 244-79K of this
chapter.
(o) To grant de minimis exceptions to the Residential Site
Improvement Standards adopted pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:21 in
§ 244-7 JACKSON CODE § 244-7
1:646
§ 244-8. Zoning Board of Adjustment.
accordance with the provisions of § 244-182F. [Added
6-8-1998 by Ord. No. 15-98]
(2) The Township Committee may, by ordinance, provide for the
reference of any matter or class of matters to the Planning Board
before final action thereon by a municipal body or municipal officer
having final authority thereon. Such reference shall not extend the
time for action by the referring body, whether or not the Planning
Board has submitted its report. Whenever the Planning Board shall
have made a recommendation regarding a matter authorized by
ordinance to another municipal body, such recommendation may be
rejected only by a majority of the full authorized membership of
such other body.
L. Simultaneous review. The Planning Board shall have the power to
review and approve or deny conditional uses or site plans
simultaneously with review for subdivision approval without the
developer's being required to make further application to the Planning
Board or the Planning Board's being required to hold further hearings.
The longest time period for action by the Planning Board, whether it is
for subdivision, conditional use or site plan approval, shall apply.
Whenever approval of a conditional use is requested by the developer,
notice of the hearing on the plat shall include reference to the request
for such conditional use.
A. Establishment. The Zoning Board of Adjustment, presently in existence
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., is hereby continued. The Zoning
Board of Adjustment shall consist of seven regular members, who shall
be appointed by the Township Committee. [Amended 12-28-1998 by
Ord. No. 38-98]
B. Alternate members.
(1) The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall not have more than two
alternate members, who shall be appointed by the Township
Committee. Alternate members shall be designated at the time of
appointment by the Township Committee as "Alternate No. 1" and
"Alternate No. 2." [Amended 12-28-1998 by Ord. No. 38-98]
(2) Alternate members may participate in discussions of the
proceedings but may not vote except in the absence or
disqualification of a regular member. A vote shall not be delayed in
order that a regular member may vote instead of an alternate
member. In the event that a choice must be made as to which
alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote.
C. Terms.
(1) The members of the Board of Adjustment shall continue in office
until their respective terms expire.
§ 244-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-8
1:647
(2) The terms of the members first appointed under this chapter shall
be so determined that to the greatest practicable extent the
expiration of such terms shall be distributed, in the case of regular
members, evenly over the first four years after their appointment
and, in the case of alternate members, evenly over the first two
years after their appointment, provided that the initial term of a
regular member shall not exceed four years and that the initial
term of an alternate member shall not exceed two years.
Thereafter, the term of each regular member shall be four years,
and the term of each alternate member shall be two years.
D. Vacancies. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of term
shall be filled for the unexpired term only, as herein and above
provided.
E. Conflicts. No member of the Board of Adjustment shall be permitted to
act on any matter in which he has, either directly or indirectly, any
personal or financial interest. No member may hold elective office or
position under the municipality.
F. Removal. A member may, after a public hearing if he requests one, be
removed by the Township Committee for cause.
G. Organization of the Board of Adjustment. The Board of Adjustment shall
annually elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman from its members and
shall also select a Secretary who may or may not be a Board member or
another municipal employee.
H. Board of Adjustment Attorney. There is hereby created the position of
Attorney to the Zoning Board of Adjustment. The Zoning Board of
Adjustment may annually appoint and fix the compensation of or agree
upon the rate of compensation of the Zoning Board of Adjustment
Attorney, who shall be an attorney other than the Municipal Attorney.
I. Experts and staff. The Zoning Board of Adjustment may also employ or
contract for and fix the compensation of such experts and other staff
and services as it may deem necessary. The Board shall not authorize
expenditures which exceed, exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount
appropriated by the Township Committee for its use.
J. Rules and regulations. The Board shall adopt such rules and regulations
as may be necessary to carry into effect the provisions and purposes of
this chapter.
K. Powers.
(1) The Board of Adjustment shall have the power to:
(a) Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant
that there is error in any order, requirement, decision or
refusal made by the administrative officer based on or made in
the enforcement of this chapter.
§ 244-8 JACKSON CODE § 244-8
1:648
[1] Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any
interested party affected by any decision of the
administrative officer of the municipality based on or made
in the enforcement of this chapter. Each appeal shall be
taken within the 20 days prescribed by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-72
by filing a notice of appeal with the office from whom the
appeal was taken, together with three copies of said notice
with the Secretary of the Board of Adjustment. Said notice
of appeal shall specify the grounds for said appeal. The
officer from whom the appeal is taken shall immediately
transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the
record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
[2] An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the
action in respect to which the decision appealed from was
made, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken
certifies to the Board of Adjustment, after the notice of
appeal shall have been filed with him, that by reason of
facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion,
cause imminent peril to life or property. In such cases,
proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a
restraining order which may be granted by the Board of
Adjustment or by the Superior Court of New Jersey on
application or notice to the officer from whom the appeal is
taken and on due cause shown.
[3] The Board of Adjustment may, in conformity with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., reverse or affirm,
wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement,
decision or determination appealed from and make such
other requirement, decision or determination as ought to
be made and to that end have all the powers of the
administrative officer from whom the appeal was taken.
(b) Hear and decide requests for interpretation of the Zoning Map
or this chapter or for decisions upon other special questions
upon which the Board of Adjustment is authorized to pass by
any Zoning or Official Map Ordinance in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
(c) Grant variances as follows:
[1] General.
[a] Where, by reason of exceptional narrowness,
shallowness or shape of a specific property or by
reason of exceptional topographic conditions or
physical features uniquely affecting a specific piece of
property or by reason of an extraordinary and
exceptional situation uniquely affecting a specific
piece of property or the structures lawfully existing
§ 244-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-8
1:649
thereon, the strict application of any regulation
pursuant to Article 8 of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.,
would result in peculiar and exceptional practical
difficulties to or exceptional and undue hardship upon
the developer of such property, grant, upon an
application or an appeal relating to such property,
a variance from such strict application of such
regulation so as to relieve such difficulties or
hardship.
[b] Where, in an application or appeal relating to a
specific piece of property, the purposes of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq. would be advanced by a deviation
from requirements of this chapter and the benefits of
the deviation would substantially outweigh any
detriment, grant a variance to allow departure from
regulations pursuant to Article 8 of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
et seq.; provided, however, that no variance from
those departures enumerated in § 244-8K(1)(c)[2] and
[3] below shall be granted under this subsection, and
provided further that the proposed development does
not require approval by the Planning Board of a
subdivision, site plan or conditional use in conjunction
with which the Planning Board has the power to
review a request for variance pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-60a.
[2] Additional.
[a] In particular cases and for special reasons, grant a
variance to allow departure from regulations pursuant
to Article 8 of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. to permit:
[i] A use or principal structure in a district restricted
against such use or principal structure.
[ii] An expansion of a nonconforming use.
[iii] Deviation from a specification or standard,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67 pertaining solely
to a conditional use.
[iv] An increase in the permitted floor area ratio, as
defined in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-4.
[v] An increase in the permitted density as defined in
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-4, except as applied to the
required lot area for a lot or lots for detached oneor
two-dwelling-unit buildings, which lot or lots
are either an isolated undersized lot or lots
resulting from a minor subdivision. A variance
under this subsection shall be granted only by
§ 244-8 JACKSON CODE § 244-8
1:650
affirmative vote of at least five members, in the
case of a municipal board, or 2/3 of the full
authorized membership, in the case of a regional
board pursuant to Article 10 of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
et seq.
[b] Pinelands development credits.
[i] Any municipal variance approval which grants
relief from the density or lot area requirements
set forth in §§ 244-87, 244-90, 244-91 and 244-92
for the RG-2, RG-3 or RG-4 Zone shall require that
Pinelands development credits be used for all
dwelling units or lots in excess of that permitted
without the variance. [Amended 4-12-1993 by
Ord. No. 10-93; 2-26-1996 by Ord. No. 4-96;
12-30-1996 by Ord. No. 27-96]
[ii] Any variance or other approval for a residential
use in the RGC-1, RGC-2 or PM-1 Zone shall
require that Pinelands development credits be
used for 50% of the authorized units for parcels
under 10 acres in size; for 75% of the authorized
units for parcels between 10 and 20 acres in size
and for 100% of the authorized units for parcels
over 20 acres in size. [Amended 12-23-2002 by
Ord. No. 50-02]
[iii] Any variance or other approval for a
nonresidential use not otherwise permitted in the
RG-2, RG-3 or RG-4 Zone shall require that
Pinelands development credits be used at 50% of
the maximum rate permitted for Pinelands
development credit use in the zone in which the
nonresidential use will be located for parcels
under 10 acres in size; at 75% of the maximum
rate for parcels between 10 and 20 acres in size;
and at 100% of the maximum rate for parcels over
20 acres in size. This requirement shall not apply
to a variance or other approval which authorizes
the expansion of or changes to existing
nonresidential uses in accordance with N.J.A.C.
7:50-5.2. [Amended 2-26-1996 by Ord. No.
4-96; 12-23-2002 by Ord. No. 50-02]
[iv] Any municipal variance approval which grants
relief from the density or lot area requirements
set forth in §§ 244-87, 244-93 and 244-94 for a
residential or principal nonresidential use in the
PV, PVC-1 or PVC-2 Zone shall require that
Pinelands development credits be used for all
§ 244-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-8
1:651
dwelling units or lots in excess of that permitted
without the variance. [Added 12-30-1996 by
Ord. No. 27-96]
[3] No variance or other relief may be granted under the
terms of this section unless such variance or other relief
can be granted without substantial detriment to the public
good and will not substantially impair the intent and
purpose of the zone plan and this chapter. In respect of any
airport hazard areas delineated under the Air Safety and
Hazardous Zoning Act of 1983, P.L. 1983, c. 260 (N.J.S.A.
6:1-80 et seq.), no variance or other relief may be granted
under the terms of this section permitting the creation or
establishment of a nonconforming use which would be
prohibited under the standards promulgated pursuant to
that Act, except upon issuance of a permit by the
Commissioner of Transportation. An application under this
section may be referred to any appropriate person or
agency for its report, provided that such reference shall
not extend the period of time within which the Zoning
Board of Adjustment shall act.
(d) Direct issuance of a permit, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34, for
a building or structure in the bed of a mapped street or public
drainageway, flood-control basin or public area reserved
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32.
(e) Direct issuance of a permit, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36, for
a building or structure not related to a street.
(f) Grant, to the same extent and subject to the same restrictions
as the Planning Board, subdivision or site plan approval,
pursuant to Article 6 of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., or conditional
use approval, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67, whenever the
proposed development requires approval by the Board of
Adjustment of a variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70. The
developer may elect to submit a separate application
requesting approval of the variance and a subsequent
application for any required approval of a subdivision, site plan
or conditional use. The separate approval of the variance shall
be conditioned upon the grant of all required subsequent
approvals by the Board of Adjustment. No such subsequent
approval shall be granted unless such approval can be granted
without substantial detriment to the public good and without
substantial impairment of the intent and purpose of the zone
plan and this chapter. The number of votes of Board members
required to grant any such subsequent approval shall be as
otherwise provided in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., for the
approval in question and the special vote, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d, shall not be required.
§ 244-8 JACKSON CODE § 244-8
1:652
(g) To grant de minimis exceptions to the Residential Site
Improvement Standards adopted pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:21 in
accordance with the provisions of § 244-182F. [Added
6-8-1998 by Ord. No. 15-98]
(2) Any variance granted under § 244-8K(1)(c)[2] and [3] above shall
be valid for a period of one year from the date of the granting of the
same where subsequent submission of an application for
development for a minor subdivision, preliminary plat of a major
subdivision, minor site plan or preliminary plat of a major site plan
is required. However, upon written request by the applicant within
the one-year period, said variance may be extended by the Board of
Adjustment for a period not to exceed one year. The applicant shall
be entitled to only one such extension. Failure of the applicant to
act within the time period or extension, as provided herein, shall
render the variance null and void.
L. Time for decision.
(1) The Board of Adjustment shall render a decision not later than 120
days after the date:
(a) An appeal is taken from a decision of the administrative officer;
or
(b) A complete application for development to the Board of
Adjustment, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-72b, is submitted.
(2) Failure of the Board to render a decision within the one-hundredtwenty-
day period, or within such further time as may be consented
to by the applicant, shall constitute a decision favorable to the
applicant.
(3) Whenever an application for development requests relief pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-76b, the Board of Adjustment shall grant or deny
approval of the application within 120 days after submission by a
developer of a complete application to the administrative officer, or
within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant.
In the event that the developer elects to submit separate
consecutive applications, the aforesaid provision shall apply to the
application for approval of the variance. The period for granting or
denying any subsequent approval shall be as otherwise provided in
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. Failure of the Board of Adjustment to act
within the period prescribed shall constitute approval of the
application. A certificate of the administrative officer as to the
failure of the Board of Adjustment to act shall be issued on request
of the applicant, and it shall be sufficient in lieu of the written
endorsement or other evidence of approval herein required and
shall be so accepted by the Ocean County recording officer for
purposes of filing subdivision plats.
§ 244-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-8
1:653
§ 244-9. Provisions applicable to Planning Board and Zoning Board
of Adjustment.
(4) Whenever review or approval of the application by the Ocean
County Planning Board is required by Section 5 of P.L. 1968, c. 285
(N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3), in the case of a subdivision, or Section 8 of P.L.
1968, c. 285 (N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.6), in the case of a site plan, the
Jackson Township Board of Adjustment shall condition any approval
it grants upon the timely receipt of a favorable report on the
application by the Ocean County Planning Board or approval by the
Ocean County Planning Board by its failure to report thereon
within the required time.
M. Modification on appeal. The Board of Adjustment may reverse or affirm,
wholly or in part, or may modify the action, order, requirement,
decision, interpretation or determination appealed from and, to that
end, have all the powers of the administrative officer from whom the
appeal is taken.
N. Stay of proceedings by appeal; exception. An appeal to the Board of
Adjustment shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action in
respect to which the decision appealed from was made, unless the
officer from whose action the appeal is taken certifies to the Board of
Adjustment, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him,
that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his
opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case,
proceedings shall not be stayed, other than by an order of the Superior
Court upon notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on
due cause shown.
O. Annual report. The Board of Adjustment shall, at least once a year,
review its decisions on applications and appeals for variances and
prepare and adopt by resolution a report of its findings on provisions of
this chapter which were the subject of variance requests and its
recommendations for amendment or revision of this chapter, if any. The
Board of Adjustment shall send copies of the report and resolution to
the Township Committee and Planning Board.
P. Referral. The Board of Adjustment may, at its option, refer an
application to any appropriate person or agency, including the Planning
Board, for its report, provided that such reference shall not extend the
period of time within which the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act.
A. Meetings.
(1) Meetings of both the Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall be scheduled no less often than once a month, and
any meeting so scheduled shall be held as scheduled unless
canceled for lack of applications for development to process.
§ 244-8 JACKSON CODE § 244-9
1:654
(2) Special meetings may be provided for at the call of the Chairman or
on the request of any two Board members, which meetings shall be
held on notice to the Board's members and the public, in
accordance with all applicable legal requirements.
(3) Action taken.
(a) No action shall be taken at any meeting without a quorum's
being present.
(b) All actions shall be taken by majority vote of a quorum, except
as otherwise required by any provision of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et
seq. Failure of a motion to receive the number of votes
required to approve an application for development shall be
deemed an action denying the application.
(4) All regular meetings and all special meetings shall be open to the
public. Notice of all such meetings shall be given in accordance
with the requirements of the Open Public Meetings Act, P.L. 1975,
c. 231.112 An executive session for the purpose of discussing and
studying any matters to come before the Board shall not be deemed
a regular or special meeting within the meaning of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.
(5) When any hearing before the Board shall carry over one or more
meetings, a member of the Board who was absent for one or more
of the meetings shall be eligible to vote on the matter upon which
the hearing was conducted, notwithstanding his absence from one
or more of the meetings; provided, however, that such Board
member has available to him a transcript or recording of the
meeting from which he was absent and certifies in writing to the
Board that he has read such transcript or listened to such
recording.
B. Minutes.
(1) Minutes of every regular or special meeting shall be kept and shall
include the names of the persons appearing and addressing the
Board and of the persons appearing by attorney; the action taken
by the Board; and the findings, if any, made by it and reasons
therefor. The minutes shall thereafter be made available for public
inspection during normal business hours at the office of the
administrative officer. Any interested party shall have the right to
compel production of the minutes for use as evidence in any legal
proceedings concerning the subject matter of such minutes. Such
interested party may be charged a reasonable fee for reproduction
of the minutes in an amount sufficient to cover the cost of such
reproduction.
112. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
§ 244-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-9
1:655
(2) The Secretary of the Board, or the person designated by the Board
for keeping the minutes of meetings, shall, within 10 days following
each meeting of the Board, submit minutes of the meeting to the
Township Administrator, Township Attorney, Township Clerk,
Township Engineer and all department heads.
C. Hearings.
(1) Rules. The Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment shall
hold a hearing on each application for development and shall make
rules governing the conduct of hearings before such bodies, which
rules shall not be inconsistent with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq. or of this chapter.
(2) Filing of documents. Any maps and documents for which approval
is sought at a hearing shall be on file and available for public
inspection at least 10 days before the date of the hearing during
normal business hours in the office of the administrative officer.
The applicant may produce other documents, records or testimony
at the hearing to substantiate or clarify or supplement the
previously filed maps and documents.
(3) Oaths. The Board Chairman presiding at the hearing, or such
person as he may designate, shall have the power to administer
oaths and issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses
and the production of relevant evidence, including witnesses and
documents presented by the parties, and the provisions of the
County and Municipal Investigations Law, P.L. 1953, c. 38 (N.J.S.A.
2A:67A-1 et seq.), shall apply.
(4) Testimony. The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application
for development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the
presiding officer, and the right of cross-examination shall be
permitted to all interested parties through their attorneys, if
represented, or directly, if not represented, subject to the
discretion of the presiding officer and to reasonable limitations as
to time and number of witnesses.
(5) Evidence. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the
hearing, but the Board may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or
unduly repetitious evidence.
(6) Records. Each Board shall provide for the verbatim recording of
the proceedings by either stenographic, mechanical or electronic
means. The Board shall furnish a transcript, or duplicate recording
in lieu thereof, on request to any interested party at his expense.
Said transcript shall be certified in writing by the transcriber to be
accurate.
D. Decisions.
§ 244-9 JACKSON CODE § 244-9
1:656
(1) The Board shall include findings of fact and conclusions based
thereon in each decision on any application for development and
shall reduce the decision to writing. The Board shall provide the
findings and conclusions through:
(a) A resolution adopted at a meeting held within the time period
provided in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., for action by the Board on
the application for development; or
(b) A memorializing resolution adopted at a meeting held not later
than 45 days after the date of the meeting at which the Board
voted to grant or deny approval. Only the members of the
Board who voted for the action taken may vote on the
memorializing resolution, and the vote of a majority of such
members present at the meeting at which the resolution is
presented for adoption shall be sufficient to adopt the
resolution. An action, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-9 (resulting
from the failure of a motion to approve an application) shall be
memorialized by resolution as provided above, with those
members voting against the motion for approval being the
members eligible to vote on the memorializing resolution. The
vote on any such resolution shall be deemed to be a
memorialization of the action of the Board and not to be an
action of the Board; however, the date of the adoption of the
resolution shall constitute the date of the decision for purposes
of the mailings, filings and publications required by N.J.S.A.
40:55D-10. If the Board fails to adopt a resolution or
memorializing resolution as hereinabove specified, any
interested party may apply to the Superior Court in a summary
manner for an order compelling the Board to reduce its
findings and conclusions to writing within a stated time, and
the cost of the application, including attorney's fees, shall be
assessed against the municipality.
(2) A copy of the decision shall be mailed by the Board Secretary
within 10 days of the date of decision to the applicant or, if
represented, then to his attorney, without separate charge, and to
all who request a copy of the decision for a reasonable fee in an
amount sufficient to cover the cost of such mailing. A copy of the
decision shall also be filed by the Board in the office of the
administrative officer. The administrative officer shall make a copy
of such filed decision available to any interested party for a
reasonable fee in the amount sufficient to cover the cost of such
copy and available for public inspection at his office during
reasonable hours.
(3) A brief notice of the decision shall be published in the official
newspaper of the municipality, if there is one, or in a newspaper of
general circulation in the municipality. Such publication shall be
arranged by the applicant, and proof of publication shall be
submitted to the administrative officer. The period of time in which
§ 244-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-9
1:657
an appeal of the decision may be made shall run from the first
publication of the decision.
E. Notice requirements for hearing.
(1) Whenever public notice of a hearing is required on an application
for development, the applicant shall give notice thereof at least 10
days prior to the date of the hearing, in accordance with the
following:
(a) Public notice of a hearing on an application for development
shall be given for all of the following:
[1] Appeal or variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70.
[2] Directive for issuance of a building permit pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 or 40:55D-36.
[3] Conditional uses pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67.
[4] Preliminary major subdivision plats.
[5] Preliminary major site plans.
[6] Preliminary site plans for planned developments.
(b) Public notice shall be given by publication in the official
newspaper of the municipality, if there is one, or in a
newspaper of general circulation in the municipality.
(c) Giving of notice.
[1] Notice of hearing requiring public notice pursuant to this
section shall be given to the owners of all real property, as
shown on the current tax duplicate or duplicates, located
within 200 feet in all directions of the property which is
the subject of such hearing, and whether located within or
outside the municipality in which the applicant's land is
located, provided that this requirement shall be deemed
satisfied by notice to a condominium association, in the
case of any unit owner whose unit has a unit above or
below it, or horizontal property regime, in the case of any
co-owner whose apartment has an apartment above or
below it. Such notice shall be given by serving a copy
thereof on the property owner, as shown on said current
tax duplicate, or his agent in charge of the property, or by
mailing a copy thereof by certified mail to the property
owner at his address as shown on said current tax
duplicate.
[2] Notice to a partnership owner may be made by service
upon any partner.
§ 244-9 JACKSON CODE § 244-9
1:658
[3] Notice to a corporate owner may be made by service upon
its president or a vice president, secretary or other person
authorized by appointment or by law to accept service on
behalf of the corporation.
[4] Notice to a condominium association, horizontal property
regime, community trust or homeowners' association,
because of its ownership of common elements or areas
located within 200 feet of the property which is the subject
of the hearing, may be made in the same manner as to a
corporation without further notice to unit owners, coowners
or homeowners on account of such common
elements or areas.
(d) Notice of all hearings on applications for development
involving property located within 200 feet of an adjoining
municipality shall be given by personal service or certified mail
to the Clerk of such municipality, which notice shall be in
addition to the notice required to be given pursuant to this
chapter to the owners of lands in such adjoining municipality
which are located within 200 feet of the subject premises.
(e) Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to
the Ocean County Planning Board of a hearing on all
applications for development of property adjacent to an
existing county road or proposed road shown on the Official
County Map or on the County Master Plan, adjoining other
county land or situated within 200 feet of a municipal
boundary.
(f) Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to
the Commissioner of the New Jersey Department of
Transportation of a hearing on any application for development
of property adjacent to a state highway.
(g) Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to
the State Planning Commission of any hearing on an
application for development of property which exceeds 150
acres or 500 dwelling units. Such notice shall include a copy of
any maps or documents required to be on file with the
administrative officer, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10b.
(h) The applicant shall file an affidavit of proof of service with the
Board holding the hearing on the application for development.
(i) Any notice made by certified mail as hereinabove required
shall be deemed to be complete upon mailing, in accordance
with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-14.
(2) Form of notice. All notices required to be given, pursuant to the
terms of this chapter shall state:
§ 244-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-9
1:659
(a) The date, time and place of the hearing;
(b) The nature of the matters to be considered;
(c) Identification of the property proposed for development by
street address, if any, or by reference to lot and block numbers
as shown on the current tax duplicate in the Township Tax
Assessor's office; and
(d) The location and times at which any maps and documents for
which approval is sought are available for public inspection as
required by law.
F. List of property owners furnished. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-12c, the Township Tax Assessor shall, within seven days after
receipt of a request therefor and upon receipt of payment of a fee of
$10, make and certify a list from the current tax duplicate of names and
addresses of owners whom the applicant is required to give notice
pursuant to § 244-9E(1)(c) above. The applicant shall be entitled to rely
upon the information contained in such list, and failure to give notice to
any owner not on the list shall not invalidate any hearing or proceeding.
[Amended 10-27-2009 by Ord. No. 33-09]
G. Conditional approvals.
(1) In the event that a developer submits an application for
development proposing a development that is barred or prevented,
directly or indirectly, by legal action instituted by any state agency,
political subdivision or other party to protect the public health and
welfare or by a directive or order issued by any state agency,
political subdivision or court of competent jurisdiction to protect
the public health and welfare, the Board shall process such
application for development in accordance with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. and this chapter, and, if such application
for development complies with the provisions of this chapter, the
Board shall approve such application, conditioned on the removal
of such legal barrier to development.
(2) In the event that development proposed by an application for
development requires an approval of a governmental agency other
than the Board, the Board shall, in appropriate instances, condition
its approval upon the subsequent approval of such governmental
agency, provided that the Board shall make a decision on any
application for development within the time period provided in this
chapter and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., or within an extension of
such period as has been agreed to by the applicant, unless the
Board is prevented or relieved from so acting by the operation of
law.
(3) Whenever review or approval of the application by the Ocean
County Planning Board is required by Section 5 of P.L. 1968, c. 285
(N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3), in the case of a subdivision, or Section 8 of P.L.
§ 244-9 JACKSON CODE § 244-9
1:660
§ 244-10. Provisions applicable to Planning Board.
1968, c. 285 (N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.6), in the case of a site plan, the
Board shall condition any approval that it grants upon timely
receipt of a favorable report on the application by the Ocean
County Planning Board or approval by the Ocean County Planning
Board by its failure to report thereon within the required time
period.
(4) Time limits within which to obtain approvals from outside agencies.
When an application for development has been approved by the
municipal agency subject to the conditions and approvals of outside
agencies, the applicant shall have 18 months to obtain those
approvals from said agencies. An extension of the eighteen-month
period within which to comply with the conditions of approval
imposed by the municipal agency may be granted by that municipal
agency for a period of time it determines.
H. Tolling of running of period of approval. In the event that, during the
period of approval heretofore or hereafter granted to an application for
development, the developer is barred or prevented, directly or
indirectly, from proceeding with the development otherwise permitted
under such approval by a legal action instituted by any state agency,
political subdivision or other party to protect the public health and
welfare or by a directive or order issued by any state agency, political
subdivision or court of competent jurisdiction to protect the public
health or welfare, and the developer is otherwise ready, willing and able
to proceed with said development, the running of the period of approval
shall be suspended for the period of time said legal action is pending or
such directive or order is in effect.
A. The Planning Board shall adopt an administrative and technical
checklist which will set forth the submission requirements for each type
of application.
B. Within five business days of the date of submission of an application,
the Planning Board Clerk shall review the submitted documents, fees,
etc., and determine whether the application is administratively
complete.
(1) If the application is administratively complete, the Clerk shall log in
the application and assign a case number. The date that the
application is deemed administratively complete shall be deemed
to be the date of a "complete" submission for the purpose of
commencing the time period for completeness review pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.3.
(2) If the application is deemed not to be administratively complete,
the Clerk shall return the submission package to the applicant with
a letter setting forth the deficiencies.
§ 244-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-10
1:661
(3) If an applicant requests a waiver of one of the administrative
checklist requirements, the Clerk shall, provided that the
application is otherwise administratively complete, refer the waiver
request to the full Planning Board for consideration. If the Planning
Board grants the waiver request, the Clerk shall certify the
application as administratively complete within five business days
after the decision of the Planning Board. If the waiver request is
denied, then the Clerk shall return the submission package to the
applicant with a letter setting forth the Planning Board's denial of
the waiver request.
C. Upon certification of an administratively complete application, the
Clerk shall transmit the application package to the Planning Board
Engineer for a technical completeness review. Said review shall be
completed within 45 days of the date the application was deemed to be
administratively complete.
D. Within the forty-five-day period, the Planning Board Engineer shall
make a determination that the submitted documents, plans, etc., are in
conformance with the technical requirements of the applicable code
requirements.
(1) If the submitted plans, documents, etc., are determined to be
technically complete, the Planning Board Engineer shall issue a
certification of technical completeness to the applicant and shall
schedule the application for a hearing on the next available agenda
of the Planning Board. The Engineer shall also issue an engineering
report to the applicant.
(2) If the submitted documents, plans, etc., are determined not to be
technically complete, the Planning Board Engineer shall issue a
deficiency letter to the applicant setting forth the technical
deficiencies of the submitted documents, plans, etc., and return the
application package to the applicant for revision and resubmission
to the Planning Board Engineer.
(3) If the applicant requests a waiver of any technical requirements of
the applicable ordinance, the Planning Board Engineer shall,
provided that the plans are otherwise technically complete, submit
the waiver request to the full Planning Board for a determination. If
the Planning Board grants the requested waiver, the Planning
Board Engineer shall certify the application as technically complete
in accordance with Subsection D(1) above. If the waiver request is
denied, then the Planning Board Engineer shall issue a deficiency
letter to the applicant in accordance with Subsection D(2) above.
E. Following a determination of technical completeness, the Planning
Board Engineer may, at his discretion, and prior to the initial public
hearing, request a plan review meeting with the applicant and the
applicant's professional consultants and also with other members of the
Planning Board's professional staff to review the submitted plans and
§ 244-10 JACKSON CODE § 244-10
1:662
other documents to resolve any engineering, planning or legal issues
in order to expedite the public hearing process. No member of the
Planning Board shall attend the plan review meeting. Upon the
conclusion of the plan review meeting, the applicant may submit
revised plans or other documents prior to the public hearing, provided
that said revisions are submitted at least 14 days prior to the public
hearing and are on file at the Township Municipal offices for review by
the public.
F. At the public hearing, the applicant and/or the applicant's professional
consultants shall make a presentation to the Planning Board. The
applicant shall also address to the Planning Board's satisfaction all
issues contained in the various reports of the Planning Board's
professional staff and other municipal agencies. At the conclusion of the
applicant's presentation, the Planning Board Chairman shall, if
required by the New Jersey Municipal Land Use Law113 and/or the
Jackson Township Code, open the meeting to the general public for
comments and questions.
G. After the conclusion of the public comment and question period, the
Planning Board shall either:
(1) Determine that the issues raised by the Planning Board's
professional staff have been fully addressed by the applicant and
that the plans and other documents are in a form which would
permit a final decision of the Planning Board; whereupon, the
Board shall close the public hearing and refer the application to the
executive caucus session of the Planning Board; or
(2) Determine that there are still unresolved issues and the plans and
other documents require substantial revision; whereupon, the
Planning Board shall require the applicant to further revise the
plans and continue the public hearing to the next available agenda
of the Planning Board for consideration of the revised plans.
H. At the executive caucus session of the Planning Board, the Planning
Board's professional staff shall review the application with members of
the Planning Board. Following this summary, the Planning Board
members shall caucus in open public session and shall direct the
Planning Board Attorney to prepare a resolution of approval or denial,
which is to be read and voted upon at the next public hearing of the
Planning Board. Said approval may be subject to appropriate
conditions. Members of the public and the applicant and the applicant's
professional staff may attend the executive caucus session and respond
to questions raised by the Planning Board but may not otherwise
participate in the Planning Board's deliberations.
113. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 244-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-10
1:663
§ 244-11. Certificates and permits.
I. At the next public hearing of the Planning Board, the Planning Board
shall take formal action on the application and adopt the memorializing
resolution, in accordance with the provisions of § 244-9D.
A. Development permit.
(1) Development permits shall hereafter be secured from the
administrative officer:
(a) Prior to the filing of an approved subdivision;
(b) Prior to the issuance of a building permit for the construction,
erection or alteration of any structure or sign or part of a
structure;
(c) Upon a change in the use of a structure or land; or
(d) For any use of or alteration of the natural condition of a parcel
of land or the construction of any improvement above or below
the ground.
(2) Where no building permit is required, the development permit shall
be secured prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
(3) Prior to issuance of a development permit, the applicant shall have,
where applicable, secured other required permits, including but
not limited to:
(a) Access permit from the New Jersey Department of
Transportation and/or Ocean County Engineering Department.
(b) Drainage permit from the New Jersey Department of
Transportation.
(c) Stream encroachment permit from the New Jersey Department
of Environmental Protection.
(d) Coastal Area Facility Review Act (CAFRA) permit from the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
(e) Wetlands permit from the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection.
(f) Sewage and/or industrial waste treatment permit from the
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
(g) Soil disturbance permit from the Ocean County Soil
Conservation District.
(h) A certificate of filing from the Pinelands Commission.
B. Certificates as to approval of subdivision of land.
§ 244-10 JACKSON CODE § 244-11
1:664
(1) The prospective purchaser, prospective mortgagee or any other
person interested in any land which forms part of a subdivision or
which formed part of such a subdivision three years preceding the
effective date of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. may apply in writing to
the administrative officer for issuance of a certificate certifying
whether or not such subdivision has been approved by the Planning
Board and whenever such subdivision, if the same has not been
approved, is statutorily exempt from the requirement of approval
as provided in this chapter. Such application shall contain a
diagram showing the location and dimension of the land to be
covered by the certificate and the name of the owner thereof.
(2) The administrative officer shall make and issue such certificate
within 15 days after the receipt of such written application and the
fees therefor. Said officer shall keep a duplicate copy of each
certificate, consecutively numbered, including a statement of the
fee charged, in a binder as a permanent record in his office.
(3) Each such certificate shall be designated as "Certificate as to
Approval of Subdivision of Land" and shall certify:
(a) Whether there exists in Jackson Township a duly established
Planning Board and whether there is an ordinance controlling
subdivision of land adopted under the authority of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.
(b) Whether the subdivision, as it relates to the land shown in said
application, has been approved by the Planning Board and, if
so, the date of such approval and any extensions and terms
thereof, showing that the subdivision of which the lands are a
part is a validly existing subdivision.
(4) The administrative officer shall be entitled to demand and receive
for such certificate issued by him a reasonable fee not in excess of
those provided in N.J.S.A. 54:5-14 and 54:5-15. The fees so
collected by such official shall be paid by him to the municipality.
(5) Any person who shall acquire for a valuable consideration an
interest in the lands covered by any such certificate of approval of a
subdivision in reliance upon the information therein contained shall
hold such interest free of any right, remedy or action which could
be prosecuted or maintained by the Township pursuant to the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-55 and this chapter.
(6) If the administrative officer designated to issue any such certificate
fails to issue the same within 15 days after receipt of an application
and the fees therefor, any person acquiring an interest in the lands
described in such application shall hold such interest free of any
right, remedy or action which could be prosecuted or maintained
by the Township pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-55 and § 244-15 of this
chapter.
§ 244-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-11
1:665
(7) Any such application addressed to the Township Clerk shall be
deemed to be addressed to the proper designated officer, and the
Township shall be bound thereby to the same extent as though the
same was addressed to the designated official.
C. Building permit. No building or structure shall be erected, restored,
added to or structurally altered until a permit therefor has been issued
by the Construction Official. All applications for such permits shall be in
accordance with the requirements of the Building Code. No building
permit shall be issued unless the applicant shall have first secured a
development permit.
D. Certificate of occupancy.
(1) New uses.
(a) No building or structure shall be occupied or used until such
time as a certificate of occupancy is issued by the Construction
Official. In addition, certificates of occupancy shall not be
issued for any change of ownership, change of use or new use,
other than one- and two-family homes, until approval shall
have been received from the Jackson Township Bureau of Fire
Prevention.
(b) Such certificate shall be issued upon application by the owner,
prospective occupant or purchaser only after the Construction
Official determines that the facts represented on the
application are correct and that the building, structure or use
is in conformance with the provisions of the Building Code.
(2) Existing uses at time of passage of this chapter. Upon written
request from the owner, tenant, occupant or purchaser under
contract, the administrative officer, after inspection, shall issue a
certificate of zoning for a use legally existing at the time this
chapter is made effective, certifying the extent and kind of use and
whether any such existing use conforms to the provisions of this
chapter.
(3) Change of use. Whenever there occurs a change in the use of a
building, structure or land, a new certificate of occupancy shall be
applied for to ensure compliance with all applicable codes and
ordinances. For the purposes of this section, "change in use" shall
be broadly construed and shall, for example, include substitution of
one type of retail trade use for another and of a particular
industrial manufacturing use for another. A certificate of occupancy
shall be obtained for each and every change and/or addition of
commercial or industrial occupancy. The Construction Official may
issue such certificate if the administrative officer determines that
the requirements of this chapter are not more stringent than those
of the previous occupancy, and provided that the applicant has met
the requirements of other applicable regulations.
§ 244-11 JACKSON CODE § 244-11
1:666
§ 244-12. Fees.
(4) Scope of certificate of occupancy. The certificate of occupancy shall
contain sufficient information as to the extent and kind of use or
uses, such that any future investigation of the premises would
disclose the extent to which a use was altered. It shall also indicate
whether such use is a permitted or nonconforming use and the
extent to which the use does not conform to the provisions of this
chapter.
(5) Improvement required. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued
until required improvements have been installed in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter.
(6) Development permit required. No certificate of occupancy shall be
issued for the nonresidential use of any building or structure unless
a development permit shall have first been issued for the
nonresidential use of such building or structure. Single-family and
multifamily residential uses shall be exempt from requiring a
development permit under this provision.
E. Any permit, other than a certificate of occupancy, issued in the
Pinelands Area shall be subject to the application, notice and review
procedures set forth in Articles III and VII of this Chapter 244.
A. Administrative fees for all development applications. The developer
shall pay, at the time of filing an application with the Jackson Township
Planning and Zoning Office, the following nonrefundable fees to the
Township of Jackson. Proposals involving more than one use shall pay a
fee equaling the sum of the fees for the component elements of the
proposal. Proposals requiring a combination of approvals such as
subdivision, site plan and/or variance shall pay a fee equal to the sum of
the fee for each element. Administrative fees for combined applications
for development shall not exceed $5,000. [Amended 12-30-1996 by
Ord. No. 27-96; 3-13-2007 by Ord. No. 06-07]
(1) Concept plan for nonbinding informal review: no cost.
(2) Minor subdivision: $200.
(3) Minor subdivision for lot consolidation: $130.
(4) Master development plan: $250.
(5) Preliminary plat for major subdivision:
(a) Zero to 50 lots: $350.
(b) Fifty-one to 100 lots: $1,300.
(c) One hundred one lots and greater: $1,800.
(6) Final plat for major subdivision:
§ 244-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-12
1:667
(a) Zero to 50 lots: $200.
(b) Fifty-one to 100 lots: $650.
(c) One hundred one lots and greater: $925.
(7) Plan revisions. For the revision of any subdivision plan or plans
which have been granted approval: 50% of the original
administrative fee for the stage of application (preliminary or final).
(8) Extension of subdivisions:
(a) Extension of preliminary approval: $250.
(b) Extension of final approval: $130.
(c) Resubdivision of final plat: $130.
(d) Extension of time to post bond or meet conditions: $75.
(9) Site plans other than residential:
(a) Preliminary:
[1] Total of Subsection A(9)(a)[1][a], [b] and [c]:
[a] One hundred fifty dollars per acre for each acre being
developed.
[b] Thirty dollars for each parking space up to 500 and
$20 for each space above 500.
[c] Six cents per square foot of building area up to 5,000
square feet, plus $0.04 per square foot up to 25,000
square feet, plus $0.03 per square foot above 25,000
square feet.
[2] The minimum fee shall be $250.
[3] The maximum fee shall be $5,000.
(b) Final approval: 50% of the preliminary application fee.
(c) Minor site plan: $150.
(10) Site plans for residential uses (townhouses, condominiums, etc.):
(a) Preliminary:
[1] From one to 50 units: $35 per unit.
[2] From 51 to 150 units: $30 per unit.
[3] From 151 units and greater: $20 per unit.
[4] The minimum fee shall be $250.
§ 244-12 JACKSON CODE § 244-12
1:668
(b) Final: 50% of preliminary fee.
(11) Plan revisions. For the revision of any site plan or plans which have
not been granted approval: 50% of the original fee for the stage of
application (preliminary or final).
(12) Amendment to approved application for development, to include
but not be limited to major subdivision and site plans which do not
fall within the category of administrative approvals and must be
reviewed by the Planning Board: $300.
(13) Minor subdivision plat reapproval. For the reapproval of a minor
subdivision plat which has been granted a previous approval and
meets the criteria set forth in § 244-6 of this chapter: 50% of the
original fee.
(14) Administrative approvals: $250.
(15) Extension of preliminary or final site plan approval: $300.
(16) Variances:
(a) Hear and decide appeals:
[1] Single- or two-family uses: $50.
[2] Multifamily uses: $100.
[3] Other: $300.
(b) Interpretation of the zoning regulations or Zoning Map: $75.
(c) Hardship or bulk variance:
[1] Single- or two-family uses: $20 per variance, with a
minimum of $50.
[2] Other: $50 per variance, with a minimum of $150.
(d) Use variance:
[1] Residential: $50.
[2] Other residential: $50 per unit, with a minimum of $200.
[3] Other than residential: $350 per acre, with a minimum of
$350.
(e) Building permit in conflict with Official Map or building permit
for lot not related to a street: $100.
(f) Others, including signs and fences: $50.
(17) Conditional uses:
(a) Residential: $200.
§ 244-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-12
1:669
(b) Other: $350.
(18) Zoning certificate application/development permit:
(a) Residential: $30.
(b) Commercial: $50.
(19) Certificate as to approval of subdivision of land: $20.
(20) Certificate of zoning:
(a) Residential: $30.
(b) Commercial: $50.
B. Preparation of resolutions of approval. The following fees shall be paid
by the applicant as an administrative fee at the time of filing the
application for development with the Planning and Zoning Office:
(1) The cost for the preparation of a resolution for preliminary
approval or denial with or without final approval shall be $150.
(2) The cost for the preparation of a resolution for final approval shall
be $150.
(3) The cost for the preparation of any other resolution shall be $150.
(4) The fee for any legal costs incurred by the Township to review any
performance or maintenance guarantee and prepare any necessary
Township resolution in connection with the application of
development shall be $300. Said fee shall be submitted when the
developer applies for a reduction or release of any performance or
maintenance guarantee. [Added 12-28-1998 by Ord. No. 37-98]
C. Escrow fees. In addition to the above, the developer shall, at the time of
filing an application for development, pay the following escrow fees to
the Township of Jackson. Said escrow fees shall be used to pay any and
all fees incurred by the Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment
for any time spent reviewing the application for development or
working on said application by the Board's engineer, attorney and any
other professional hired by said Board. Said escrow fees shall be used
to pay any and all fees incurred by the Township Attorney for any time
spent reviewing the application for development or reviewing or
preparing documents related to said application. Proposals involving
more than one use shall pay a fee equaling the sum of the fees for the
component elements of the proposal. Proposals requiring a combination
of approvals such as subdivisions, site plan and/or variances shall pay a
fee equal to the sum of the fee for each element. The total amount of
escrow fees for combined applications for development shall be a
minimum of $1,000. [Amended 12-27-2000 by Ord. No. 34-00;
2-26-2013 by Ord. No. 03-13; 8-22-2017 by Ord. No. 15-17]
(1) Minor subdivision: $1,000, plus $500 per lot.
§ 244-12 JACKSON CODE § 244-12
1:670
(2) Minor subdivision for lot consolidation: $1,000.
(3) Master development plan: $1,000.
(4) Preliminary plat for major subdivision:
(a) Zero to 30 lots: $1,000, plus $100 per lot.
(b) Thirty-one to 100 lots: $4,000, plus $70 per lot over 30 lots.
(c) One hundred one to 200 lots: $8,900, plus $60 per lot over 100
lots.
(d) Two hundred one lots and greater: $14,900, plus $50 per lot
over 200 lots.
(5) Final plat for major subdivision:
(a) Zero to 30 lots: $1,000, plus $50 per lot.
(b) Thirty-one to 100 lots: $2,300, plus $30 per lot over 30 lots.
(c) One hundred one to 200 lots: $4,400, plus $20 per lot over 100
lots.
(d) Two hundred one lots and greater: $6,400, plus $10 per lot
over 200 lots.
(6) Site plans other than residential. Preliminary:
(a) Zero to 5,000 square feet of building area: $4,000.
(b) Five thousand one to 10,000 square feet of building area:
$4,500.
(c) Ten thousand one to 20,000 square feet of building area:
$7,500.
(d) Twenty thousand one to 50,000 square feet of building area:
$10,000.
(e) Fifty thousand one to 100,000 square feet of building area:
$20,000.
(f) One hundred thousand one and greater square feet of building
area: $25,000.
(7) Final approval of other than residential use: 1/2 the preliminary
approval application.
(8) Minor site plan for other than residential use: $2,500.
(9) Site plans for residential uses (townhouses, condominiums, etc.).
Preliminary:
(a) Zero to 30 units: $1,000, plus $100 per unit.
§ 244-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-12
1:671
(b) Thirty-one to 100 units: $4,000, plus $70 per unit over 30 units.
(c) One hundred one to 200 units: $8,900, plus $60 per unit over
100 units.
(d) Two hundred one units or greater: $14,900, plus $50 per unit
over 200 units.
(10) Final site plan approval: 50% of the preliminary fee, but not less
than $2,000.
(11) Extension of subdivision or site plans:
(a) Extension of preliminary approvals: $1,000.
(b) Extension of final approval: $1,000.
(c) Resubdivision of final plat: $1,000.
(12) Administrative approvals: $500.
(13) Amendment to approved application for development, to include
but not be limited to minor subdivision, major subdivision and site
plans which do not fall within the category of administrative
approvals and must be reviewed by the Planning Board: $1,000.
(14) Variances:
(a) Use variance and density variance:
[1] Single- or two-family use: $1,500.
[2] Multiple-family use: $1,500.
[3] Whole-house generator: $350.
[4] Other: $1,000.
(b) Interpretation of this chapter or Zoning Map: $500.
(c) Hardship or bulk variance: $150.
(d) Building permit in conflict with Official Map or building permit
for lot not related to a street: $500.
(e) Others, including signs and fences: $150.
(15) Conditional uses: $1,500.
(16) Certificate as to approval of subdivision of land: $50.
(17) Change of zone request: $500.
D. Inspection costs for on-site and off-site improvements.
(1) Escrow. At least one week prior to the beginning of construction or
installation of any required improvements, the developer shall
§ 244-12 JACKSON CODE § 244-12
1:672
notify the Township Engineer, in writing, of the developer's
intention to commence such work. All improvements and utility
installation shall be inspected during the time of their installation
by the Township Engineer or his designee to ensure satisfactory
completion, and no underground installation shall be covered until
inspected by the Township Engineer or his designee. The developer
shall reimburse the Township for reasonable inspection fees paid to
the Township Engineer for the inspection of improvements, which
fees shall not exceed the sum of the amounts set forth below.
The developer shall deposit the necessary inspection fee with the
Planning and Zoning Office prior to the start of any construction
or prior to signing the final plat, whichever shall first occur. The
inspection fee shall be in addition to the amount of any required
performance or maintenance guaranties and shall consist of a sum
equal in an amount: [Amended 3-27-2018 by Ord. No. 05-18]
(a) Not to exceed, except for extraordinary circumstances, the
greater of $500 or 5% of the cost of bonded improvements that
are subject to a performance guarantee; and
(b) Not to exceed 5% of the cost of private site improvements that
are not subject to a performance guarantee, which cost shall
be determined pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4.
(2) This fee shall be held in reserve by the Township and shall be used
to pay the cost of inspecting the construction. It shall be the
obligation of the developer to pay for the actual cost of inspecting
the construction. Any excess moneys shall be remitted to the
developer upon approval of all improvements as provided herein.
Any additional inspection costs shall be paid by the developer prior
to the approval of the improvements by the governing body as
provided for herein.
(3) In the event that final approval of a development has been granted
in stages or sections and hence the construction of the required
improvements is to be undertaken in stages or sections, bonding
and inspection of improvements shall also be in stages or sections.
E. Deposit of escrows with banking institution. Whenever the fees paid
under § 244-12C and D shall exceed $5,000, it shall be deposited in a
banking institution or savings and loan association in this state, insured
by an agency of the federal government, or in any other fund or
depository approved for such deposits by the State of New Jersey in an
account bearing interest at the minimum rate currently paid by the
institution or depository on time or savings deposits. The Township
Treasurer shall notify the applicant, in writing, of the name and address
of the institution or depository in which the deposit is made and the
amount of the deposit. If the amount of interest earned on the deposit
exceeds $100, that entire amount shall belong to the applicant and shall
be refunded to him by the Township on an annual basis or at the time
the deposit is repaid or applied to the purpose for which it was
§ 244-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-12
1:673
deposited; provided, however, that the Township shall retain for
administrative expenses a sum equivalent to no more than 33 1/3% of
the entire amount, which shall be in addition of all other administrative
expenses. In the event that the interest paid on a deposit for a year does
not exceed $100, the same is to be retained by the Township.
F. Replenishment of escrow account. If the Township determines that the
amount in escrow for the payment of inspection fees, as calculated
pursuant to § 244-12D(1), is insufficient to cover the cost of additional
required inspections, the Township may require the developer to
deposit additional funds in escrow, provided that the Township delivers
to the developer a written escrow deposit request, signed by the
Township Engineer, which: informs the developer of the need for
additional inspections, details the items or undertakings that require
inspection, estimates the time required for those inspections, and
estimates the cost of performing those inspections. [Amended
3-27-2018 by Ord. No. 05-18]
G. Returning fees to the applicant. When the Planning and Zoning Office
determines that there is no longer any need to retain an escrow account
in which to maintain funds pursuant to § 244-12C and D, the applicant
shall be entitled to the return of any moneys which remain in those
accounts. The applicant shall follow the procedures established by the
Planning and Zoning Office to obtain a refund of said funds.
H. Exemption from payment of fees. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8,
any philanthropic, fraternal and religious nonprofit organization
holding a tax-exempt status under the Federal Internal Revenue Code of
1954 is hereby exempt from the payment of any fees charged under this
chapter by virtue of the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
I. Tax Map maintenance fees.
(1) The following fees shall be paid by the applicant at the time of filing
an application with the Jackson Township Planning and Zoning
Office:
(a) Minor subdivision, two to three lots: $300.
(b) Final major subdivision:
[1] Four to six lots: $400.
[2] Seven to 12 lots: $600.
[3] Thirteen to 19 lots: $1,000.
[4] Twenty lots or more: $1,200, plus $10 per lot.
(c) Nonresidential site plan (final plat): $400.
(d) Residential site plan (final plat): $500, plus $10 per unit.
§ 244-12 JACKSON CODE § 244-12
1:674
(2) In the event that any application for development is denied and the
application is no longer pending in any manner before the
respective Board, then any portion of the aforementioned fee which
has not been expended by the Engineer responsible for maintaining
the Tax Map shall be refunded to the applicant.
J. Mandatory development fees. [Added 4-26-1993 by Ord. No. 14-93]
(1) Purpose. The purpose of the mandatory development fee is to
provide funding for the Township's Housing Element and Fair
Share Plan approved by the Township Committee, Township of
Jackson.
(2) Definitions.
(a) The following words used in this subsection are intended to
have the same meanings as given to them by the New Jersey
Supreme Court in the Mount Laurel II decision and as clarified
or otherwise modified by subsequent decisions, if any, by a
court of competent jurisdiction and by the New Jersey Council
on Affordable Housing in N.J.A.C. 5:92-1.3, including but not
limited to:
AFFORDABLE — A sales price or rent within the means of
a low- or moderate-income household as defined in N.J.A.C.
5:92-12.
COUNCIL or COAH — The New Jersey Council on Affordable
Housing established under the Fair Housing Act114 and which
has primary jurisdiction for the administration of housing
obligations in accordance with sound regional planning
considerations in the state.
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUATION — The value of property
determined by the Municipal Tax Assessor through a process
designed to ensure that all property in the municipality is
assessed at the same assessment ratio or ratios as required
by law. Estimates at the time of issuance of building permits
may be obtained by the tax assessor utilizing estimates for
construction costs. Actual equalized assessed value will be
determined at project completion by the Municipal Tax
Assessor.
INCLUSIONARY DEVELOPMENT — A housing development
containing both affordable units and market-rate units
identified as such in the Township's judicially approved
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan. This term includes, but
is not necessarily limited to: new construction, the conversion
of a nonresidential structure to residential and the creation of
new affordable units through the reconstruction of a vacant
residential structure. The term does not include market-rate
114. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq.
§ 244-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-12
1:675
units or nonresidential structures that generate an affordable
housing production growth share obligation and are not
designated as inclusionary developments in the Township's
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan.[Amended 2-28-2005
by Ord. No. 08-05115]
JUDGMENT OF REPOSE — A judgment issued by the Superior
Court approving a municipality's plan to satisfy its fair share
obligation.
MANDATORY DEVELOPMENT FEE — A fee paid pursuant to a
mandatory fee ordinance.
MANDATORY FEE ORDINANCE — An ordinance which
prohibits development pursuant to an existing permitted use
in the zoning ordinance without compelling the affected
developer to contribute moneys to the municipality's
Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
(b) All other terms contained herein shall be as set forth in the
Municipal Land Use Act, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., and this
Chapter 244, Land Use and Development Regulations.
(3) Residential development fees. [Amended 2-28-2005 by Ord. No.
08-05116]
(a) In accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:94-6.6(a) and (b) of COAH's
Substantive Rules, all new development of residential dwelling
units within the Township of Jackson not exempt from the
collection of development fees in accordance with the
provisions of this Subsection J shall pay to Jackson Township
1.0% of either the equalized assessed value of each housing
unit, the coverage amount of the homeowner warranty
document of a for-sale unit, or the appraised value on the
document utilized for construction financing for a rental unit,
provided no increased density is permitted.
(b) In the event that an increase in residential density is permitted
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d(5) (known as a "d" variance),
the fee shall increase to 6.0% of either the equalized assessed
value for each additional unit that is realized, the coverage
amount on the homeowner warranty document for each
additional for-sale unit, or the appraised value on the
document utilized for construction financing for each
additional rental unit. However, if the zoning on a site has
115. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that all references throughout the Code to
COAH's first cycle Substantive Rules published at N.J.A.C. 5:92 should be replaced by
COAH's third cycle Substantive Rules published at N.J.A.C. 5:94, effective as of
12-20-2004.
116. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that all references throughout the Code to
COAH's first cycle Substantive Rules published at N.J.A.C. 5:92 should be replaced by
COAH's third cycle Substantive Rules published at N.J.A.C. 5:94, effective as of
12-20-2004.
§ 244-12 JACKSON CODE § 244-12
1:676
changed during the two-year period preceding the filing of
such a variance application, the density for the purposes of
calculating the bonus development fee shall be the highest
density permitted by right during the two-year period
preceding the filing of the variance application.
(4) Nonresidential development fees. [Amended 2-28-2005 by Ord.
No. 08-05117]
(a) In accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:94-6.7(a) and (b) of COAH's
Substantive Rules, all new development of nonresidential
buildings and structures not exempt from the collection of
development fees in accordance with the provisions of this
Subsection J shall pay a fee to Jackson Township of 2.0% of
either the equalized assessed value for nonresidential
development or the appraised value on the document utilized
for construction financing.
(b) In the event that an increase in floor area is permitted
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d(4) (known as a "d" variance),
the fee shall increase to 6.0% on the additional floor area
realized. However, if the zoning on a site has changed during
the two-year period preceding the filing of such a variance
application, the base floor area for the purposes of calculating
the bonus development fee shall be the highest floor area
permitted by right during the two-year period preceding the
filing of the variance application.
(5) Timing of payments.
(a) Fifty percent of the total mandatory development fee owed to
Jackson Township, whether for residential or nonresidential
development, shall be paid prior to the issuance of any building
permit required in connection with the development and shall
be calculated as follows:
[1] For residential developments, the 50% payment required
prior to the issuance of any building permit shall be
calculated using an estimated equalized assessed
valuation of each residential unit as determined by the
Jackson Township Tax Assessor. [Amended 3-26-1994 by
Ord. No. 7-94]
[2] For nonresidential developments, the 50% payment
required prior to the issuance of any building permit shall
be calculated using an estimated total equalized assessed
117. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that all references throughout the Code to
COAH's first cycle Substantive Rules published at N.J.A.C. 5:92 should be replaced by
COAH's third cycle Substantive Rules published at N.J.A.C. 5:94, effective as of
12-20-2004.
§ 244-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-12
1:677
valuation of the nonresidential development as determined
by the Jackson Township Tax Assessor.
(b) The remaining portion of the development fee shall be paid
prior to the issuance of any certificate of occupancy for any
development or any part thereof, whether residential or
nonresidential, and shall be calculated using the actual
assessed valuation of the development as determined by the
Jackson Township Tax Assessor.
(c) Because the initial payment required prior to the issuance of a
building permit is calculated using an estimated assessed
valuation based on estimates for construction costs, the
following adjustments are permitted to compensate for
differences between the estimated assessed valuation and the
actual assessed valuation:
[1] If the estimated assessed valuation used to calculate the
initial fifty-percent payment was overestimated or
underestimated, causing the actual assessed valuation to
be less than or greater than the estimated assessed
valuation used to calculate the initial fifty-percent
payment, the developer's certificate of occupancy payment
shall be equal to the difference between the actual
assessed valuation and the initial fifty-percent payment as
determined by the Jackson Township Tax Assessor.
(6) Exemptions, eligible exactions and ineligible exactions.
(a) Inclusionary developments, as defined herein, are exempt from
development fees.
(b) Developments that have received preliminary or final approval,
prior to the effective date of this subsection, are exempt from
development fees during the effective period of said approval,
unless the developer seeks a substantial change in the
approvals granted.
(c) Low- and moderate-income dwelling units shall be exempt
from paying development fees.
(d) Development that expands an existing structure shall pay a
development fee. The development fee shall be calculated
based on the increase in the equalized assessed value of the
improved structure.
(7) Housing trust fund.
(a) All mandatory development fees collected pursuant to this
chapter shall be deposited in the interest-bearing escrow
account entitled the "Affordable Housing Trust Fund:
Mandatory Fee Account."
§ 244-12 JACKSON CODE § 244-12
1:678
(b) If the Court determines that Jackson Township's spending is
not in conformance with COAH's rules on development fees,
the Court is authorized to direct the manner in which all
development fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be
expended.
(8) Use of funds.
(a) Money deposited in a housing trust fund may be used for any
activity approved for addressing the Township's low- and
moderate-income housing obligation. Such activities may
include but are not necessarily limited to housing
rehabilitation; new construction; regional contribution
agreements; the purchase of land for low- and moderateincome
housing; extensions and/or improvements of roads and
infrastructures to low- and moderate-income housing sites;
assistance designed to render units to be more affordable to
low- and moderate-income people; and administrative costs
necessary to implement the Township's housing element. The
expenditure of all money shall conform to the approved
spending plan.
(b) Unless specifically waived by the Court or by COAH, not less
than 30% of the revenues collected from development fees
collected pursuant to this chapter shall be devoted to
rendering existing units more affordable to low-and moderateincome
households by funding such activities as downpayment
assistance, low-interest loans and rental assistance.
[Amended 3-26-1994 by Ord. No. 7-94]
(c) No more than 20% of the revenues collected from development
fees collected pursuant to this subsection shall be devoted to
administrative expenses incurred by the Township in
addressing its fair share obligation.
(9) Monitoring. The Township shall complete and return all monitoring
forms related to the collection of fees, expenditure of revenues and
implementation of the spending plan to the Court or COAH.
Quarterly financial reports and annual program and
implementation and submitting reports shall be completed on
current forms utilized by COAH. [Added 3-26-1994 by Ord. No.
7-94]
K. Stormwater management maintenance fee. For purposes of this
section, the calculation of the maintenance fee will be based on the type
of stormwater management system which is to serve the development,
that is, a surface system, such as a detention or retention basin and
subsurface infiltration system or a combination of the above. The fee
shall be determined as follows: [Added 2-9-1998 by Ord. No. 5-98]
§ 244-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-12
1:679
§ 244-13. Enforcement.
The duty of administering and enforcing the provisions of this chapter
is hereby conferred upon the administrative officer, who shall have such
powers as are conferred upon him by this chapter and as reasonably may
be implied. It shall be the duty of the administrative officer to cause any
building, plans or premises to be inspected or examined and to order, in
writing, the remedying of any conditions found to exist in violation of this
chapter, and he shall have the right to enter any buildings or premises
during the daytime, or other normal business hours of the premises, in the
course of his duties.
§ 244-14. Records.
(1) Surface stormwater management systems (detention or retention
basins). The amount of the maintenance fee shall be the annual
maintenance cost per acre multiplied by the twenty-five-year
maintenance period multiplied by the maintenance area in acres.
The maintenance area of the stormwater management basin shall
be defined to be the area included within a line drawn around the
top of the bank of the basin, plus an additional 25 feet outward
from the top of the bank. The annual maintenance cost per acre
shall be $1,025. The minimum contribution, regardless of the size
of the basin, will be $10,000.
(2) Subsurface infiltration system. The amount of the maintenance fee
shall be determined as follows: $1 per linear foot of the infiltration
system per year for maintenance multiplied by a twenty-five-year
period, plus twice the cost of the subsurface infiltration system (not
including structures). The replacement cost shall be the amount of
the performance guaranties for the subsurface infiltration system,
plus the amount of $27.50 per linear foot for road repair for any
portion of the roadway disturbed by such replacement determined
by the Township Engineer. The minimum fee, regardless of the
length of infiltration system, shall be $10,000.
(3) Combination systems. The required fee shall be based on a
combined total of the above.
A. It shall be the duty of the administrative officer to keep a record of all
applications for and all development permits issued, together with a
notation of all special conditions involved. He shall file and safely keep
copies of all plans submitted, and the same shall form a part of the
records of his office and shall be available for the use of the Township
Committee, other officials of the Township of Jackson and the public.
B. The administrative officer shall prepare a monthly report for the
Township Committee summarizing, for the period since his last report,
all development permits issued and all complaints of violations and the
action taken by him consequent thereto. A copy of each such report
§ 244-12 JACKSON CODE § 244-14
1:680
§ 244-15. Violations and penalties.
shall be filed with the Township Tax Assessor at the same time it is filed
with the Township Committee.
A. For any and every violation of the provisions of this chapter, the owner,
general agent or contractor of a building or premises where such
violation has been committed or shall exist, and the lessee or tenant of
an entire building or entire premises where such violations have been
committed or shall exist, and the owner, general agent, contractor
lessee or tenant of any part of a building or premises in which part such
violation has been committed or shall exist, and the general agent,
architect, building contractor or any other person who commits, takes
part or assists in such violation or who maintains any building or
premises in which any such violation shall exist, shall, for each and
every day that such violation continues, be subject to a fine of not more
than $1,000 or be imprisoned for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both.
B. Transfer before approval; injunctive relief.
(1) If, before final subdivision approval has been granted, any person
transfers or sells or agrees to transfer or sell, except pursuant to an
agreement expressly conditioned on final subdivision approval, as
owner or agent, any land which forms a part of a subdivision for
which municipal approval is required by this chapter, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., such person shall be subject to a penalty
not to exceed $1,000, and each lot disposition so made may be
deemed a separate violation.
(2) In addition to the foregoing, the municipality may institute and
maintain a civil action for injunctive relief and to set aside and
invalidate any conveyance made pursuant to such a contract of sale
if a certificate as to approval of subdivision of land has not been
issued in accordance with § 244-11B of this chapter. In any such
action, the transferee, purchaser or grantee shall be entitled to a
lien upon the portion of the land from which the subdivision was
made that remains in the possession of the developer or his assigns
or successors, to secure the return of any deposits made or
purchase price paid and, also, to a reasonable search fee, survey
expense and title-closing expense, if any. Any such action must be
brought within two years after the date of the recording of the
instrument of transfer, sale or conveyance of said land, or within six
years, if unrecorded.
C. If, after final approval, it is discovered that there was any
misrepresentation of any statements or proofs contained in any plat or
plan or in any application for approval or in any representations made
to induce approval, the Planning Board or the Township Committee
may, in addition to such other sanctions as are available in the law,
revoke the approval of any plat, plan or application for development and
proceed as if final approval had not been obtained.
§ 244-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-15
1:681
§ 244-16. Amendments.
All amendments to this chapter and to the Zoning Map which forms a
part hereof shall be adopted in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq., as amended and supplemented.
§ 244-17. Pending applications.
§ 244-18. Interpretation.
In the application and interpretation of this chapter, all provisions hereof
shall be held to be minimum standards or requirements adopted for the
promotion of the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare
of the Township of Jackson. Whenever the requirements of this chapter
are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules,
regulations or ordinances, the most restrictive or that imposing the higher
standards shall govern.
§ 244-19. Repealer.
Chapter 109, Zoning; Chapter 93, Subdivision of Land; Chapter 89, Site
Plan Approval; Chapter 21, Planning Board; Chapter 100, Trees; and
Chapter 94, Administrative Fees and Escrows for all Development
Applications, of the Code of the Township of Jackson, New Jersey, are hereby
repealed in their entirety,118 and any portions of other ordinances which
contain provisions inconsistent with this chapter are hereby repealed to
the extent of such inconsistency, except that any building permit, variance,
special use permit, certificate of occupancy or other permit validly issued
D. If the developer or agent of the developer shall, after notification by
certified mail from the Township Engineer to cease the construction of
improvements, to cease the use of certain construction methods and
procedures or to cease the use of or lack of use of site maintenance
methods and procedures which may result in hazards to life, health or
property, continue to carry on the activities specifically included in
cessation order(s) from the Township Engineer, then any such
developer or agent of such developer shall be subject to a fine not to
exceed $1,000 or to imprisonment for not more than 90 days. Each and
every day that a developer or agent of a developer operates in violation
of this chapter after issuance of a cessation order by the Township
Engineer shall be considered a separate and specific violation.
A. All pending applications for development for which no approvals have
been granted prior to the effective date of this chapter shall be subject
to the procedures, standards and other requirements of this chapter.
B. All approvals granted after the effective date of this chapter shall confer
upon the applicant all the rights set forth in this chapter.
118. Editor's Note: Said repealed chapters were originally located in the 1972 Code.
§ 244-15 JACKSON CODE § 244-19
1:682
pursuant to any such ordinance shall remain valid and effective and shall
continue to be governed by the terms and conditions of such ordinance.
§ 244-20. Copy to be filed with County Planning Board.
Upon adoption of this chapter, the Township Clerk shall file a copy of this
chapter with the Ocean County Planning Board, as required by N.J.S.A.
40:55D-16.
§ 244-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-20
1:683

ARTICLE IV
Development Application Procedures
§ 244-21. Approval required.
In all zones, for all proposed uses, subdivisions, site development or
construction, other than exempt development, site plan and/or subdivision
approval shall be required prior to:
§ 244-22. Application required.
A. The issuance of a development permit.
B. The issuance of a building permit for any new structure or for any
addition to or alteration of an existing structure.
C. Any change of use of land or structure to a use for which any of the
standards of this chapter are more restrictive or stringent.
D. Any expansion of the total number of employees, number of employees
in any shift or the number of vehicles to be stored or parked on the site
exceeding 15% of the amount existing at the time of passage of this
chapter or as set forth at the time of a previous site plan approval.
E. The construction or alteration of any public facility, structure or
building for which referral to the Planning Board for review and
recommendation is required by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-31.
F. The construction or alteration of or addition to any off-street parking
area which provides an increase of 10 or more vehicle parking spaces.
A. Application shall first be made to the administrative officer for issuance
of a development permit by any person wishing to undertake any of the
following, unless the proposed undertaking is a single-family dwelling
on an existing lot of record in the Pinelands Area, in which case a
preliminary zoning permit shall instead be required pursuant to the
provisions of § 244-78: [Amended 3-23-1998 by Ord. No. 9-98]
(1) Construct a new building or structure.
(2) Add to or structurally alter any existing building.
(3) Change the use on any land or within any building or structure.
(4) Any expansion of the total number of employees, number of
employees in any shift or the number of vehicles to be stored or
parked on the site exceeding 15% of the amount existing at the
time of passage of this chapter or as set forth at the time of a
previous site plan approval.
(5) Construct, add to or alter any parking area, signs, lighting,
drainage facility or any other site improvement above and/or below
ground level.
§ 244-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-22
1:685
§ 244-23. Application procedures.
(6) Alter the existing condition of any parcel of land, including the
filling or excavation of land.
(7) Erect a fence in conjunction with any nonfarm use.
B. If the administrative officer shall determine that the proposed
undertaking is an exempt development which conforms in all aspects to
the requirements of this chapter and does not require direction for
issuance of a building permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 or
40:55D-36, he shall issue a development permit, and the applicant may
then apply for a building permit and/or other permits that may be
required.
C. If the administrative officer shall determine that the proposed
undertaking is an exempt development but does not conform in all
aspects to the requirements of this chapter and/or requires direction
for issuance of a building permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 or
40:55D-36, he shall instruct the applicant that Board of Adjustment
approval of an application for development for variance and/or
direction for issuance of a building permit is required before a
development permit may be issued allowing the applicant to apply for a
building permit and/or other permits that may be required.
D. If the administrative officer shall determine that the proposed
undertaking is not an exempt development, he shall instruct the
applicant that Planning Board or Board of Adjustment approval of an
application for development is required. He shall further advise the
applicant which Board has jurisdiction over the application for
development and which of the following approvals are required:
(1) Site plan.
(2) Subdivision.
(3) Variance.
(4) Conditional use.
(5) Direction for the issuance of a building permit.
E. The Planning Board or Board of Adjustment shall hear and act upon any
requests for granting of variances, conditional use approval and/or
direction for the issuance of a building permit at the same time that it
hears and acts upon a minor subdivision, minor site plan, preliminary
plat of a major subdivision or a preliminary plat of a major site plan. No
such action shall be taken simultaneously with any action on a sketch
plat of a major subdivision or major site plan. Such simultaneous action
shall not be taken in conjunction with a final plat of a major subdivision
or major site plan unless revisions in the plat subsequent to preliminary
plat approval shall have created the need for such simultaneous action.
§ 244-22 JACKSON CODE § 244-23
1:686
A. Submission requirements. Eighteen sets of the application for
development shall be submitted and shall be accompanied by 11 sets of
the required plats, plans, maps and supporting attachments, exhibits
and information. Applications for development shall not be accepted by
the Office of Planning and Zoning unless they are accompanied by the
required fees as set forth in § 244-12 of this chapter. [Amended
4-23-2001 by Ord. No. 12-01]
B. Administrative procedure. Upon the receipt of an application for
development, the Office of Planning and Zoning shall forward one set of
the application and one set of each of the accompanying plans, maps,
supporting attachments, exhibits and information to the office of the
Planning Board Engineer.
C. Engineering review. The Board Engineer shall review applications for
development for site plan, subdivisions and conditional uses and shall
advise the applicant's engineer of any technical deficiencies, required
changes and/or recommended changes. Eighteen copies of revised
plans and attachments, which correct all deficiencies, incorporate all
required changes and satisfactorily consider all recommended changes,
shall be submitted to the Office of Planning and Zoning for processing.
[Amended 4-23-2001 by Ord. No. 12-01]
D. Certificate of completeness. When all submission requirements have
been fulfilled and, in the case of site plans, subdivisions and conditional
uses, when reports have been prepared indicating that the plans and
attachments submitted are in technical compliance, the administrative
officer shall issue a certificate of completeness and schedule the
application for development for public hearing before the Planning
Board or Board of Adjustment.
E. Conditional approvals.
(1) After issuance of a certificate of completeness, all applications for
development shall be acted upon by the Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment within the time limits set forth in this chapter, or within
such further time as may be consented to by the applicant. If
required, approvals from other governmental agencies have not
been received prior to Planning Board or Board of Adjustment
approval of an application for development, such approval shall be
conditional upon the subsequent approval or approvals by the other
government agencies, unless the applicant shall request that such
approval be withheld until the approval or approvals from the other
government agencies have been received.
(2) If approval is granted conditioned upon the subsequent approval of
another governmental agency and such governmental agency
requires revisions in the plat which alter the layout and/or design
standards approved by the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment
to an extent that the administrative officer determines that the
basis upon which the approval was granted has been changed, the
§ 244-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-23
1:687
applicant shall be required to receive revised approval from the
Planning Board or Board of Adjustment and pay the fees for such
revised approval set forth in § 244-12 of this chapter.
F. Planning Board action. In acting upon an application for development
for a subdivision, site plan or conditional use, the Planning Board shall
consider whether the submittal complies with the following standards
and regulations:
(1) The proposed use is consistent with the Master Plan.
(2) The plat submission contains all of the information and data
required by this chapter.
(3) The details and improvement standards of the plat are in
accordance with the standards of this chapter.
(4) Adequate provision is made for safe and convenient vehicular
traffic access, circulation and parking.
(5) Adequate provision is made for safe and convenient pedestrian
circulation.
(6) Ingress and egress for the site will not unduly impede or obstruct
the flow of traffic on public streets.
(7) Adequate provision has been made for the collection and disposal
of stormwater runoff.
(8) Adequate provision has been made to screen adjoining residential
properties from any adverse effects that might result from outdoor
lighting, buildings, parking areas, refuse storage areas, recreation
area, equipment areas, bulk storage areas or similar utilities or
structures located on the site.
(9) Adequate provision has been made for compliance with the
performance standards of this chapter.
(10) Adequate provision has been made to provide structures and uses
of a quality and design which will not produce adverse effects on
existing developments in the surrounding area or future uses
designated for the surrounding area in the Master Plan.
(11) The proposed development is compatible with approved
subdivisions and/or site plans for adjacent and nearby parcels of
land.
G. Issuance of development permit. Approvals of all applications for
development shall not be valid until all of the following have taken
place:
(1) The administrative officer shall certify that all conditions of
approval have been satisfied.
§ 244-23 JACKSON CODE § 244-23
1:688
§ 244-24. Minor subdivisions.
(2) In the case of applications for development for site plans and
subdivisions, the applicant shall submit for signature to the Office
of Planning and Zoning the reproducible original of the plat and 10
paper prints, all with the Ocean County Planning Board stamp and
signature of the Chairman.
(3) After signature, the Office of Planning and Zoning shall return the
reproducible original of the plat and attachments to the applicant.
(4) For all applications for development that receive final plat
approval, the administrative officer shall issue a development
permit after the plat has been signed. The date of the development
permit shall be the date upon which the approval becomes valid.
The date upon which the approval of applications for development
related to a preliminary plat becomes valid shall be the date on
which the plat is signed by the Chairman and Secretary or Assistant
Secretary of the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment. However,
the period of time for which certain rights are conferred upon the
applicant shall commence on the date which the Planning Board or
Board of Adjustment granted approval.
H. Administrative approval may be granted for changes to any previously
approved site plan or subdivision, which changes comply with the
following:
(1) Technical changes in engineering design, location of facilities and
improvements, or composition of the same, may be granted by the
Township Engineer if said changes have no affect on the purpose
and intent of the initial approval and said changes do not diminish
setbacks or location of improvements less than stipulated or
required by ordinance or increase the dimension of any building or
facility beyond 10% of the original approval, provided that all other
requirements or stipulations of approval have been met.
(2) Any changes in location of facilities as above mentioned may be
approved administratively by the full Board upon petition of the
applicant or at the discretion of the Township Engineer unless the
same impacts the subject matter of a public hearing or
substantially changes the location of any facility or building beyond
the content of said original approval.
A. Required documents. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of
completeness, the administrative officer shall determine that the
following have been submitted in proper form:
(1) Proof from the Tax Office that real estate taxes and local
assessments have been paid to date.
(2) Proof of submission to the Ocean County Planning Board.
§ 244-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-24
1:689
(3) Proof of submission to the Jackson Township Municipal Utilities
Authority.
(4) Proof of submission to the Ocean County Soil Conservation Service.
(5) Proof of submission to the Ocean County Board of Health.
(6) Proof of submission to the Jackson Township Environmental
Commission.
(7) Application for a floodplain encroachment, where required.
(8) Application for a state wetlands approval, where required.
(9) Other submittals that may be required by the Planning Board
Engineer, Planning Board or federal, state or local law.
(10) A request for the granting of any variances, waivers or other
approvals required from the Planning Board.
(11) Required application and escrow fees.
(12) Eighteen copies of the plat and attachments meeting the
requirements set forth below. [Amended 4-23-2001 by Ord. No.
12-01]
B. Plat requirements.
(1) General requirements. The plat for a minor subdivision shall be
drawn at a scale of not less than 100 feet to the inch, shall conform
to the provisions of Chapter 141 of the Laws of 1960 of the State of
New Jersey, as amended and supplemented,119 and shall include or
be accompanied by the information specified below:
(a) All dimensions, both linear and angular, of the exterior
boundaries of the subdivision. All lots and lands reserved or
dedicated for public use shall balance, and their descriptions
shall close within a limit of error of not more than one part in
10,000.
(b) The minor subdivision shall be based upon a current boundary
survey certified to by the subdivider and prepared or
recertified not less than 12 months prior to the date of
application. The outbound survey and subdivision shall be in
New Jersey State Plane Coordinates, North American Datum,
1983. To assure the compatibility of the survey data and the
Geographic Information System (GIS) in the course of
development in the Township, the basis of bearings for all
surveys must be stated in the New Jersey Plane Coordinate
System, as adopted by state statutes and standards. The minor
subdivision plat must contain a factual statement indicating
119. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.
§ 244-24 JACKSON CODE § 244-24
1:690
the control monuments and methodologies used to establish
the bearing system. Bearings shall be stated in degrees,
minutes and seconds (as a whole integer). Survey distances
defining the property and plane coordinate values of the
description point of beginning and one other property corner
shall be stated. Property surveys must close mathematically
in all cases. Coordinated positions, bearings and distances,
including the methodology for their establishment, must meet
or exceed the published standards for Third Order, Class I
accuracy. [Amended 6-8-1998 by Ord. No. 16-98]
(2) Title block. The title block shall appear on all sheets and shall
include:
(a) The title of "Minor Subdivision."
(b) The name of the subdivision, if any.
(c) The Tax Map sheet, block and lot number(s) of the tract to be
subdivided as shown on the latest Township Tax Map, the date
of which shall also be shown.
(d) The acreage of the tract being subdivided to the nearest
hundredth of an acre.
(e) The names and addresses of owner and subdivider so
designated.
(f) The date of the original plat and all revisions thereto.
(g) The name(s), signature(s), address(es) and license number(s)
of the engineer and/or land surveyor who prepared the map
and made the survey. The plat shall bear the embossed seal of
said engineer and/or land surveyor.
(3) Detailed information. Detailed information shall be as follows:
(a) A key map, at a scale of not less than one inch equals 2,000
feet, which shall be based on a reproduction of the Tax Map
sheet, or portions thereof, and shall show the subject site with
reference to surrounding areas, existing streets, the names of
all such streets and any zone boundary or municipal boundary
within 500 feet of the property in question.
(b) The names and addresses of all owners of and property lines of
parcels within 200 feet of the land to be subdivided, including
properties across the street, as shown by the most recent
records of the Township of Jackson, or of the municipality of
which the property is a part. The list of property owners shall
also indicate the use of parcels within 200 feet.
(c) All zone boundaries and Tax Map sheet, lot and block numbers,
existing streets and watercourses within 200 feet of the
§ 244-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-24
1:691
boundaries thereof and both the width of the paving and the
width of the right-of-way of each street, existing public
easement and Township border within 200 feet of the
subdivision.
(d) All existing structures, with an indication of those which are to
be destroyed or removed, and the front, rear and side yard
dimensions of those to remain, referenced to proposed lot
lines.
(e) All existing and proposed public easements or rights-of-way
and the purposes thereof.
(f) The existing system of drainage of the subdivision and of any
larger tract of which it is a part, together with information on
how it is proposed to dispose of surface drainage.
(g) All proposed lot lines and the areas of all lots in square feet.
The areas and dimensions specified shall be shown to the
nearest hundredth of a square foot or hundredth of a linear
foot.
(h) North arrow.
(i) Written and graphic scales.
(j) Schedule on the plat indicating the acreage of the tract, the
number of lots, the zone, the minimum required lot areas and
setbacks and dimensions (both required and proposed).
(k) Signature within the appropriate certificate block of the
engineer and/or land surveyor who prepared the plat and the
embossed seal of same.
(l) All required endorsements or certifications and space for the
appropriate signatures.
(m) All monumentation as required pursuant to the Map Filing
Law,120 including all monuments found, set and to be bonded.
(n) Proposed lot and block numbers, subject to approval by the
Township Engineer.
(o) Such other information as the Planning Board and/or Planning
Board Engineer may require or request during the review of
the application for classification and approval as a minor
subdivision.
C. Conditions of approval. Any approval of an application for development
for a minor subdivision granted by the Planning Board shall be subject
120. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.
§ 244-24 JACKSON CODE § 244-24
1:692
to the following conditions being satisfied prior to signing of the plat or
issuance of a development permit:
(1) Installation of or posting of performance guaranties for the
installation of any improvements required by the Planning Board.
(2) Ocean County Planning Board approval, if not previously granted.
(3) Ocean County Board of Health approval, if necessary and not
previously granted.
(4) Jackson Township Municipal Utilities Authority approval, if not
previously granted, or a letter of no interest.
(5) Jackson Township Environmental Commission review, if not
previously received.
(6) Payment of the required reproduction fee, pursuant to § 244-12 of
this chapter.
(7) Payment of the required Tax Map maintenance fee, pursuant to
§ 244-12 of this chapter.
(8) Submission of additional prints of the plat map and attachments for
distribution, if required.
(9) Any other conditions which may be imposed by the Planning Board
or which may be required by federal, state or local law.
D. Certification. In the event that the application for development for a
minor subdivision is approved, certifications shall appear on the plat
that said plat is in compliance with the Map Filing Law.121
E. Resolution compliance. Upon approval of a minor subdivision plat by
the municipal agency, the applicant shall submit, to the Office of
Planning and Zoning, the original Mylar and seven paper prints, all with
the stamp of approval of the Ocean County Planning Board and the
signature of the Chairman of the Ocean County Planning Board. The
Office of Planning and Zoning shall transmit the original Mylar and the
seven prints to the Township Engineer, who shall be responsible for
reviewing the plat for compliance with the resolution of approval
adopted by the municipal agency. After said review, the Township
Engineer shall retain one print, send one print to the applicant's
engineer, and return five prints and the original Mylar of the plat to the
Office of Planning and Zoning for signature by all appropriate municipal
officials. Upon being signed by Township officials, the plat shall be
picked up by the applicant. The Office of Planning and Zoning shall
retain five prints of the plat for its records and for distribution to
various municipal offices.
121. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.
§ 244-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-24
1:693
§ 244-25. Contribution disclosure requirements. [Added 8-8-2005
by Ord. No. 32-05123]
F. Filing of approved plat. If the applicant desires to proceed with a
subdivision for which approval as a minor subdivision has been granted,
he shall file with the county recording officer a deed or an approved
minor subdivision plat drawn in compliance with Chapter 141 of the
Laws of 1960, as amended and supplemented,122 within 190 days from
the date of approval by the Planning Board. In the event that the
subdivider fails to so file within the period allowed, the approval of the
plat shall expire.
A. Disclosure requirements.
(1) Any applicant for a variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d or a
variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c in conjunction with any
application for a subdivision not considered a minor subdivision
pursuant to local ordinance or a site plan not considered a minor
site plan pursuant to local ordinance as well as any application for a
subdivision not considered a minor subdivision pursuant to local
ordinance or site plan not considered a minor site plan pursuant to
local ordinance requiring waivers or exceptions pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-51 shall include in the application contribution
disclosure statements for all developers; all associates of said
developers who would be subject to disclosure pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-48.1 or 40:55D-48.2; and all professionals who apply for or
provide testimony, plans, or reports in support of said variance and
who have an enforceable proprietary interest in the property or
development which is the subject of the application or whose fee in
whole or part is contingent upon the outcome of the application.
Regardless of whether the owner of the property which is the
subject of the variance application falls in any of the categories
established in the preceding sentence, the applicant shall include
in the application a contribution disclosure statement for said
owner.
(2) During the pendency of the application process until final site plan
approval is granted, any applicant required to comply with this
section shall amend its contribution disclosure statements to
include continuing disclosure of all contributions within the scope
of disclosure requirement of the above paragraph.
B. Inclusion of contribution disclosure statements as an element of the
application checklist.
(1) An application checklist ordinance is hereby adopted pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.3 to require that the contribution disclosure
statements specified in Subsection A of this section be submitted by
122. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.
123. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided an effective date of 1-1-2006.
§ 244-24 JACKSON CODE § 244-25
1:694
§ 244-26. Preliminary plat of major subdivision.
the applicant for all applications for variance relief pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d as well as for relief pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70c or N.J.S.A. 40:55D-51 in applications for site plan and
subdivision approval not considered to be minor site plans or minor
subdivisions pursuant to local ordinance.
(2) The Township Planning Board and Board of Adjustment shall
amend their application checklists for variances pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d as well as for relief pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70c or N.J.S.A. 40:55D-51 in applications for site plan and
subdivision approval not considered to be minor site plans or minor
subdivisions pursuant to local ordinance to include the contribution
disclosure statements specified in Subsection A of this section.
(3) An application shall not be deemed complete by the administrative
official or accepted for public hearing by the municipal agency until
the required contribution disclosure statements are submitted.
C. Availability of the disclosure statement. All contribution disclosure
statements shall be available in the office of the administrative officer
for review by any member of the public.
D. Intent of the disclosure statement. It is the intent of this section that the
disclosure statement shall serve to inform the public and not serve as
evidence relevant to the decision criteria for variance applications
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d as well as for relief pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70c or N.J.S.A. 40:55D-51 in applications for site plan and
subdivision approval not considered to be minor site plans or minor
subdivisions pursuant to local ordinance.
A. Required documents. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of
completeness or scheduling of a preliminary plat of a major subdivision
for public hearing before the Planning Board, the administrative officer
shall determine that the following have been submitted in proper form:
(1) Proof from the Tax Office that real estate taxes and local
assessments have been paid to date.
(2) Proof of submission to the Ocean County Planning Board.
(3) Proof of submission to the Ocean County Board of Health.
(4) Proof of submission to the Ocean County Soil Conservation District.
(5) Proof of submission to the Jackson Township Municipal Utilities
Authority.
(6) Proof of submission to the Jackson Township Bureau of Fire
Prevention.
§ 244-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-26
1:695
(7) Proof of submission to the Jackson Township Environmental
Commission.
(8) Application for a floodplain encroachment permit, where required.
(9) Application for a state wetlands permit, where required.
(10) Other submittals which may be required by the Planning Board
Engineer, Planning Board or federal, state or local laws.
(11) A request for the granting of any variances, waivers or other
approvals required from the Planning Board.
(12) Payment of the required application and escrow fees.
(13) Eighteen copies of a plat and attachments meeting the
requirements set forth below. [Amended 4-23-2001 by Ord. No.
12-01]
B. Plat requirements.
(1) General requirements. All plats containing proposals or design for
drainage, streets and subdivision layouts shall be prepared by a
professional engineer licensed to practice in the State of New
Jersey and shall bear the address, signature, embossed seal and
license number of said professional engineer. The preliminary plat
shall be based on a land survey conducted not more than five years
prior to the date of application and certified to the subdivider and
shall be drawn at a scale of not less than 100 feet to the inch for
subdivisions up to 100 acres in size and not less than 200 feet to the
inch for subdivisions over 100 acres in size and shall show or be
accompanied by the information specified below. The outbound
survey shall be in New Jersey State Plane Coordinates, North
American Datum, 1983. To assure the compatibility of the survey
data and the Geographic Information System (GIS) in the course of
development in the Township, the basis of bearings for all surveys
must be stated in the New Jersey Plane Coordinate System, as
adopted by state statutes and standards. The subdivision plat must
contain a factual statement indicating the control monuments and
methodologies used to establish the bearing system. Bearings shall
be stated in degrees, minutes and seconds (as a whole integer).
Survey distances defining the property and plane coordinate values
of the description point of beginning and one other property corner
shall be stated. Property surveys must close mathematically in all
cases. Coordinated positions, bearings and distances, including the
methodology for their establishment, must meet or exceed the
published standards for Third Order, Class I accuracy. [Amended
6-8-1998 by Ord. No. 16-98]
(2) Title block. The title block shall appear on all sheets and shall
include:
§ 244-26 JACKSON CODE § 244-26
1:696
(a) Title of "Preliminary plat — Major Subdivision."
(b) Name of subdivision, if any.
(c) Tax Map sheet, block and lot number(s) of the tract to be
subdivided as shown on the latest Township Tax Map, the date
of which shall also be shown.
(d) Date of original plat and all revisions thereto.
(e) Name(s) and address(es) of the owner and subdivider, so
designated.
(f) Name(s), signature(s), address(es) and license number(s) of
the engineer and/or land surveyor who prepared the map. The
plat shall bear the embossed seal of said engineer and/or land
surveyor.
(3) A key map, at a scale of not less than one inch equals 2,000 feet,
which shall be based on a reproduction of the Tax Map sheet, or
portions thereof, and shall show the subject site with reference to
surrounding areas, existing streets, the names of all such streets
and any zone boundary or municipal boundary within 500 feet of
the property in question.
(4) The names and addresses of all owners of and property lines of
parcels within 200 feet of the site, including properties across the
street, as shown by the most recent records of the Township of
Jackson or of the municipality of which the property is a part. The
list of property owners shall also indicate the use of all parcels
within 200 feet of the subject site.
(5) A schedule shall be placed on the map indicating the acreage of the
tract, the number of lots, the zone, the minimum required lot areas,
setbacks, yards and the dimensions and percentage of open space
and recreation acreage provided.
(6) The preliminary plat shall be based on a current, certified boundary
survey as required above with sufficient lines of the adjoining tracts
surveyed to establish any overlap or gap between the adjoining
boundary lines and the boundary lines of the tract in question. The
date of the survey and the name of the person making the same
shall be shown on the map.
(7) Contours.
(a) Existing one-foot-interval contours based on National Geodetic
Vertical Datum shall be shown extending a minimum of 100
feet beyond the boundary of the tract in question and shall be
certified by a New Jersey licensed surveyor or professional
engineer as to accuracy, except that where the slopes exceed
5%, a two-foot interval may be used, and if the slopes exceed
10%, a five-foot interval is permissible. The source of elevation
§ 244-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-26
1:697
datum base shall be noted. If contours have been established
by aerial photography, a check profile shall be made on the
boundary line of the tract and certified by a New Jersey
licensed land surveyor.
(b) Ninety percent of elevations interpolated from contour lines
shall be within 1/2 the contour interval when referred to the
nearest bench mark. All spot elevations shall be to the nearest
0.1 foot and accurate to within 0.3 foot.
(c) Ninety percent of all planimetric features shown on the map
shall be within 1/40 inch of their true position, and no
planimetric features will be out of true position more than 1/20
inch at map scale when referenced to the nearest fieldestablished
station. A statement of compliance and/or a
complete statement concerning any areas of noncompliance
with this requirement shall be placed on the preliminary plat.
(8) All existing streets, watercourses, floodplains, floodways and flood
areas within the proposed subdivision and within 200 feet of the
boundaries thereof, both the width of the paving and the width of
the right-of-way of each street, existing public easement and
Township borders within 200 feet of the subdivision.
(9) All existing structures, an indication of those which are to be
destroyed or removed and the front, rear and side yard dimensions
of those to remain.
(10) The boundaries, nature, extent and acreage of wooded areas and
other important physical features, including swamps, bogs,
wetlands and ponds within the proposed subdivision and within
200 feet thereof.
(11) The layout of the proposed subdivision drawn in compliance with
the provisions of this chapter.
(12) All existing and proposed public easements or rights-of-way and
the purposes thereof, and proposed streets within the proposed
subdivision. The proposed streets shall show the right-of-way and
proposed pavement widths.
(13) The existing system of drainage of the subdivision and of any larger
tract of which it is a part, together with information on how it is
proposed to dispose of surface drainage.
(14) The acreage of the drainage area or areas of each natural or manmade
watercourse traversing the subdivision, including the area
within the subdivision and the area upstream from the subdivision.
(15) All proposed lot lines and the areas of all lots in square feet. The
areas and dimensions specified should be accurate to within minus
§ 244-26 JACKSON CODE § 244-26
1:698
-0% and plus +4%; for example, a lot line specified as 250 feet long
should not be less than 250 feet but may be as long as 260 feet.
(16) North arrow.
(17)Written and graphic scales.
(18) Preliminary utility layouts showing methods of connection and
sources of service.
(19) The proposed location and area, in acres and square feet, of all
proposed open space areas.
(20) The types and locations of all stakes, marks or flagged points, if
any, placed on the property to aid in on-site inspections. The
Planning Board may require that the marks or stakes, as a
minimum, be placed at the intersection of all lines of the tract
boundary with existing streets, at the center of all culs-de-sac, at all
internal street intersections, along street tangents at intervals not
exceeding 500 feet and at such additional locations as the Planning
Board may deem necessary. The locations indicated on the plat
shall be accurate within plus or minus 10 feet. Any traverse lines
cut out and/or marked on the site shall be shown on the plat. If such
on-site points, as above discussed, have not been established at the
time of submission of a tentative plat, the Planning Board may give
the subdivider 15 days' notice of the date of any proposed site
inspection by the Board, so the points may be set.
(21) The tentative plat shall show, on the property to be subdivided and
within 200 feet thereof, all existing paper streets, dirt roads, paved
streets, curbs, manholes, sewer lines, water and gas pipes, utility
poles, ponds, swamps and all other topographical features of a
physical or engineering nature.
(22) A preliminary on-site grading and drainage plan containing the
following shall be submitted:
(a) The preliminary plat shall show or be accompanied by a
preliminary grading and drainage plan which shall show
locations of all existing and proposed drainage swales and
channels, retention-recharge basins, the scheme of surface
drainage and other items pertinent to drainage, including the
approximate proposed grading contours at one-foot intervals,
except that if slopes exceed 5%, a two-foot interval may be
used, and if they exceed 10%, a five-foot interval is permissible.
Data shall be National Geodetic Vertical Datum, and the source
of data shall be noted.
(b) The plan shall outline the approximate area contributing to
each inlet.
§ 244-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-26
1:699
(c) All proposed drainage shall be shown with preliminary pipe
types and sizes, invert elevations, grades and direction of flow.
The direction of flow of all surface waters and all watercourses
shall be shown.
(d) The preliminary grading and drainage plan shall be
accompanied by drainage calculations made in accordance
with standards set forth in this chapter.
(23) Preliminary off-site drainage plan. The preliminary plat shall also
be accompanied by a preliminary off-site drainage plan prepared in
accordance with the following standards:
(a) The plan shall consist of an outline of the entire drainage basin
in which the property to be subdivided is located. The terminus
of the basin and existing ground contours or other basins for
determining basin limits shall be shown.
(b) Pertinent off-site existing drainage, which receives or
discharges runoff from or onto the site, shall be shown with
elevations of inverts, pipe types and sizes or other appropriate
physical data for open or nonpipe conduits.
(c) To the extent that information is available and may be obtained
from the county or municipal engineer(s), any existing plans
for drainage improvements shall be shown.
(d) In the event that a temporary drainage system is proposed,
tentative plans of that system shall be shown.
(24) Preliminary center-line profiles showing all proposed drainage; all
existing and proposed finished roadway grades; channel section
details; pipe sizes, type and inverts; road crowns and slopes; and all
other proposed drainage structures and connections shall be
shown.
(25) Boring logs. Unless the Planning Board Engineer shall determine
that fewer boring logs are required or that some or all of the boring
logs may be deferred to the final plat state, the preliminary plat
shall be accompanied by a set of boring logs and soil analyses for
borings made in accordance with the following requirements:
(a) Borings shall be spaced evenly throughout the tract.
(b) One boring not less than 15 feet below the proposed grade or
20 feet minimum depth shall be made for every five acres, or
portion thereof, of land within a tract where the seasonal high
water table is found to be six feet or more below the proposed
or existing grade at all boring locations.
(c) In addition to the above, in those areas where the seasonal
high water table is found to be six feet or less below the
existing or proposed grade, one additional boring per acre, or
§ 244-26 JACKSON CODE § 244-26
1:700
portion thereof, shall be required. If the construction of homes
with basements is contemplated, at least one boring shall be
located on each lot within the building setback lines.
(d) Boring logs shall show soil types and characteristics
encountered, groundwater depths, the methods and equipment
used, the name of the firm, if any, making the borings and the
name of the person in charge of the boring operation. The
boring logs shall also show surface elevations to the nearest
0.1 foot and shall indicate the estimated seasonal high water
table depth taking soil mottling into consideration.
(e) Based on the borings, the preliminary plat shall clearly indicate
all areas having a seasonal high water table within two feet of
the existing surface of the land, or within two feet of proposed
grade, or all areas within which two feet or more of fill is
contemplated or has previously been placed.
(26) The location, dimensions, area and disposition of any park and
recreation areas shall be shown and noted on the preliminary plat
and shall be subject to the approval of the Planning Board.
(27) If the Planning Board Engineer and/or Planning Board determines
that specimen trees located on the site may have an effect on the
proper layout of the subdivision, it may be required that the
location, caliper and type be shown on the plat for the following:
(a) Living deciduous trees having a trunk of 18 inches' diameter or
more at breast height.
(b) All living coniferous trees having a trunk of 12 inches' diameter
or more at breast height.
(c) All living flowering dogwood (Cornus florida) or American holly
(Ilex opaca) trees having a trunk of three inches' diameter or
greater at breast height.
(d) All native laurel (Kalmia latifolia) shrubs having a root crown of
three inches or greater measured at the soil or surface level.
(28) The location of proposed depressed pedestrian ramps and other
facilities for the handicapped.
(29) For an application creating seven or more new lots, an
environmental impact statement (EIS) shall be provided which
addresses the requirements set forth in § 244-189 of this chapter.
(30) A tree-save plan shall be submitted, which generally outlines the
limits of tree removal and disturbance and location of any specimen
or extraordinary trees.
(31) A traffic impact study shall be submitted which addresses the
requirements set forth in § 244-218 of this chapter.
§ 244-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-26
1:701
(32) Sectionalization and staging plans. A preliminary sectionalization
and staging plan showing the following:
(a) If the subdivision is proposed to be filed for final approval in
sections, the plan shall show each section and the anticipated
date of filing for each section. The staging of the various
sections in the subdivision shall be such that if development of
the subdivision were to be discontinued after the completion of
any section, the developed portion of the subdivision would be
provided with adequate street drainage utility systems. The
size and staging of the section in a subdivision shall be
established to promote orderly development and shall be
subject to the approval of the Planning Board.
(b) The sectionalization and staging plan shall identify, for each lot
or group of lots in the subdivision, those improvements that
will be completed prior to application for certificates of
occupancy. The plan should demonstrate that the staging of
construction will minimize adverse effects upon occupied
buildings in the subdivision and adjoining properties.
(33) The applicant shall submit such other information as the Planning
Board and/or Planning Board Engineer may require or request for
the review of the preliminary plat.
(34) It is recognized that in certain instances, the uniqueness of a
particular proposal may require the waiver of some of the
information required herein. The Planning Board may consider
and, for cause shown, may waive strict conformance with such of
these plat map details and other engineering documents as it sees
fit. Any developer desiring such action should present with his
application for development a listing of all such waivers desired,
together with the reasons therefor. It shall also be indicated on the
plat map that this plan, as some plat map details and engineering
documents are not so indicated on the plat map, will not be used for
construction purposes.
C. Conditions of approval.
(1) Any approval of an application for a preliminary plat of a major
subdivision shall be subject to the following conditions being
satisfied, within 18 months from the date of approval by the
Planning Board, prior to the signing of the plat:
(a) Ocean County Planning Board approval, if not previously
granted.
(b) Ocean County Board of Health approval, if not previously
granted.
(c) Ocean County Soil Conservation District approval, if not
previously granted.
§ 244-26 JACKSON CODE § 244-26
1:702
(d) Jackson Township Municipal Utilities Authority approval, if not
previously granted, or a letter of no interest.
(e) Jackson Township Bureau of Fire Prevention approval, if not
previously granted.
(f) Jackson Township Environmental Commission review, if not
previously received.
(g) Any other conditions which may be imposed by the Planning
Board or may be required by federal, state or local laws.
(h) Payment of the required reproduction fee, pursuant to § 244-12
of this chapter.
(i) Submission of additional prints of the plat and attachments for
distribution, if required.
(2) The Planning Board may also condition its preliminary approval
upon the applicant's providing for certain revisions or additions to
the final plat submission.
(3) An extension of the eighteen-month period within which to comply
with the conditions of approval imposed by the Board may be
granted by said Board for a period of time it determines.
D. Certification. In the event that the application for a preliminary plat of a
major subdivision is approved, a certificate to that effect shall be
endorsed as the preliminary plat.
E. Resolution of compliance. Upon approval of the preliminary plat of a
major subdivision by the municipal agency, the applicant shall submit,
to the Office of Planning and Zoning, the original Mylar and seven
paper prints, all with the stamp of approval of the Ocean County
Planning Board and the signature of the Chairman of the Ocean County
Planning Board. The Office of Planning and Zoning shall transmit the
original Mylar and the seven prints to the Township Engineer, who shall
be responsible for reviewing the plat for compliance with the resolution
of approval adopted by the municipal agency. After said review, the
Township Engineer shall retain one print, send one print to the
applicant's engineer and return five prints and the original Mylar of the
plat to the Office of Planning and Zoning for signature by all
appropriate municipal officials. Upon being signed by Township
officials, the plat shall be picked up by the applicant. The Office of
Planning and Zoning shall retain five prints of the plat for its records
and for distribution to various municipal offices.
F. Effect of preliminary approval.
(1) Preliminary approval of a major subdivision shall, except as
otherwise provided herein, confer upon the applicant the following
rights for a three-year period from the date of the preliminary
approval:
§ 244-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-26
1:703
(a) That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary
approval was granted shall not be changed, including but not
limited to use requirements; layouts and design standards for
streets, curbs and sidewalks; lot size; yard dimensions; and offtract
improvements, except that nothing herein shall be
construed to prevent the municipality from modifying by
ordinance such general terms and conditions of preliminary
approval as they relate to public health and safety.
(b) That the applicant shall submit for final approval within three
years after the date of preliminary approval or any extensions.
If no application for final approval is submitted within such
time, then the preliminary approval shall be deemed void.
[Amended 7-14-2003 by Ord. No. 18-03]
(c) That the applicant may apply for and the Planning Board may
grant extensions on such preliminary approval for additional
periods of at least one year, but not to exceed a total extension
of two years, provided that if the design standards have been
revised by ordinance, such revised standards shall govern.
(2) In the case of a subdivision for an area of 50 acres or more, the
Planning Board may grant the rights referred to in Subsection
F(1)(a), (b) and (c) above for such period of time longer than three
years as shall be determined by the Planning Board to be
reasonable, taking into consideration the number of dwelling units
and nonresidential floor area permissible under preliminary
approval, economic conditions and the comprehensiveness of the
development. The applicant may apply for thereafter and the
Planning Board may thereafter grant an extension to preliminary
approval for such additional period of time as shall be determined
by the Planning Board to be reasonable, taking into consideration
the number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area
permissible under preliminary approval, the potential number of
dwelling units and nonresidential floor area permissible under
preliminary approval, the potential number of dwelling units and
nonresidential floor area of the section or sections awaiting final
approval, economic conditions and the comprehensiveness of the
development, provided that if the design standards have been
revised by ordinance, such revised standards shall govern.
G. Improvements not to be installed. Approval of a preliminary plat shall
not confer upon the developer the right to undertake any clearing or
grading and/or to install any improvements prior to final plat approval
unless it shall be determined by the Planning Board Engineer that all of
the following have been satisfied:
(1) Such clearing, grading and/or installation of improvements would
not hinder future development or create physical or aesthetic
problems in the event that further development of the subdivision
is not undertaken.
§ 244-26 JACKSON CODE § 244-26
1:704
§ 244-27. Final plat of major subdivision.
(2) The required inspection fees shall be paid.
(3) Adequate performance guaranties have been posted to provide for
the cost to the Township of performing work that may be necessary
to protect adjacent property owners and the public interest in the
event that such clearing, grading and/or further development of the
subdivision is not undertaken. Such performance guaranties shall
include but are not limited to the cost to the Township of providing
erosion-control facilities, seeding or otherwise stabilizing the site,
drainage facilities necessary to protect off-tract areas from
flooding, screening or fencing that may be required and all
improvements to be undertaken which are within public right-ofway
or easements.
(4) Final design plans for the details required in § 244-27B(8) through
(14) and (17) shall be submitted to and approved by the Planning
Board Engineer.
A. Required documents. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of
completeness or scheduling of a final plat of a major subdivision for
public hearing before the Planning Board, the administrative officer
shall determine that the following have been submitted in proper form:
(1) Proof from the Tax Office that real estate taxes and local
assessments have been paid to date.
(2) Proof of submission to the Ocean County Planning Board.
(3) Proof of submission to the Ocean County Board of Health.
(4) Proof of submission to the Ocean County Soil Conservation District.
(5) Proof of submission to the Jackson Township Municipal Utilities
Authority.
(6) Proof of submission to the Jackson Township Bureau of Fire
Prevention.
(7) Proof of submission to the Jackson Township Environmental
Commission.
(8) Application for a floodplain encroachment permit, when required.
(9) Application for state wetlands approval, where required.
(10) Application for stream encroachment permit, where required.
(11) Other submittals that may be required by the Planning Board
Engineer, Planning Board or federal, state or local laws.
(12) Unless waived by the Planning Board, a formal request, in
appropriate statutory form, requesting that the applicable
§ 244-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-27
1:705
provisions of Title 39 of the New Jersey Revised Statutes be made
applicable to the site in order to permit police regulation of traffic
control devices prior to acceptance of streets.
(13) Payment of the required application and escrow fees.
(14) Eighteen copies of the plat and attachments meeting the
requirements set forth below. [Amended 4-23-2001 by Ord. No.
12-01]
B. Plat requirements.
(1) General requirements. A final plat shall, for all or any portion of an
approved preliminary plat, be submitted to the Planning Board
within three years of the date of approval of any preliminary plat,
including extensions thereto. In general, all requirements set forth
in this chapter for preliminary plats shall apply to final plats with
the addition of the specific additional requirements set forth
herein. [Amended 7-14-2003 by Ord. No. 18-03]
(a) A final plat shall be drawn at a scale of not less than 100 feet to
the inch, shall conform to the provisions of Chapter 141 of the
Laws of 1960 of the State of New Jersey, as amended and
supplemented,124 and shall include or be accompanied by the
information specified herein.
(b) All dimensions, both linear and angular, of the exterior
boundaries of the subdivision and all lots and all lands reserved
or dedicated for public use shall balance, and their description
shall close within a limit of error of not more than one part in
10,000.
(2) Purpose of final plat. A final plat and supporting drawings and
documents for a proposed subdivision constitute the complete and
fully detailed and documented development of the subdivision
proposal and become the basis for the construction of the
subdivision and inspection by the Township Engineer, other
officials and Planning Board. The portion of the plat intended for
filing must be recorded at the Ocean County Clerk's office to have
legal status.
(3) Title block. The title block shall appear on all sheets and shall
include:
(a) Title of "Final Plat — Major Subdivision."
(b) Name of subdivision, if any.
(c) Tax Map sheet, block and lot number(s) of the tract to be
subdivided as shown on the latest Township Tax Map, the date
of which shall also be shown.
124. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.
§ 244-27 JACKSON CODE § 244-27
1:706
(d) Date of the original plat and all revisions thereto.
(e) Name(s) and address(es) of the owner and subdivider, so
designated.
(f) Name(s), signature(s), address(es) and license number(s) of
the engineer and/or land surveyor who prepared the map. The
plat shall bear the embossed seal of said engineer and/or land
surveyor.
(4) The final plat shall be based on a monumented, current, certified
boundary survey. The date of the survey and the name of the person
making the same shall be shown on the map. If 12 months or more
have passed since the date of (or date of last recertification of) the
survey, it shall be recertified and, if necessary, brought up-to-date.
Any necessary revisions from the survey used as a base for the
preliminary plat shall be specifically noted. The outbound survey
and subdivision shall be in New Jersey State Plane Coordinates,
North American Datum, 1983. To assure the compatibility of the
survey data and the Geographic Information System (GIS) in the
course of development in the Township, the basis of bearings for all
surveys must be stated in the New Jersey Plane Coordinate System,
as adopted by state statutes and standards. The final subdivision
plat must contain a factual statement indicating the control
monuments and methodologies used to establish the bearing
system. Bearings shall be stated in degrees, minutes and seconds
(as a whole integer). Survey distances defining the property and
plane coordinate values of the description point of beginning and
one other property corner shall be stated. Property surveys must
close mathematically in all cases. Coordinated positions, bearings
and distances, including the methodology for their establishment,
must meet or exceed the published standards for Third Order, Class
I accuracy. [Amended 6-8-1998 by Ord. No. 16-98]
(5) A key map, at a scale of not less than one inch equals 2,000 feet,
which shall be based on a reproduction of the Tax Map sheet, or
portions thereof, and shall show the subject site with reference to
surrounding areas, existing streets, the names of all such streets
and any zone boundary or municipal boundary within 500 feet of
the property in question.
(6) The names and addresses of all owners of and property lines of
parcels within 200 feet of the site, including properties across the
street, as shown by the most recent records of the Township of
Jackson, or of the municipality of which the property is a part. The
list of property owners shall also include the use of all parcels
within 200 feet of the subject site.
(7) A schedule shall be placed on the map indicating the acreage of the
tract, the number of lots, the zone, the dimensions and percentage
of open space and recreation acreage provided.
§ 244-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-27
1:707
(8) All design information submissions required by the provisions of
the improvements and design standards portions of this chapter
shall accompany the final plat.
(9) A grading plan shall be submitted showing existing and proposed
grading contours at one-foot intervals throughout the tract, except
that if slopes exceed 5%, a two-foot interval may be used; if they
exceed 10%, a five-foot interval is permissible. Data shall be
National Geodetic Vertical Datum, and the source of data shall be
noted. In addition to proposed grading contours, sufficient
additional spot elevations shall be shown to clearly delineate
proposed grading, including corner elevations of buildings and first
floor and basement elevations.
(10) The limits of all areas of proposed cuts and fills, exclusive of
excavations for basements, shall be clearly designated.
(11) An on-site drainage plan containing the following shall be
submitted:
(a) The drainage plan shall be presented in graphic form which
shall clearly show the street and lot layout and those items
which are pertinent to drainage, including existing and
proposed contours as previously required.
(b) The plan shall outline each area contributing to each inlet.
(c) All proposed drainage shall be shown with pipe types and sizes,
invert and grate or rim elevations, grades and direction of flow.
The direction of flow of all surface waters and of all streams
shall be shown.
(d) The drainage plan shall be accompanied by complete drainage
calculations made in accordance with standards set forth
herein.
(12)Off-site drainage plan. The final plat shall also be accompanied by
an off-site drainage plan prepared in accordance with the following
standards:
(a) The plan shall consist of an outline of the entire drainage basin
in which the property to be subdivided is located. The terminus
of the basin and existing ground contours or other basis for
determining basin limits shall be shown.
(b) The pertinent off-site existing drainage shall be shown with
elevations of inverts and grade to the nearest 0.1 foot.
(c) To the extent that information is available and may be obtained
from the county or municipal engineer(s), any existing plans
for drainage improvements shall be shown.
§ 244-27 JACKSON CODE § 244-27
1:708
(d) In the event that a temporary drainage system is proposed, full
plans of that system shall be shown.
(e) The off-site drainage plans shall be accompanied by profiles of
all proposed drainage, showing existing and proposed finished
grades; channel section details; pipe sizes, types, inverts,
crowns and slopes; all proposed structures and connections;
and design hydraulic grade lines for all conduits designed to
carry 40 or more cubic feet per second. Cross sections at
intervals not exceeding 100 feet shall be shown for all open
channels.
(13) Center-line profiles of all proposed streets showing the following
shall be submitted:
(a) Existing and proposed finished grades and slopes.
(b) Pipe sizes, slope, type, inverts and grate or rim elevations of
drainage and sanitary sewage facilities.
(14) Where required by the Township Engineer, cross sections of
proposed streets to at least 10 feet outside of any grading limit, at
intervals of at least every 100 feet, of all proposed streets shall be
submitted.
(15) The location, caliper and type (common and botanical names) of
the following shall be shown on the plat:
(a) Living deciduous trees having a trunk of 18 inches' diameter or
more at breast height.
(b) All living coniferous trees having a trunk of 12 inches or more
diameter at breast height.
(c) All living flowering dogwood (Cornus florida) or American holly
(Ilex opaca) trees having a trunk of three inches or greater
diameter at breast height.
(d) All native laurel (Kalmia latifolia) shrubs having a root crown of
three inches or greater measured at the soil or surface level.
(16) The quantity, location, size at time of planting and species of all
proposed shade trees or other plantings shall be submitted.
(17) Plans shall be submitted showing detailed utility layouts,
specifications and cross sections (sewers, water, gas, electric,
telephone, etc.), including feasible connections to any existing or
proposed utility systems; provided, however, that detailed layouts
of gas, electric and telephone lines are not required. An indication
of these on a typical road cross section shall be sufficient. Layouts
shall include proposed locations of streetlights and fire hydrants. If
private utilities are proposed, they shall comply with all local,
county and state regulations.
§ 244-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-27
1:709
(18) Plans shall be submitted showing the tops of the banks and
boundaries of the floodways and flood hazard areas of all existing
watercourses, where such have been delineated, or the limits of
alluvial soils where the boundaries of floodways and flood hazard
areas have not been determined, and/or such other information as
may assist the Planning Board in the determination of floodway and
flood hazard area limits. In cases where all or a portion of a
subdivision is located in an unnumbered A Zone as shown on the
Flood Insurance Rate Maps of the Federal Insurance
Administration, the applicant shall undertake and submit such
studies as are necessary to determine the base flood elevation.
(19) Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, wetlands limit
lines, wetlands transition area limit lines, conservation easements
and other easements and rights-of-way, land to be reserved or
dedicated to public use, all lot lines and site easement lines, with
accurate dimensions and bearings and radii, tangents, chords, arcs
and central angles of all curves and all front, rear and side (or yard)
setback lines shall be provided on the final plat map.
(20) All monuments in accordance with Chapter 141 of the Laws of 1960
of the State of New Jersey,125 including all monuments found,
monuments set and monuments to be set and an indication of
monumentation found and reset shall be shown on the plans
submitted.
(21) Certification by the engineer and/or land surveyor preparing the
plat as to accuracy of the details of same shall be provided.
(22) Lot and block numbers shown on the final plat shall conform to the
Township Tax Map, or proposed revisions thereof, and shall be
obtained by the applicant's engineer from the Tax Map
Maintenance Engineer. Proposed house numbers shall also be
obtained from the Tax Map Maintenance Engineer, and shall be
shown encircled on the final plat, or one of the attachments
thereto. The Township Engineer shall not affix his signature to the
final plat unless the applicant has fully complied in this regard.
(23) Subdivision names and street names shown on the final plat shall
not be the same or similar to any name of any existing subdivision
or street in the Township of Jackson and shall be approved by the
Township Engineer.
(24) The plans submitted shall show the locations of areas dedicated for
park and recreation facilities or open space as approved by the
Planning Board.
(25) Unless waived by the Planning Board, a detailed plan setting forth
the type and location of all traffic control and regulatory devices
shall be provided. This plan shall have been approved by or, in the
125. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.
§ 244-27 JACKSON CODE § 244-27
1:710
opinion of the Township Engineer, be likely to be approved by,
the New Jersey Department of Transportation. This plan shall be
prepared in consultation with the Township Engineer and the
Jackson Township Police Department and shall provide for all
appropriate traffic control measures necessary for the health,
safety, convenience and well-being of those occupying or likely
to occupy the subdivision between final approval and final
acceptance.
(26) Sectionalization of final plats shall be in conformance with the
sectionalization and staging plan, if any, approved with the
preliminary plat.
(27) The applicant shall submit such other information as the Planning
Board and/or Planning Board Engineer may require or request for
review of the final plat.
(28) All plats submitted to the Planning Board for final approval shall
comply with the provisions of the Map Filing Law (N.J.S.A.
46:23-9.9 et seq.) and shall not contain more than 100 lots.
Simultaneous consideration of approval of multiple final sections,
each containing not more than 100 lots, may be entertained by the
Board.
C. Conditions of approval.
(1) Any approval of an application for a final plat of a major subdivision
shall be subject to the following conditions being satisfied, within
18 months from the date of approval by the Planning Board, prior
to the signing of the plat and issuance of a development permit:
(a) Ocean County Planning Board final approval, if not previously
granted.
(b) Ocean County Board of Health final approval, if not previously
granted.
(c) Ocean County Soil Conservation District final approval, if not
previously granted.
(d) Jackson Township Municipal Utilities Authority final approval,
if not previously granted, or a letter of no interest.
(e) Jackson Township Bureau of Fire Prevention final approval, if
not previously granted.
(f) Jackson Township Environmental Commission review, if not
previously received.
(g) Granting of a state wetlands permit, if required.
(h) Granting of a floodplain permit, if required.
§ 244-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-27
1:711
(i) Certification of approval of plans for drainage or watercourse
diversions by the State of New Jersey, Department of
Environmental Protection, where required.
(j) Granting of drainage and/or access permits by the New Jersey
Department of Transportation, where required.
(k) Granting of any required construction permits.
(l) Posting of required performance guaranties. In the event that
the development does not propose the construction of a new
roadway, the Planning Board may, upon favorable
recommendations of the Township Engineer, permit the
installation and approval of improvements in lieu of the posting
of performance guaranties for the installation of any
improvements required by the Planning Board.
(m) Payment of the required inspection fees, pursuant to § 244-12
of this chapter.
(n) Evidence of comprehensive general liability insurance policy in
an amount not less than $300,000 per occurrence, identifying
and saving harmless the Township of Jackson and its agencies,
employees and agents from any liability for any acts of the
subdivider or his agents, contractors or employees in the
implementing of the approved subdivision. The insurance
policy shall provide for 30 days' notice to the Township prior to
cancellation. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any
property owner, subdivider or builder to carry on the
construction of a subdivision without having current valid
evidence of insurance on file.
(o) Submission of an agreement from the applicant authorizing
proposed roadways to be governed by state statute, Title 39,
Subtitle 1.
(p) Any other conditions which may be imposed by the Planning
Board or may be required by federal, state or local laws.
(q) Payment of the required reproduction fee, pursuant to § 244-12
of this chapter.
(r) Payment of the required tax map maintenance fee, pursuant to
§ 244-12 of this chapter.
(s) Submission of additional prints of the plat map and
attachments for distribution, if required.
(2) An extension of the eighteen-month period within which to comply
with the conditions of approval imposed by the Board may be
granted by said Board for a period of time it determines.
§ 244-27 JACKSON CODE § 244-27
1:712
D. Certification. In the event that the application for a final plat of a major
subdivision is approved, a certification shall appear on the plat that said
plat is in compliance with the Map Filing Law.126
E. Resolution compliance. Upon approval of the final plat of a major
subdivision by the municipal agency, the applicant shall submit to the
Office of Planning and Zoning seven sets of prints of final design plans,
the original Mylar and seven paper prints, all with the stamp of
approval of the Ocean County Planning Board and the signature of the
Chairman of the Ocean County Planning Board. The Office of Planning
and Zoning shall transmit the original Mylar and the seven prints of the
plat and design plans to the Township Engineer, who shall be
responsible for reviewing the plans for compliance with the resolution
of approval adopted by the municipal agency. After said review, the
Township Engineer shall retain one print of the plat and design plans,
send one print of the plat and design plans to the applicant's engineer
and return five prints of the plat and design plans and the original
Mylar of the plat to the Office of Planning and Zoning for signature by
all appropriate municipal officials. Upon being signed by Township
officials, the original Mylar of the plat shall be picked up by the
applicant. The Office of Planning and Zoning shall retain five prints of
the plat and design plans for its records and for distribution to various
municipal offices.
F. Filing of approved plat. If the applicant desires to proceed with a
subdivision for which final approval has been granted, the applicant
shall file with the Ocean County Recording Officer a plat map drawn in
compliance with Chapter 141 of the Laws of 1960, as amended and
supplemented, within 95 days from the date upon which the plat was
signed by the Planning Board Chairman and Secretary or Assistant
Secretary. In the event that the subdivider fails to so file within the
period allowed, the approval of the plat shall expire unless, prior to
expiration, such time is extended by the Planning Board, for good cause
shown, for a period not to exceed 95 days.
G. Effect of final approval.
(1) The zoning requirements applicable to the preliminary approval
first granted and all other rights conferred upon the developer at
preliminary approval, whether conditionally or otherwise, shall not
be changed for a period of two years after the date of final
approval, provided that, in the case of a major subdivision, the
rights conferred by this chapter shall expire if the plat has not been
duly recorded within the required time period. If the developer has
followed the standards prescribed for final approval and has duly
recorded the major subdivision plat, the Planning Board may
extend such period of protection for extensions of one year, but not
to exceed three extensions. Notwithstanding any other provisions
of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., the granting of final approval
126. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.
§ 244-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-27
1:713
§ 244-28. Minor site plans.
terminates the time period of the rights conferred by preliminary
approval for the section granted final approval.
(2) In the case of a subdivision for a planned unit development; a
planned unit residential development; a residential cluster of 50
acres or more; or a conventional subdivision for 150 acres or more,
the Planning Board may grant rights for such period of time longer
than two years as shall be determined by the Planning Board to be
reasonable, taking into consideration the number of dwelling units
and nonresidential floor area permissible under final approval,
economic conditions and the comprehensiveness of the
development. The developer may apply for thereafter and the
Planning Board may thereafter grant an extension of final approval
for such additional period of time as shall be determined by the
Planning Board to be reasonable, taking into consideration the
number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area permissible
under final approval, the number of dwelling units and
nonresidential floor area remaining to be developed, economic
conditions and the comprehensiveness of the development.
(3) Any application for renewal or extension of final approval shall be
acted on by the municipal agency at a hearing. At such hearing, the
applicant shall have the burden of coming forward with reasons
why the final approval shall be extended for the requested period of
time.
A. Required documents. Prior to issuance of a certificate of completeness,
the administrative officer shall determine that the following have been
submitted in proper form:
(1) Proof from the Tax Office that real estate taxes and local
assessments have been paid to date.
(2) Proof of submission to the Ocean County Planning Board.
(3) Proof of submission to the Ocean County Board of Health.
(4) Proof of submission to the Ocean County Soil Conservation District.
(5) Proof of submission to the Jackson Township Municipal Utilities
Authority.
(6) Proof of submission to the Jackson Township Bureau of Fire
Prevention.
(7) Proof of submission to the Jackson Township Environmental
Commission.
(8) Application for a floodplain encroachment permit, where required.
(9) Application for a state wetlands permit, where required.
§ 244-27 JACKSON CODE § 244-28
1:714
(10) Other submittals that may be required by the Planning Board or
Planning Board Engineer or federal, state or local laws.
(11) A request for the granting of any variances, waivers or other
approvals required from the Planning Board.
(12) Payment of the required application and escrow fees.
(13) Eighteen copies of the plat and attachments meeting the
requirements set forth below. [Amended 4-23-2001 by Ord. No.
12-01]
B. Plat requirements.
(1) General requirements.
(a) Any minor site plan presented to the Planning Board for its
approval shall be drawn, signed and appropriately sealed by an
architect, professional engineer, land surveyor and/or
professional planner licensed to practice in the State of New
Jersey.
(b) Site plans shall not be drawn at a scale smaller than one inch
equals 50 feet or larger than one inch equals 10 feet.
(c) The minor site plan shall be based on a monumented, current,
certified boundary survey. The date of the survey and the name
of the person making same shall be shown on the map. If 12
months or more have passed since the date of (or date of last
recertification of) the survey, it shall be recertified and, if
necessary, brought up-to-date. The outbound survey shall be in
New Jersey State Plane Coordinates, North American Datum,
1983. To assure the compatibility of the survey data and the
Geographic Information System (GIS) in the course of
development in the Township, the basis of bearings for all
surveys must be stated in the New Jersey Plane Coordinate
System, as adopted by state statutes and standards. The minor
site plan must contain a factual statement indicating the
control monuments and methodologies used to establish the
bearing system. Bearings shall be stated in degrees, minutes
and seconds (as a whole integer). Survey distances defining the
property and plane coordinate values of the description point
of beginning and one other property corner shall be stated.
Property surveys must close mathematically in all cases.
Coordinated positions, bearings and distances, including the
methodology for their establishment, must meet or exceed the
published standards for Third Order, Class I accuracy.
[Amended 6-8-1998 by Ord. No. 16-98]
(2) Title block.
(a) The title block shall appear on all sheets and shall include:
§ 244-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-28
1:715
[1] Title of "Minor Site Plan."
[2] Name of the development, if any.
[3] Tax Map sheet, block and lot number(s) of the site, as
shown on the latest Township Tax Map, the date of which
shall also be shown.
[4] Date of the original plan and all revisions thereto.
[5] Names and addresses of owner and developer, so
designated.
[6] Name(s), signature(s), address(es) and license number(s)
of the engineer, architect, land surveyor or planner who
prepared the plan and his/their embossed seal(s).
(b) If the site plan contains more than one sheet, each sheet shall
be numbered and titled.
(3) A schedule shall be placed on the site plan indicating:
(a) The acreage of the tract and site (the portion of the tract
involved in the site plan) to the nearest hundredth.
(b) The floor area of the existing and proposed building, listed
separately.
(c) The proposed use or uses and the floor area devoted to each
use.
(d) The zone in which the site is located.
(e) Proposed and required lot dimensions and front, rear and side
setbacks.
(f) Proposed and required off-street parking spaces.
(g) Square footage and percentage of the site retained in
unoccupied open space.
(4) A key map, at a scale of not less than one inch equals 2,000 feet,
which shall be based on a reproduction of the Tax Map sheet, or
portion thereof, and shall show the subject site with reference to
surrounding areas, existing streets, the names of all such streets
and any zone boundary or municipal boundary within 500 feet of
the property-in-question.
(5) The names and addresses of all owners of and property lines of
parcels within 200 feet of the site, including properties across the
street, as shown by the most recent records of the Township of
Jackson, or of the municipality of which the property is a part. The
list of property owners shall also indicate the use of parcels within
200 feet of the subject site.
§ 244-28 JACKSON CODE § 244-28
1:716
(6) North arrow.
(7) Written and graphic scales.
(8) Sufficient spot elevations (National Geodetic Survey Datum) and/or
contour lines to indicate the proposed system of surface drainage
and the relationship of proposed grading to the land surrounding
the site.
(9) The tops of the banks and boundaries of the floodways and flood
hazard areas of all existing watercourses, where such have been
delineated, or the limits of alluvial soils where the boundaries of
floodways and flood hazard areas have not been determined, and/or
such other information as may assist the Planning Board in the
determination of floodway and flood hazard area limits.
(10) Paving and right-of-way widths of existing streets within 200 feet of
the site.
(11) The boundary, nature and extent of wooded areas, swamps, bogs,
wetlands and ponds within the site and within 200 feet thereof.
(12) All existing structures on the site and within 200 feet, including the
use thereof, indicating those to be destroyed or removed and those
to remain.
(13) Location, use, finished grade level, ground coverage, first floor and
basement elevations, front, rear and side setbacks of all buildings
and other pertinent improvements.
(14) All existing and proposed public easements or rights-of-way and
the purposes thereof.
(15) The capacity of off-street parking areas and the location and
dimensions of all access drives, aisles and parking stalls.
(16) The location and size of proposed loading docks.
(17) Location of curbs and sidewalks.
(18) Cross sections showing the composition of pavement areas, curbs
and sidewalks.
(19) Exterior lighting plan, including the location and drawn details of
all outdoor lighting standards and fixtures and a notation on the
plat indicating conformance or nonconformance with the minimum
design standards set forth in this chapter.
(20) Landscaping and screening plan showing the location, type
(common and botanical names), spacing and number of each type
of tree or shrub and the location, type (common and botanical
names) and amount of each type of ground cover to be utilized.
§ 244-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-28
1:717
(21) Location of signs and drawn details showing the size, nature of
construction, height and content of all signs.
(22) Drawn details of the type of screening to be utilized for refuse
storage areas, outdoor equipment and bulk storage areas.
(23) Floor plans and building elevation drawings of any proposed
structure or structures or existing structures to be renovated.
(24)Written description of the proposed operations in sufficient detail
to indicate the effects of the use in producing traffic congestion,
noise, glare, air pollution, fire hazards or safety hazards. The
written description of the use, the number of shifts to be worked,
the number of employees in each shift, the number of vehicles to be
stored or parked on the site and provisions to be made for site
maintenance.
(25) A tree-save plan shall be submitted, which generally outlines the
limits of tree removal and disturbance and the location of any
specimen or extraordinary trees.
(26) Such other information as the Planning Board and/or Planning
Board Engineer may require or request during site plan review.
C. Conditions of approval. Any approval of an application for development
for a minor site plan granted by the Planning Board shall be subject to
the following conditions being satisfied, within 18 months from the date
of approval by the Planning Board, prior to the signing of the site plan
and issuance of a development permit:
(1) Installation and approval of, or posting of performance guaranties
for the installation of, those improvements which are necessary to
protect adjacent property and the public interest in the event that
development of the site was not completed.
(2) Ocean County Planning Board approval, if not previously granted.
(3) Ocean County Board of Health approval, if not previously granted.
(4) Ocean County Soil Conservation District approval, if not previously
granted.
(5) Jackson Township Municipal Utilities Authority approval, if not
previously granted, or a letter of no interest.
(6) Jackson Township Bureau of Fire Prevention approval, if not
previously granted.
(7) Jackson Township Environmental Commission review, if not
previously received.
(8) Granting of a state wetlands permit, if required.
(9) Granting of a floodplain permit, if required.
§ 244-28 JACKSON CODE § 244-28
1:718
(10) Certification of approval of plans for drainage or watercourse
diversion by the State of New Jersey, Department of Environmental
Protection, where required.
(11) Granting of drainage and/or access permits by the New Jersey
Department of Transportation, where required.
(12) Approval of any required riparian grants or licenses.
(13) Granting of any required construction permits.
(14) Posting of the required performance guaranties for the installation
of any improvements required by the Planning Board.
(15) Payment of the required inspection fees, pursuant to § 244-12 of
this chapter.
(16) Filing of an appropriate instrument with the Ocean County Clerk
consolidating the lots constituting the site, if required.
(17) Any other conditions which may be imposed by the Planning Board
or which may be required by federal, state or local laws.
(18) Payment of the required reproduction fee, pursuant to § 244-12 of
this chapter.
(19) Submission of additional prints of the site plan and attachments for
distribution, if required.
(20) Payment of the required tax map maintenance fee, pursuant to
§ 244-12 of this chapter.
D. Extension. An extension of the eighteen-month period within which to
comply with the conditions of approval imposed by the Board may be
granted by said Board for a period of time it determines.
E. Certification. In the event that the application for development for a
minor site plan is approved, an appropriate certification shall be
endorsed on the site plan, and the original reproducible thereof shall be
provided to the Planning Board by the applicant.
F. Resolution compliance. Upon approval of a minor site plan by the
municipal agency, the applicant shall submit to the Planning and Zoning
Office the original Mylar and seven sets of prints of the site plan and all
related plans. The Planning and Zoning Office shall transmit the
original Mylar and the seven sets of prints to the Township Engineer,
who shall be responsible for reviewing the plans for compliance with
the resolution of approval adopted by the municipal agency. After said
review, the Township Engineer shall retain one set of plans, send one
set to the applicant's engineer and return five sets and the original
Mylar of the site plan to the Planning and Zoning Office for signature by
all appropriate municipal officials. Upon being signed by Township
officials, the original Mylar shall be picked up by the applicant. The
§ 244-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-28
1:719
§ 244-29. General development plan. [Added 3-27-2006 by Ord. No.
07-06]
Planning and Zoning Office shall retain five sets of prints of the site
plan and all related plans for its records and for distribution to various
municipal offices.
G. Effect of approval. The approval of a minor site plan shall be considered
final approval and shall expire two years after the date of approval if a
building permit or, where a building permit is not required, a certificate
of occupancy has not been obtained.
A. Purpose and applicability.
(1) The purpose of this section is to permit and encourage the
submission of conceptual general development plans that present a
comprehensive plan for a proposed development. The general
development plan is intended to prompt a holistic approach to site
planning.
(2) A developer of a parcel or parcels of land totaling more than 100
acres in size, for which the developer is seeking approval of a
planned development, may submit a general development plan to
the Planning Board prior to the granting of preliminary approval of
the development by the Planning Board.
(3) The general development plan shall set forth the permitted number
of dwelling units and the residential density and the amount of
nonresidential floor space for the proposed development in its
entirety according to a schedule which sets forth the timing of the
various sections of the development. The planned development
shall be developed in accordance with the general development
plan approved by the Planning Board notwithstanding any
provision of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.) or any
ordinance or regulation adopted pursuant thereto after the
effective date of the approval.
(4) The general development plan shall be designed to promote and
encourage the conservation of natural features and the efficient
use of resources in subdivision and site design while remaining
responsive to market demands for residential and nonresidential
development. To the extent possible, a general development plan
should be designed to reduce infrastructure and service costs over
the long term and to provide a pedestrian-friendly environment.
B. Required submission items. The general development submission shall
include the following:
(1) A general land use plan indicating the tract area and general
location of land uses to be included in the planned development at a
scale not smaller than one inch equals 200 feet. The total number
of proposed dwelling units and the amount of nonresidential floor
§ 244-28 JACKSON CODE § 244-29
1:720
area to be provided and the proposed land area to be devoted to
residential and nonresidential uses shall be set forth.
(2) The proposed types of nonresidential uses to be included in the
planned development shall be set forth, and the land area to be
occupied by each use shall be estimated, including the area to be
devoted to parking for the proposed uses.
(3) A circulation plan showing the general location and types of
transportation facilities, including facilities for pedestrian access,
within the planned development and any proposed improvements
to the existing transportation system outside the planned
development.
(4) An open space plan showing the proposed land area and general
location of parks and any other land areas to be set aside for
conservation and recreational purposes and a general description
of improvements proposed to be made thereon, including a plan for
the operation and maintenance of parks and recreational lands.
The open space plan should include a calculation of the total area
that will be available for public or semipublic use, as well as the
anticipated percentage of impervious surface.
(a) The open space plan shall provide a minimum of 25% of the
gross site area as open space. The recreation plan shall be
shown with the open space plan and consistent with the
requirements of § 244-200. The recreation area shall be
centrally located.
(b) The open space plan shall include a minimum buffer of 50 feet
to county roadways and a minimum of 50 feet to adjacent
residential development existing as of the effective date of this
section.
(c) The open space plan should be designed to create linkages
between open lands and provide pedestrian access a minimum
of 100 feet in width to open space areas.
(5) A utility plan indicating the need for and showing the proposed
location of sewer and water lines and information regarding the
available capacity for utility facilities. Additionally, proposed
methods for handling solid waste disposal and a plan for the
operation and maintenance of proposed utilities shall be included.
If a homeowners' association is anticipated, a draft of the HOA
documents shall be submitted.
(6) A stormwater management plan setting forth the proposed method
of controlling and managing stormwater on the site, including lowimpact
development and bioremediation techniques.
(7) An environmental inventory, including a general description of the
vegetation, soils, topography, geology, surface hydrology, climate
§ 244-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-29
1:721
and cultural resources of the site, existing man-made structures
or features and the probable impact of the development on the
environmental attributes of the site.
(a) A natural resources inventory should be provided in a plan
format that clearly delineates the following: topography at twofoot
intervals, slopes in excess of 15%, soil types, streams,
wetlands, wetland and uplands buffers, identification of trees,
including species and size, and analysis of the quality of the
wooded areas. The applicant should provide a descriptive
explanation of how the proposed plan responds to the natural
features of the site, providing evidence that the plan has been
arranged with consideration for the protection and
enhancement of the site's natural attributes.
(8) A community facility plan indicating the scope and type of
supporting community facilities which may include but not be
limited to educational or cultural facilities, historic sites, libraries,
hospitals, firehouses and police stations.
(9) A housing plan outlining the number and type of housing units to be
provided and the manner in which any affordable housing
obligation will be fulfilled by the development.
(10) A local service plan indicating those public services which the
applicant proposes to provide and which may include but not be
limited to water, sewer, cable and solid waste disposal.
(11) A fiscal report describing the anticipated demand on municipal
services to be generated by the planned development and any other
financial impacts to be faced by the municipality or the school
districts as a result of the completion of the planned development.
The fiscal impact report shall also include a detailed projection of
property tax revenues which will accrue to the county, municipality
and school district according to the timing schedule provided.
(12) A proposed timing schedule for the phasing of the project if it is
anticipated that the development will be completed over a number
of years, including any terms or conditions which are intended to
protect the interests of the public and of the residents who occupy
any section of the planned development prior to the completion of
the development in its entirety.127
C. Required findings by the Planning Board. Prior to approval of a general
development plan, the Planning Board shall make the following facts
and conclusions:
127. Editor's Note: Original § 109-30B(13) of the 1972 Code, which required submission of a
municipal development agreement, which immediately followed this subsection, was
repealed 2-8-2011 by Ord. No. 07-11.
§ 244-29 JACKSON CODE § 244-29
1:722
(1) That departures by the proposed development from zoning
regulations otherwise applicable to the subject property conform to
the zoning ordinance standards that may be specific to a planned
development or overlay zone ordinance.
(2) That proposals for maintenance and conservation of the common
open space are reliable, and that the amount, location and purpose
of the common open space are adequate.
(3) That provisions through the physical design of the proposed
development for public services, control over vehicular and
pedestrian traffic and the amenities of light and air, recreation and
visual enjoyment are adequate.
(4) That the proposed planned development will not have an
unreasonably adverse impact upon the area in which it is proposed
to be established.
(5) In the case of a proposed development, which contemplates
construction over a period of years, the terms and conditions
intended to protect the interest of the public and of the residents,
occupants and owners of the proposed development in the total
completion of the development are adequate.
(6) That the proposal is responsive to the natural features of the site
and is designed in a manner that preserves valuable site
characteristics identified in the environmental inventory.
(7) That the proposal advances the principles of smart growth by
providing opportunities for vehicular and pedestrian
interconnectivity where feasible, by incorporating affordable
housing units within the development when deemed appropriate by
the Planning Board or in the Housing Element of the Master Plan,
by encouraging the use of conservation or cluster design when
practicable and by safeguarding the character of existing stable
neighborhoods.
D. Approval process and duration.
(1) The Planning Board shall grant or deny general development plan
approval within 95 days after submission of a complete application
to the administrative officer or within such further time as may be
consented to by the applicant.
(2) A general development plan approval shall, as a condition of such
approval, require a municipal development agreement, which shall
mean a written agreement between the Township of Jackson and
the developer, in a form previously approved by the appropriate
land use board relating to the development. [Added 2-8-2011 by
Ord. No. 07-11]
§ 244-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-29
1:723
(3) The term of the effect of the general development plan approval
shall be determined by the Planning Board using the guidelines set
forth below, except that the term of the approval shall not exceed
20 years from the day upon which the developer receives final
approval of the first section of the planned development. In making
its determination regarding the duration of the approval of the
development plan, the Planning Board shall consider the following:
(a) The number of dwelling units or amount of nonresidential floor
area to be constructed.
(b) Prevailing economic conditions.
(c) The timing schedule to be followed and likelihood of its
fulfillment.
(d) The developer's capability of completing the development.
(e) The contents of the general development plan and any
conditions which the Planning Board attaches thereto.
(4) In the event that the developer seeks to modify the proposed timing
schedule, such modification shall require the approval of the
Planning Board. The Planning Board shall, in deciding whether or
not to grant approval of the modification, take into consideration
prevailing market and economic conditions, anticipated actual
needs for residential units and nonresidential space within the
Township and the region and the availability and capacity of public
facilities to accommodate the proposed development.
(5) Except as provided hereunder, once a general development plan
has been approved by the Planning Board, it may be amended or
revised only upon application by the developer and approval of the
Planning Board. The exceptions are listed below.
(a) If a variation in land uses or increase in density or floor area
ratio is proposed in response to a negative decision of, or a
condition of development approval imposed by the Pinelands
Commission or the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, and there is a valid environmental reason for such
decision, the variation shall be approved by the Planning Board
if the developer can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
Planning Board that the variation being proposed is a direct
result of a determination by the Pinelands Commission or the
Department of Environmental Protection.
(b) Planning Board approval is not required if the developer seeks
to reduce the number of residential dwellings or reduce the
amount of nonresidential floor space by no more than 15%
without otherwise violating the terms and conditions of the
general development plan approval.
§ 244-29 JACKSON CODE § 244-29
1:724
§ 244-30. Preliminary plat of major site plan.
E. Completion, failure to apply and termination of approval.
(1) In the event that a developer who has general development plan
approval does not apply for preliminary approval for the planned
development which is the subject of that general development plan
approval within five years of the date upon which the general
development plan has been approved by the Planning Board, the
municipality shall have cause to terminate the approval.
(2) If a developer does not complete any section of the development
within eight months of the date provided for in the approved plan,
or if at any time the municipality has cause to believe that the
developer is not fulfilling his obligations pursuant to the approved
plan, the Township shall notify the developer by certified mail, and
the developer shall have 10 days within which to give evidence that
he is fulfilling his obligation pursuant to the plan. The Township
thereafter shall conduct a hearing to determine whether or not the
developer is in violation of the approved plan. If, after such hearing,
the Township finds good cause to terminate the approval, it shall
provide written notice of same to the developer and the approval
shall be terminated 30 days thereafter.
(3) In the event that a development which is the subject of a general
development plan is completed before the end of the term of the
approval, the approval shall terminate with the completion of the
development.
A. Required documents. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of
completeness or scheduling of a preliminary plat of a major site plan for
public hearing before the Planning Board, the administrative officer
shall determine that the following have been submitted in proper form:
(1) Proof from the Tax Office that real estate taxes and local
assessments have been paid to date.
(2) Proof of submission to the Ocean County Planning Board.
(3) Proof of submission to the Ocean County Board of Health.
(4) Proof of submission to the Ocean County Soil Conservation District.
(5) Proof of submission to the Jackson Township Municipal Utilities
Authority.
(6) Proof of submission to the Jackson Township Bureau of Fire
Prevention.
(7) Proof of submission to the Jackson Township Environmental
Commission.
(8) Application for a floodplain encroachment permit, where required.
§ 244-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-30
1:725
(9) Application for a state wetlands permit, where required.
(10) Other submittals which may be required by the Planning Board
Engineer, Planning Board or federal, state or local laws.
(11) A request for the granting of any variances, waivers or other
approvals required from the Planning Board.
(12) Payment of the required application and escrow fees.
(13) Eighteen copies of a plat and attachments meeting the
requirements set forth below. [Amended 4-23-2001 by Ord. No.
12-01]
B. Plat requirements.
(1) General requirements.
(a) Any preliminary plat of a major site plan presented to the
Planning Board for its approval shall be signed and
appropriately sealed by an architect, professional engineer,
land surveyor and/or professional planner licensed to practice
in the State of New Jersey; provided, however, that sanitary
sewer, water distribution and storm drainage plans and water
and sewerage treatment plans may only be signed and sealed
by a licensed professional engineer.
(b) Site plans shall not be drawn at a scale smaller than one inch
equals 50 feet nor larger than one inch equals 10 feet. If the
size of the site would require the use of sheets larger than 30
inches by 42 inches in order to show the entire site on one
sheet, the detailed information for the site plan shall be shown
in sections on sheets not larger than 30 inches by 42 inches,
which sheets shall be keyed to an overall plat of the site drawn
at a scale of not less than one inch equals 200 feet. The site
plan shall be based on a monumented, current certified
boundary survey. The outbound survey shall be in New Jersey
State Plane Coordinates, North American Datum, 1983. To
assure the compatibility of the survey data and the Geographic
Information System (GIS) in the course of development in the
Township, the basis of bearings for all surveys must be stated
in the New Jersey Plane Coordinate System, as adopted by
state statutes and standards. The site plan drawing must
contain a factual statement indicating the control monuments
and methodologies used to establish the bearing system.
Bearings shall be stated in degrees, minutes and seconds (as a
whole integer). Survey distances defining the property and
plane coordinate values of the description point of beginning
and one other property corner shall be stated. Property
surveys must close mathematically in all cases. Coordinated
positions, bearings and distances, including the methodology
for their establishment, must meet or exceed the published
§ 244-30 JACKSON CODE § 244-30
1:726
standards for Third Order, Class I accuracy. The date of the
survey and the name of the person making same shall be
shown on the map. If 12 months or more have passed since
the date of (or date of last recertification of) the survey, it shall
be recertified and, if necessary, brought up-to-date. [Amended
6-8-1998 by Ord. No. 16-98]
(2) Title block.
(a) The title block shall appear on all sheets and shall include:
[1] Title of "Preliminary plat — Major Site Plan."
[2] Name of the development, if any.
[3] Tax Map sheet, block and lot number(s) of the site, as
shown on the latest Township Tax Map, the date of which
should also be shown.
[4] Date of the original plan and all revisions thereto.
[5] Name(s) and address(es) of owner and developer, so
designated.
[6] Name(s) and signature(s), address(es) and license
number(s) of the engineer, architect, land surveyor or
planner who prepared the plan. The plat shall bear the
embossed seal of said professional.
(b) If the site plan contains more than one sheet, each sheet shall
be numbered and titled.
(3) A schedule shall be placed on the site plan indicating:
(a) The acreage of the tract and site (the portion of the tract
involved in the site plan).
(b) The floor area of the existing and proposed buildings, listed
separately.
(c) The proposed use or uses and the floor area devoted to each
use.
(d) The zoning district within which the site is located.
(e) Proposed and required lot dimensions and front, rear and side
yard setbacks.
(f) Proposed and required off-street parking spaces.
(g) Acreage, square footage and percentage of the site retained in
unoccupied open space.
(4) A key map, at a scale of not less than one inch equals 2,000 feet,
which shall be based on a reproduction of the Tax Map sheet, or
§ 244-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-30
1:727
portions thereof, and shall show the subject site with reference to
surrounding areas, existing streets, the names of all such streets
and any zone boundary or municipal boundary within 500 feet of
the property-in-question.
(5) The names and addresses of all owners of and property lines of
parcels within 200 feet of the site, including properties across the
street, as shown by the most recent records of the Township of
Jackson, or of the municipality of which the property is a part. The
list of property owners shall also indicate the use of all parcels
within 200 feet of the subject site.
(6) North arrow.
(7) Written and graphic scales.
(8) The tops of the banks and boundaries of the floodways and flood
hazard areas of all existing watercourses, where such have been
delineated, or the limits of alluvial soils where the boundaries of
floodways and flood hazard areas have not been determined, and/or
such other information as may assist the Planning Board in the
determination of floodway and flood hazard area limits. In cases
where all or a portion of a site is located in an unnumbered A Zone
as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps of the Federal
Insurance Administration, the applicant shall undertake and submit
such studies as are necessary to determine the base flood
elevations.
(9) Pavement and right-of-way widths of existing streets within 200
feet of the site.
(10) The boundary, nature and extent of wooded areas, swamps, bogs,
wetlands and ponds within the site and within 200 feet thereof.
(11) Existing and proposed manholes, sewer lines, fire hydrants,
waterlines, utility poles and all other topographical features of a
physical or engineering nature within the site and within 200 feet
thereof.
(12) All existing structures on the site and within 200 feet thereof,
including their use, indicating those to be destroyed or removed
and those to remain.
(13) Location, use, finished grade level, ground coverage, first floor and
basement elevations, front, rear and side yard setbacks of all
existing buildings and other pertinent improvements.
(14) All existing and proposed public easements or rights-of-way and
the purposes thereof. The limits of wetlands areas, wetlands
transition areas and conservation easements shall be shown.
(15) A grading plan showing existing and proposed grading contours at
one-foot intervals throughout the tract, except that if slopes exceed
§ 244-30 JACKSON CODE § 244-30
1:728
5%, a two-foot interval may be used, and if they exceed 10%, a
five-foot interval is permissible. Data shall be National Geodetic
Vertical Datum, and the source of data shall be noted. In addition
to proposed grading contours, sufficient additional spot elevations
shall be shown to clearly delineate proposed grading.
(16) On-site drainage plan.
(a) The drainage plan shall be presented in graphic form, which
shall clearly show the street and lot layout and those items
which are pertinent to drainage, including existing and
proposed contours as previously required.
(b) The plan shall outline each area contributing to each inlet.
(c) All proposed drainage shall be shown with pipe type and sizes,
invert and grate or rim elevations, grades and direction of flow.
The direction of flow of all surface waters and of all streams
shall be shown.
(d) The drainage plan shall be accompanied by complete drainage
calculations made in accordance with the standards set forth in
this chapter.
(17)Off-site drainage plan. The plat shall also be accompanied by an offsite
drainage plan prepared in accordance with the following
standards:
(a) The plan shall consist of an outline of the entire drainage basin
in which the site is located. The terminus of the basin and
existing ground contours or other basins for determining basin
limits shall be shown.
(b) The pertinent off-site existing drainage shall be shown with
elevations of inverts and grade to the nearest 0.1 foot.
(c) To the extent that information is available and may be obtained
from the county or municipal engineer(s), any existing plans
for drainage improvements shall be shown.
(d) In the event that a temporary drainage system is proposed, full
plans of that system shall be shown.
(e) The off-site drainage plans shall be accomplished by profiles of
all proposed drainage, showing existing details; pipe sizes;
types, inverts and crowns and slopes; all proposed structures
and connections; and design hydraulic grade lines for all
conduits designed to carry 40 or more cubic feet per second.
Cross sections at intervals not exceeding 100 feet shall be
shown for all open channels.
§ 244-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-30
1:729
(18) When required by the Planning Board Engineer, center line profiles
of streets bordering the site, internal roadways and major
circulation aisles showing:
(a) Existing and proposed final grades and slopes.
(b) Pipe sizes, slope, type, inverts and grate or rim elevations of
drainage and sanitary sewerage facilities.
(19) Boring logs. Unless the Planning Board Engineer shall determine
that fewer boring logs are required or that some or all of the boring
logs may be deferred to the final plat stage, the preliminary plat
shall be accompanied by a set of boring logs and soil analyses for
borings made in accordance with the following requirements:
(a) Borings shall be spaced evenly throughout the tract.
(b) One boring not less than 15 feet below the proposed grade or
20 feet minimum depth shall be made for every five acres, or
portion thereof, of land within a tract where the seasonal high
water table is found to be six feet or more below the proposed
or existing grade at all boring locations.
(c) In addition to the above, in those areas where the seasonal
high water table is found to be five feet or less below the
existing or proposed grade, one additional boring per acre, or
portion thereof, shall be required. If construction of homes
with basements is contemplated, at least one boring shall be
located where such basements are proposed.
(d) Boring logs shall show soil types and characteristics
encountered, groundwater depths, the methods and equipment
used, the name of the firm, if any, making the borings and the
name of the person in charge of the boring operation. The
boring logs shall also show surface elevations to the nearest
0.1 foot and shall indicate the estimated seasonal high water
table depth taking soil mottling into consideration.
(e) Based on the borings, the preliminary site plan shall clearly
indicate all areas having a seasonal high water table within two
feet of the existing surface of the land, or within two feet of
proposed grade, or all areas within which two feet or more of
fill is contemplated or has previously been placed.
(20) Zone boundaries, Tax Map sheet, lot and block numbers and
property lines of parcels within 200 feet of the site, including
properties across the street, as shown by the most recent records
of the Township, or of adjoining municipalities.
(21) The plat shall show the location, area, dimensions and proposed
disposition of any area or areas of the site proposed to be retained
as open space, indicating the facilities to be provided in such areas.
§ 244-30 JACKSON CODE § 244-30
1:730
(22) The capacity of off-street parking areas and the location and
dimensions of all access drives, aisles and parking stalls shall be
shown on the site plan. The location and treatment of existing and
proposed entrances and exits to public rights-of-way, including the
possible utilization of traffic signals, channelization, acceleration
and deceleration lanes, additional width and any other device
necessary for traffic safety and/or convenience and the estimated
average number of passenger vehicles, single-unit trucks or buses
and semitrailers that will enter the site each day.
(23) A graphic depiction of the anticipated routes and details of the
system of on-site vehicular and pedestrian circulation shall be
provided. If the developer desires to have the appropriate
provisions of Title 39 of the New Jersey Revised Statutes governing
motor vehicle operation made applicable to the site, thereby
allowing municipal police regulation of traffic control devices, he
shall submit a formal request and a detailed plan meeting the
requirements of the New Jersey Department of Transportation. The
Township Engineer shall advise the developer regarding the details
of such a plan.
(24) The location and size of proposed loading facilities.
(25) Location of curbs and sidewalks.
(26) Cross sections showing the composition of pavement areas, curbs
and sidewalks.
(27) Exterior lighting plan, including the location, type, height and
drawn details of all outdoor lighting standards and fixtures, radius
of illumination and the lighting intensity in footcandles.
(28) Landscaping and screening plan showing the location, type
(common and botanical names), spacing, quantity and size at time
of planting of each type of tree or shrub and the location, type and
amount of each type of ground cover to be utilized.
(29) Location of signs and drawn details showing the size, materials of
construction, height and content of all signs.
(30) Drawn details of the type of screening to be utilized for refuse
storage areas, outdoor equipment and bulk storage areas.
(31) Floor plans and building elevation drawings of any proposed
structure or structures, or existing structures to be renovated.
(32) Location of handicapped facilities, including parking spaces and
ramps, where applicable.
(33) If the Planning Board Engineer and/or Planning Board determines
that specimen or extraordinary trees located on the site may have
an effect on the proper layout of the site plan, it may be required
§ 244-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-30
1:731
that the location, caliper and type be shown on the plat for the
following:
(a) Living deciduous trees having a trunk of 18 inches' diameter or
more at breast height.
(b) All living coniferous trees having a trunk of 12 inches or more
diameter at breast height.
(c) All living flowering dogwood (Cornus florida) or American holly
(Ilex opaca) trees having a trunk of three inches or greater
diameter at breast height.
(d) All native laurel (Kalmia latifolia) shrubs having a root crown of
three inches or greater measured at the soil or surface level.
(34) For applications involving the construction of 20,000 square feet of
new floor area, an environmental impact statement (EIS) shall be
provided, which addresses the requirements set forth in § 244-189
of this chapter.
(35) A tree-save plan shall be submitted, which generally outlines the
limits of tree removal and disturbance and the location of specimen
and extraordinary trees.
(36) A traffic impact study shall be submitted, which addresses the
requirements set forth in § 244-218 of this chapter.
(37)Written description of the proposed operations in sufficient detail
to indicate the effects of the use in producing traffic congestion,
noise, glare, air pollution, fire hazards or safety hazards. The
written description shall also include the hours of operation of the
use, the number of shifts to be worked, the number of employees in
each shift, the number of vehicles to be stored or parked on the
site, and provisions to be made for site maintenance.
(38) Sectionalization and staging plan. Developers of large uses, such as
shopping centers, multifamily dwellings, industrial parks or other
such uses proposed to be developed in stages, shall submit a
sectionalization and staging plan showing the following:
(a) The anticipated date for commencing construction of each
section or stage. The staging of development on the site shall
be such that if development of the site were discontinued after
the completion of any stage, the developed portion of the site
would comply in all respects to the requirements of this
chapter and be provided with adequate drainage and utility
systems.
(b) Those improvements that will be completed in each stage prior
to application for certificate of occupancy. The plan should
demonstrate that the staging of construction will minimize
§ 244-30 JACKSON CODE § 244-30
1:732
adverse effects upon occupied buildings in the site and
adjoining properties.
(39) The applicant shall submit such other information as the Planning
Board and/or Planning Board Engineer may require or request for
preliminary site plan review.
(40) It is recognized that in certain instances the uniqueness of
particular proposal may require the waiver of some of the
information required herein. The Planning Board may consider
and, for cause shown, may waive strict conformance with such of
these plat map details and other engineering documents as it sees
fit. Any developer desiring such action should present with his
application for development a listing of all such waivers desired,
together with the reasons therefor. It shall also be indicated on the
plat map that this plan, as some plat map details and engineering
documents are not so indicated on the plat map, will not be used for
construction purposes.
C. Conditions of approval.
(1) Any approval of an application for a preliminary plat of a major site
plan shall be subject to the following conditions being satisfied,
within 18 months from the date of approval by the Planning Board,
prior to the signing of the plat:
(a) Ocean County Planning Board approval, if not previously
granted.
(b) Ocean County Board of Health approval, if not previously
granted.
(c) Ocean County Soil Conservation District approval, if not
previously granted.
(d) Jackson Township Municipal Utilities Authority approval, if not
previously granted.
(e) Jackson Township Bureau of Fire Prevention approval, if not
previously granted.
(f) Jackson Township Environmental Commission review, if not
previously submitted.
(g) Any other conditions which may be imposed by the Planning
Board, or may be required by federal, state or local laws.
(h) Payment of the required reproduction fee, pursuant to § 244-12
of this chapter.
(i) Submission of additional prints of the site plan and
attachments for distribution, if required.
§ 244-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-30
1:733
(2) The Planning Board may also condition its preliminary approval
upon the applicant's providing for certain revisions or additions to
the final plat submission.
(3) An extension of the eighteen-month period within which to comply
with the conditions of approval imposed by the Board may be
granted by said Board for a period of time it determines.
D. Certification. In the event that the application for development of a
preliminary major site plan is approved, an appropriate certification
shall be endorsed on the site plan, and the original reproducible thereof
shall be provided to the Planning Board by the applicant.
E. Resolution compliance. Upon approval of the preliminary plat of a
major site plan by the municipal agency, the applicant shall submit to
the Office of Planning and Zoning the original Mylar and seven sets of
prints of the site plan and all related plans. The Office of Planning and
Zoning shall transmit the original Mylar and the seven sets of prints to
the Township Engineer, who shall be responsible for reviewing the
plans for compliance with the resolution of approval adopted by the
municipal agency. After said review, the Township Engineer shall retain
one set of plans, send one set to the applicant's engineer and return five
sets and the original Mylar of the site plan to the Office of Planning and
Zoning for signature by all appropriate municipal officials. Upon being
signed by Township officials, the original Mylar of the plat shall be
picked up by the applicant. The Office of Planning and Zoning shall
retain five sets of prints of the site plan and all related plans for its
records and for distribution to various municipal offices.
F. Effect of preliminary approval.
(1) Preliminary approval of a major site plan shall, except as otherwise
provided herein, confer upon the applicant the following rights for
a three-year period from the date of the preliminary approval:
(a) That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary
approval was granted shall not be changed, including but not
limited to use requirements; layouts and design standards for
streets, curbs and sidewalks; lot size; yard dimensions; and offtract
improvements, and any requirements peculiar to site plan
approval pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-41, except that nothing
herein shall be construed to prevent the municipality from
modifying by ordinance such general terms and conditions of
preliminary approval as relate to public health and safety.
(b) That the applicant may submit for final approval, on or before
the expiration date of preliminary approval, the whole or a
section or sections of the preliminary site plan.
(c) That the applicant may apply for and the Planning Board may
grant extensions on such preliminary approval for additional
periods of at least one year, but not to exceed a total extension
§ 244-30 JACKSON CODE § 244-30
1:734
§ 244-31. Final plat of major site plan.
of two years, provided that if the design standards have been
revised by ordinance, such revised standards shall govern.
(2) In the case of a site plan for an area of 50 acres or more, the
Planning Board may grant the rights referred to in Subsection
F(1)(a), (b) and (c) above for such period of time longer than three
years as shall be determined by the Planning Board to be
reasonable, taking into consideration the number of dwelling units
and nonresidential floor area permissible under preliminary
approval, economic conditions and the comprehensiveness of the
development. The applicant may apply for thereafter and the
Planning Board may thereafter grant an extension to preliminary
approval such additional period of time as shall be determined by
the Planning Board to be reasonable, taking into consideration the
number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area permissible
under preliminary approval, the potential number of dwelling units
and nonresidential floor area permissible under preliminary
approval, the potential number of dwelling units and nonresidential
floor area of the section or sections awaiting final approval,
economic conditions and the comprehensiveness of the
development, provided that if the design standards have been
revised, such revised standards shall govern.
G. Improvements not to be installed. Approval of a preliminary plat shall
not confer upon the developer the right to undertake any clearing or
grading and/or to install any improvements prior to final plat approval
unless it shall be determined by the Township Engineer that said
clearing, grading and/or installation of improvements would not hinder
future development or create physical or aesthetic problems in the
event that further development of the site plan is not undertaken and
that required inspection fees have been paid and adequate performance
guaranties have been posted to provide for the cost to the Township of
performing work that may be necessary to protect adjacent property
owners and the public interest in the event that such clearing, grading
and/or installation of improvements is not completed and/or further
development of the site is not undertaken. Such performance
guaranties shall include but are not limited to the cost to the Township
of providing erosion-control facilities, seeding or otherwise stabilizing
the site, drainage facilities necessary to protect off-tract areas from
flooding, screening or fencing that may be required and all
improvements to be undertaken which are within public rights-of-way
or easements.
A. Required documents. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of
completeness or scheduling of a final plat of a major site plan for public
hearing before the Planning Board, the administrative officer shall
determine that the following have been submitted in proper form:
§ 244-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-31
1:735
(1) Proof from the Tax Office that real estate taxes and local
assessments have been paid to date.
(2) Proof of submission to the Ocean County Planning Board.
(3) Proof of submission to the Ocean County Board of Health.
(4) Proof of submission to the Ocean County Soil Conservation District.
(5) Proof of submission to the Jackson Township Municipal Utilities
Authority.
(6) Proof of submission to the Jackson Township Bureau of Fire
Prevention.
(7) Proof of submission to the Jackson Township Environmental
Commission.
(8) Application for a floodplain encroachment permit, where required.
(9) Application for state wetlands approval, where required.
(10) Application for a stream encroachment permit, where required.
(11) Other submittals that may be required by the Planning Board
Engineer, Planning Board or federal, state or local laws.
(12) Payment of the required application and escrow fees.
(13) Eighteen copies of the plat and attachments meeting the
requirements set forth below. [Amended 4-23-2001 by Ord. No.
12-01]
B. Plat requirements. The final plat shall include all data required for the
preliminary plat of the major site plan and shall be drawn to incorporate
all changes required as a condition of preliminary approval and shall be
drawn to specifications as required for a preliminary plat and shall be
titled "Final Plat — Major Site Plan."
C. Conditions of approval.
(1) Any approval of an application for a final plat of a major site plan
shall be subject to the following conditions being satisfied, within
18 months from the date of approval by the Planning Board, prior
to the signing of the plat and issuance of a development permit:
(a) Ocean County Planning Board final approval, if not previously
granted.
(b) Ocean County Board of Health final approval, if not previously
granted.
(c) Ocean County Soil Conservation District final approval, if not
previously granted.
§ 244-31 JACKSON CODE § 244-31
1:736
(d) Jackson Township Municipal Utilities Authority final approval,
if not previously granted, or a letter of no interest.
(e) Jackson Township Bureau of Fire Prevention final approval, if
not previously granted.
(f) Jackson Township Environmental Commission review, if not
previously received.
(g) Granting of state wetlands permit, if required.
(h) Granting of a floodplain permit, if required.
(i) Granting of a stream encroachment permit, if required.
(j) Certification of approval of plans for drainage or watercourse
diversion by the State of New Jersey, Department of
Environmental Protection, where required.
(k) Granting of drainage and/or access permits by the New Jersey
Department of Transportation, where required.
(l) Unless waived by the Planning Board, a form request, in
appropriate statutory form, requesting that the applicable
provisions of Title 39 of the New Jersey Revised Statutes be
made applicable to the site in order to permit police regulation
of traffic control devices prior to acceptance of streets.
(m) Granting of any required construction permits.
(n) Posting of required performance guaranties for the installation
of any improvements required by the Planning Board.
(o) Payment of the required inspection fees, pursuant to § 244-12
of this chapter.
(p) Evidence of a comprehensive general liability insurance policy
in an amount not less than $300,000 per occurrence,
identifying and saving harmless the Township of Jackson and
its agencies, employees and agents from any liability for any
acts of the developer or his agents, contractors or employees in
the implementing of the approved site plan. The insurance
policy shall provide for 30 days' notice to the Township prior to
cancellation. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any
property owner, developer or builder to carry on the
construction of a project without having current valid evidence
of insurance on file.
(q) Any other conditions which may be imposed by the Planning
Board or may be required by federal, state or local laws.
(r) Payment of the required reproduction fee, pursuant to § 244-12
of this chapter.
§ 244-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-31
1:737
(s) Submission of additional permits of the site plan and
attachments for distribution, if required.
(t) Payment of the required Tax Map maintenance fee, pursuant to
§ 244-12 of this chapter.
(2) An extension of the eighteen-month period within which to comply
with the conditions of approval imposed by the Board may be
granted by said Board for a period of time it determines.
D. Certification. In the event that the application for development of a
final, major site plan is approved, an appropriate certification shall be
endorsed on the site plan, and the original reproducible thereof shall be
provided to the Planning Board by the applicant.
E. Resolution compliance. Upon approval of the final plat of a major site
plan by the municipal agency, the applicant shall submit to the Office of
Planning and Zoning the original Mylar and seven sets of prints of the
site plan and all related plans. The Office of Planning and Zoning shall
transmit the original Mylar and the seven sets of prints to the Township
Engineer, who shall be responsible for reviewing the plans for
compliance with the resolution of approval adopted by the municipal
agency. After said review, the Township Engineer shall retain one set of
plans, send one set to the applicant's engineer and return five sets and
the original Mylar of the site plan to the Office of Planning and Zoning
for signature by all appropriate municipal officials. Upon being signed
by Township officials, the original Mylar of the plat shall be picked up
by the applicant. The Office of Planning and Zoning shall retain five sets
of prints of the site plan and all related plans for its records and for
distribution to various municipal offices.
F. Effect of final approval.
(1) The zoning requirements applicable to the preliminary approval
first granted and all other rights conferred upon the developer at
preliminary approval, whether conditionally or otherwise, shall not
be changed for a period of two years after the date of final
approval. If the developer has followed the standards prescribed
for final approval, the Planning Board may extend such period of
protection for extensions of one year, but not to exceed three
extensions. Notwithstanding any other provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq., the granting of final approval terminates the time
period of the rights conferred by preliminary approval for the
section granted final approval.
(2) In the case of a site plan for a planned unit development or planned
unit residential development or residential cluster of 50 acres or
more or site plan for 150 acres or more, the Planning Board may
grant rights for such period of time longer than two years as shall
be determined by the Planning Board to be reasonable, taking into
consideration the number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor
area permissible under final approval, economic conditions and the
§ 244-31 JACKSON CODE § 244-31
1:738
comprehensiveness of the development. The applicant may apply
for thereafter, and the Planning Board may thereafter grant, an
extension of final approval for such additional period of time as
shall be determined by the Planning Board to be reasonable, taking
into consideration the number of dwelling units and nonresidential
floor area permissible under final approval, the number of dwelling
units and nonresidential floor area remaining to be developed,
economic conditions and the comprehensiveness of the
development.
(3) Any application for renewal or extension of final approval shall be
acted on by the municipal agency at a hearing. At such hearing, the
applicant shall have the burden of coming forward with reasons
why the final approval shall be extended for the requested period of
time.
§ 244-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-31
1:739

ARTICLE V
Guaranties and Improvement Procedures
§ 244-32. Performance, safety and stabilization and temporary
certificate of occupancy guarantees. [Amended 9-11-2000 by Ord.
No. 20-00; 3-27-2018 by Ord. No. 05-18]
A. Performance guarantee.
(1) Requirements; form; rights.
(a) Improvements; cost.
[1] Prior to the filing of a final plat, recording of minor
subdivision deeds, or as a condition of final site plan
approval, or as a condition to the issuance of a zoning
permit, the developer shall have filed with the Township
Clerk a performance guarantee sufficient in amount to
equal the total cost to the Township, as estimated by the
Township Engineer, for installation of those on-site
improvements required by an approval or developer's
agreement, ordinance or regulations to be dedicated to a
public entity that have not yet been installed, including the
following as shown on the approved plans or plat:
[a] Streets.
[b] Pavement.
[c] Gutters.
[d] Curbs.
[e] Sidewalks.
[f] Street lighting.
[g] Street trees.
[h] Surveyor's monuments.
[i] Water mains.
[j] Sanitary sewers.
[k] Community septic systems.
[l] Drainage structures.
[m] Public improvements of open space.
[n] Any grading necessitated by the preceding
improvements.
§ 244-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-32
1:741
[o] Privately owned perimeter buffer landscaping;
provided, however that a developer may choose to
post a separate performance guarantee for the
privately owned perimeter buffer landscaping.
(b) Such guarantee shall assure the installation of such
improvements on or before an agreed date, guarantee the
completion of all improvements without damage to or
interference with adjacent properties or public facilities and
hold the Township Council and Township Planning Board or
Zoning Board of Adjustment and their employees and agents
harmless with respect to any acts of the developer, its agents,
successors or assigns.
(c) The total estimated cost to the Township of constructing all
improvements shall be based upon the estimated contract
construction costs, which would prevail upon expiration of the
guarantee period, and shall also include appropriate
allowances for contract-related costs such as engineering,
legal, financial and other usual costs, which shall be estimated
to be 20% of the estimated contract construction costs.
(d) Such performance guarantee may be in the form of cash,
certified check, negotiable securities, a performance bond
issued by a bonding company or surety company approved by
the Township Council or any other type of surety acceptable to
and approved by the Township Attorney and Township Council,
provided that at least 10% of the performance guarantee shall
be in cash or certified check. The balance of said performance
guarantee shall be in the form of cash, certified check,
certificate of deposit, an irrevocable letter of credit (said letter
to be issued by a financial institution whose deposits are
insured by the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance
Corporation or Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation) or a
bond issued by a surety or bonding company authorized to do
business in New Jersey; provided, however, that all rights,
including the right to interest with dividends, shall be assigned
to the Township of Jackson in a form of assignment acceptable
to the Township Attorney for the period of the bond and that
the principal amount of the passbook or certificate of deposit,
together with interest, shall be returned to the developer upon
completion of the bonded improvements, or, in the event of
default, both interest and principal shall be used by and for the
benefit of the Township in the completion of said
improvements.
(e) The form of the performance guarantee shall be subject to the
approval of the Township Attorney.
(f) Subject to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., as amended and
supplemented, all rights in the performance guarantee,
§ 244-32 JACKSON CODE § 244-32
1:742
including the right to any interest earned on any deposits, shall
belong to the Township of Jackson.
(g) Notwithstanding the requirement of Subsection A(1) above,
when a letter of credit which has been previously accepted
pursuant to Subsection A(1) as a performance guarantee is
about to expire, it may be renewed administratively by the
Township Attorney, provided that all pertinent requirements
are met by the applicant.
(h) In the event of default, the principal and any interest shall be
used for the benefit of the Township in the completion of the
improvements.
(2) All guaranties authorized by this chapter shall run to and be in
favor of the Township of Jackson in the County of Ocean.
(3) Such performance guarantee shall run for a period to be fixed by
the Township Council, but in no case for a term of more than two
years. However, with the consent of the owner and the surety, if
there is one, the Township Council may, by resolution, extend the
term of such performance guarantee for an additional period not to
exceed one year. The amount of the performance guarantee may be
revised by the Township Council from time to time to reflect work
progress, increasing costs and changing conditions in regard to the
uncompleted or unacceptable portions of the required
improvements. If the required improvements have not been
installed in accordance with the performance guarantee, the
obligor and surety shall be liable thereon, at the option of the
municipality, for:
(a) The reasonable cost of the improvements not installed, and,
upon receipt of the proceeds thereof, the municipality shall
install such improvements; or
(b) The completion of all required improvements.
(4) Municipal Engineer list and report.
(a) Upon substantial completion of all required street
improvements (except for the top course) and appurtenant
utility improvements, and the connection of same to the public
system, the obligor may request of the governing body in
writing, by certified mail addressed in care of the Municipal
Clerk, that the Municipal Engineer prepare, in accordance
with the itemized cost estimate prepared by the Municipal
Engineer and appended to the performance guarantee
pursuant to Subsection A of this section, a list of all
uncompleted or unsatisfactorily completed bonded
improvements. If such a request is made, the obligor shall send
a copy of the request to the Municipal Engineer. The request
shall indicate which bonded improvements have been
§ 244-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-32
1:743
completed and which bonded improvements remain
uncompleted in the judgment of the obligor. Thereupon, the
Municipal Engineer shall inspect all improvements covered
by obligor's request and shall file a detailed list and report,
in writing, with the governing body, and shall simultaneously
send a copy thereof to the obligor not later than 45 days after
receipt of the obligor's request.
(b) The list prepared by the Municipal Engineer shall state, in
detail, with respect to each bonded improvement determined
to be incomplete or unsatisfactory, the nature and extent of the
incompleteness of each incomplete improvement or the nature
and extent of, and remedy for, the unsatisfactory state of each
completed improvement determined to be unsatisfactory. The
report prepared by the Municipal Engineer shall identify each
improvement determined to be complete and satisfactory,
together with a recommendation as to the amount of reduction
to be made in the performance guarantee relating to the
completed and satisfactory improvement, in accordance with
the itemized cost estimate prepared by the Municipal Engineer
and appended to the performance guarantee pursuant to
Subsection A of this section.
(5) Approval or rejection of governing body.
(a) The governing body, by resolution, shall either approve the
bonded improvements determined to be complete and
satisfactory by the Municipal Engineer or reject any or all of
these bonded improvements upon the establishment in the
resolution of cause for rejection, and shall approve and
authorize the amount of reduction to be made in the
performance guarantee relating to the improvements accepted
in accordance with the itemized cost estimate prepared by the
Municipal Engineer and appended to the performance
guarantee pursuant to Subsection A of this section. This
resolution shall be adopted not later than 45 days after receipt
of the list and report prepared by the Municipal Engineer.
Upon adoption of the resolution by the governing body, the
obligor shall be released from all liability pursuant to its
performance guarantee, with respect to those approved
bonded improvements, except for that portion adequately
sufficient to secure completion or correction of the
improvements not yet approved, provided that 30% of the
amount of the total performance guarantee and safety and
stabilization guarantee posted may be retained to ensure
completion and acceptability of all improvements. The safety
and stabilization guarantee shall be reduced by the same
percentage as the performance guarantee is being reduced at
the time of each performance guarantee reduction. For the
purpose of releasing the obligor from liability pursuant to its
§ 244-32 JACKSON CODE § 244-32
1:744
performance guarantee, the amount of the performance
guarantee attributable to each approved bonded improvement
shall be reduced by the total amount for each such
improvement in accordance with the itemized cost estimate
prepared by the Municipal Engineer and appended to the
performance guarantee pursuant to Subsection A of this
section, including any contingency factor applied to the cost of
installation. If the sum of the approved bonded improvements
would exceed 70% of the total amount of the performance
guarantee, then the municipality may retain 30% of the amount
of the total performance guarantee and safety and stabilization
guarantee to ensure completion and acceptability of bonded
improvements as provided above; except that any amount of
the performance guarantee attributable to bonded
improvements for which a temporary certificate of occupancy
guarantee has been posted shall be released from the
performance guarantee even if such release would reduce the
amount held by the municipality below 30%.
(b) If the Municipal Engineer fails to send or provide the list and
report as requested by the obligor pursuant to Subsection A(4)
of this section within 45 days from receipt of the request, the
obligor may apply to the court in a summary manner for an
order compelling the Municipal Engineer to provide the list
and report within a stated time, and the cost of applying to the
court, including reasonable attorney's fees, may be awarded to
the prevailing party. If the governing body fails to approve or
reject the improvements determined by the Municipal
Engineer to be complete and satisfactory or reduce the
performance guarantee for the complete and satisfactory
improvements within 45 days from the receipt of the Municipal
Engineer's list and report, the obligor may apply to the court in
a summary manner for an order compelling, within a stated
time, approval of the complete and satisfactory improvements
and approval of a reduction in the performance guarantee for
the approvable complete and satisfactory improvements in
accordance with the itemized cost estimate prepared by the
Municipal Engineer and appended to the performance
guarantee pursuant to Subsection A of this section; and the
cost of applying to the court, including reasonable attorney's
fees, may be awarded to the prevailing party.
(c) In the event that the obligor has made a cash deposit with the
municipality or approving authority as part of the performance
guarantee, then any partial reduction granted in the
performance guarantee pursuant to this subsection shall be
applied to the cash deposit in the same proportion as the
original cash deposit bears to the full amount of the
performance guarantee.
§ 244-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-32
1:745
(6) If any portion of the required improvements are rejected, the
Township Council may require the obligor to complete such
improvements, and, upon completion, the same procedure of
notification as set forth in this section shall be followed.
(7) Nothing herein, however, shall be construed to limit the right of the
obligor to contest by legal proceedings any determination of the
Township Committee or the Township Engineer.
B. Safety and stabilization guarantee.
(1) Safety and stabilization guarantee required.
(a) The developer shall furnish a safety and stabilization
guarantee in favor of the Township of Jackson to ensure that
the Township has an adequate guarantee to return the
property that has been disturbed to a safe and stable condition
or otherwise implement measures to protect the public from
access to an unsafe or unstable condition.
(b) The Township shall be permitted to access the guarantee
when:
[1] Site disturbance has commenced and, thereafter, all work
on the development has ceased for a period of at least 60
consecutive days following such commencement for
reasons other than force majeure; and
[2] Work has not recommenced within 30 days following the
provision of written notice by the municipality to the
developer of the municipality's intent to claim payment
under the guarantee.
(c) At the developer's option, the safety and stabilization
guarantee may be included as a line item in the performance
guarantee rather than in the form of a separate guarantee.
(d) The amount of the safety and stabilization guarantee shall be
calculated pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4 as follows:
[1] $5,000 for the first $100,000 of bonded improvement
costs; plus
[2] Two and a half percent of bonded improvement costs in
excess of $100,000 up to $1,000,000; plus
[3] One percent of bonded improvement costs in excess of
$1,000,000.
(e) The safety and stabilization guarantee shall be released upon
the determination of the Township Engineer that the
development of the project site has reached a point that the
§ 244-32 JACKSON CODE § 244-32
1:746
§ 244-33. Development and construction following final subdivision
approval. [Added 3-25-2002 by Ord. No. 15-02]
The installation of any subdivision improvements or the commencement of
any clearing and grading subsequent to preliminary approval shall not be
undertaken unless the following has been done:
improvements installed are adequate to avoid any potential
threat to public safety.
C. Temporary certificate of occupancy guarantee.
(1) In the event that the developer shall seek a temporary certificate of
occupancy for a development, unit, lot, building, or phase of
development, as a condition of the issuance thereof, the developer
shall furnish a separate guarantee, referred to herein as a
"temporary certificate of occupancy guarantee," in favor of the
Township of Jackson in an amount equal to 120% of the cost of
installation of only those improvements or items which remain to
be completed or installed under the terms of the temporary
certificate of occupancy and which are required to be installed or
completed as a condition precedent to the issuance of the
permanent certificate of occupancy for the development, unit, lot,
building or phase of development and which are not covered by an
existing performance guarantee.
(2) Upon posting of a temporary certificate of occupancy guarantee, all
sums remaining under a performance guarantee which relate to
the development, unit, lot, building, or phase of development for
which the temporary certificate of occupancy is sought shall be
released.
(3) The scope and amount of the temporary certificate of occupancy
guarantee shall be determined by the Township Engineer.
(4) The temporary certificate of occupancy guarantee shall be released
by the Township Engineer upon the issuance of a permanent
certificate of occupancy with regard to the development, unit, lot,
building, or phase as to which the temporary certificate of
occupancy relates.
A. If at any time of preliminary approval but prior to the commencement of
final approval the developer elects to proceed with the installation of
improvements required under this chapter, the developer shall furnish
the Township with the final construction drawings and details, which
shall be certified by the Township Engineer to be in accordance with the
terms and conditions of the subdivision approval.
B. The required construction, inspection, engineering, and administration
fees shall have been paid, and adequate performance guarantees as
determined by the Township Engineer have been posted to provide for
the cost to the Township of performing work that may be necessary to
§ 244-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-33
1:747
§ 244-34. Approval of performance guaranties.
protect adjacent property owners and the public interest in the event
that such clearing, grading, installation of all required improvements in
accordance with the terms and conditions of the subdivision approval,
and/or further development of the site, is not undertaken, completed
and/or installed by the developer. Such performance guarantees shall
include, but are not limited to, the cost of the Township providing
stabilization of the site, drainage facility necessary to protect off-tract
areas from flooding, screening or fencing that may be required and all
improvements to be undertaken which are within existing public rightof-
way or easements as depicted on the approved subdivision plans
and in accordance with the terms and conditions of the subdivision
approval.
C. Prior to any disturbances of the site or commencement of any
construction, the developer shall enter into an agreement with the
Township Committee. This agreement shall be of a form that is
acceptable to the Municipal Attorney and one in which the developer
agrees to abide by the terms and conditions of approval, construct the
required improvements in accordance with the approved plans, agree
to maintain the site and the constructed improvements. The developer
also shall agree that in the event that the site and improvements are not
maintained, the Township can utilize the cash portions of the
performance guarantee to immediately attend to items presenting a
safety hazard and, in the event of a default by the developer, provide
that the Township shall have recourse against the performance
guarantee which has been posted by the developer.
D. No development permit shall be issued nor any work commenced on
site until compliance with this section and notice of intention to
commence construction of such improvements shall be furnished to the
Township Engineer.
E. At least two weeks prior to the start of any construction, the developer
shall notify the Township Engineer of his intention to start work so that
a preconstruction meeting can be arranged between the developer and
the Engineer. No work shall be commenced until their preconstruction
meeting has been conducted.
F. The Township Engineer must be notified at least 48 hours in advance of
any on-site development.
A. Duties of Township Engineer, Township Attorney and Township Clerk.
No performance guaranties shall be presented for approval of the
Township Committee until the municipal officials listed below have
performed the following and make certification of their performance, in
writing, to the Township Committee.
(1) Township Engineer. The Township Engineer shall:
§ 244-33 JACKSON CODE § 244-34
1:748
(a) Where applicable, examine the plat map of a subdivision to
make certain that it complies with all state laws and this
chapter relative to the preparation and filing of maps or plans
for the subdivision of land.
(b) Ascertain that the plat of a site plan or subdivision has been
approved by the Ocean County and Jackson Township Planning
Boards.
(c) Determine those acts or things the applicant is to do to protect
Jackson Township, such as to provide proper drainage, streets,
curbs, signs, monuments or any other item or thing and the
cost of each, as well as the maximum time he recommends
granting the applicant to provide each item or all items.
(d) Determine if the landowner is an individual, corporation or
partnership and, if an individual, his full name and address; if a
corporation, its correct name, date and state of incorporation,
the name of its president and secretary and the location of its
principal office in this state; if a partnership, the names and
addresses of all partners.
(e) Give the applicant a form of the surety company bond required
by the Township of Jackson and all figures, dates and details
required by Subsection A(1)(c) above so that the same may be
included in the bond to be furnished to the Township and, also,
advise the applicant of the amount required to pay the
Township as a proper inspection and administration fees.
(f) Deliver to the Township Attorney:
[1] The original copy of the surety company bond of the
applicant.
[2] The Township Engineer's written certificate addressed to
the Township Committee, which certificate and bond shall
be delivered at one and the same time.
[a] The Township Engineer's certificate shall also state
and give the nature of cash, or its equivalent,
deposited as a portion or all of the performance
guaranty (i.e., cash, certified check, cash escrow
deposit or other security).
[b] If there is nothing the applicant needs to do under
Subsection A(1)(c) above, the certificate shall so state
and give the reason therefor.
(2) Township Attorney. Upon the receipt from the Township Engineer
of the surety bond and Engineer's certificate, the Township
Attorney shall promptly examine said bond and determine whether
or not it is correct in form, content and execution. If the bond is not
§ 244-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-34
1:749
§ 244-35. Off-tract improvements.
correct, the Township Attorney shall notify the applicant of its
shortcomings. When the bond is or has been corrected, the
Township Attorney shall make a written certificate to that effect
to the Township Committee. Thereupon, said Attorney shall deliver
the bond and Engineer's and Attorney's certificates to the Township
Clerk.
(3) Township Clerk. Upon the receipt from the Township Attorney of
the bond and certificates of the Engineer and Attorney, the
Township Clerk shall:
(a) Collect from the applicant the proper fee or fees, if any,
payable to the Township in accordance with the Engineer's
certificate.
(b) Place the matter of approval of bond(s) on the agenda of the
next regular meeting of the Township Committee for its
consideration.
(c) Submit the bond, certificate and fees to the Township
Committee at the next regular meeting of said Committee.
B. Certificates; form. Each of said certificates shall be dated and written in
letter form upon the stationery of the maker or of the Township and
shall be signed by him or his authorized agent or representative.
C. Bond requirements. There must be attached to said bond an authority
of the surety company empowering the person or persons who executed
said bond for the surety company to do so. If the bonding company is
not a New Jersey corporation, there should also be attached to the bond
proof of its authority to do business in New Jersey and a copy of its last
financial statement, made not more than one year before, showing its
financial conditions. If the principal on the bond is a corporation, there
must be attached to the bond a certified copy of a resolution adopted by
its Board of Directors authorizing the execution and delivery of said
bond. Said bond must also bear the corporate seal of the surety
company and the seal, corporate or otherwise, of the principal.
D. Copies. The Township Clerk shall keep a supply of copies of these bond
requirements in his office for the use of applicants and the general
public.
A. General requirements.
(1) As a condition of final subdivision and/or site plan approval, the
municipal agency may require an applicant to either install or pay
his pro rata share of the costs of providing necessary circulation
improvements, water, sewerage, drainage facilities, any other
public improvements or facilities (i.e., public recreation, public
buildings, public equipment), including land and easements and all
§ 244-34 JACKSON CODE § 244-35
1:750
items necessary to administer and maintain the Township's public
functions, located off tract of the property limits of the subdivision
or development but necessitated or required by the development.
"Necessary" improvements are those clearly and substantially
related to the development in question.
(2) The municipal agency shall provide, in its resolution of approval,
the basis of the required improvements.
(3) The capacity and design of proposed improvements shall be based
upon the circulation plan element, utility service plan element and
community facilities element of the adopted Jackson Township
Master Plan or other comprehensive subarea improvement plan or
study.
(4) The improvement and/or widening of a stream or the construction
of drainage or other improvements in a street or road fronting on
the tract to be subdivided, improved and/or developed shall not
constitute an off-tract improvement, and the cost of said
improvement shall not be allocated.
(5) The proportionate or pro rata amount of the cost of such facilities
within a related or common area shall be based on the criteria
contained herein.
B. Cost allocation.
(1) Full allocation. In cases where off-tract improvements are
necessitated by the proposed development and where no other
property owner(s) receive(s) a special benefit thereby, the
applicant may be required, at his sole expense and as a condition of
approval, to provide and install such improvements.
(2) Proportionate allocation.
(a) Where it is determined that properties outside the
development will also be benefited by the off-tract
improvement, the following criteria shall be utilized in
determining the proportionate share of the cost of such
improvements to the developer.
(b) Allocation formula.
[1] Roadways and transportation facilities. The applicant's
proportionate share of street improvements, alignment,
channelization, barriers, new or improved traffic
signalization, signs, curbs, sidewalks, streetlighting, trees,
utility improvements uncovered elsewhere, the
construction or reconstruction of new or existing streets
and other associated street or traffic improvements shall
be as follows:
§ 244-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-35
1:751
[a] The applicant shall provide the Township Engineer
with the existing and anticipated future peak hour
flows for the off-tract improvements.
[b] The applicant shall furnish a plan for the proposed offtract
improvement, which shall include the estimated
peak-hour traffic generated by the proposed
development and the proportion thereof which is to be
accommodated by the proposed off-tract
improvement. The ratio of the peak-hour traffic
generated by the proposed development, which is to
be accommodated by the off-tract improvement, to the
future additional peak-hour traffic anticipated to
impact the proposed off-tract improvement shall form
the basis of the proportionate share. The
proportionate share shall be computed as follows:
Total cost of enlargement
or improvement
(peak-hour traffic) =
Capacity of
enlargement or
improvement
Developer's cost Development peakhour
traffic to be
accommodated by the
enlargement or
improvement
[2] Drainage improvements. The applicant's proportionate
share of stormwater and drainage improvements,
including the purchase of land for easements, the
installation, relocation or replacement of storm drains,
culverts, catch basins, manholes, riprap, improved
drainage ditches and appurtenances thereto, and
installation, relocation or replacement of other storm
drainage facilities or appurtenances associated therewith,
shall be determined as follows:
[a] The capacity and the design of the drainage system to
accommodate stormwater runoff shall be based on the
methods and standards consistent with this chapter,
computed by the developer's engineer and approved
by the Township Engineer.
[b] The capacity of the enlarged, extended or improved
system required for the development and areas
outside of the developer's tributary to the drainage
system shall be determined by the developer's
engineer subject to approval of the Township
Engineer. The plans for the improved system shall be
prepared by the developer's engineer, and the
estimated cost of the enlarged system calculated by
§ 244-35 JACKSON CODE § 244-35
1:752
the Township Engineer. The prorated share for the
proposed improvement shall be computed as follows:
Total cost of
enlargement or
improvement =
Capacity of enlargement or
improvement (total capacity
expressed in cubic feet per
second)
Developer's cost Development-generated peak
rate of runoff, expressed in cubic
feet per second, to be
accommodated by the
enlargement or improvement
[3] Water supply. The applicant's proportionate share of water
distribution facilities under the jurisdiction of the
Township, including the installation, relocation or
replacement of water mains, hydrants, valves and
associated appurtenances, shall be computed as follows:
[a] The capacity and the design of the water supply
system shall be based on the requirements and
standards set forth in this chapter.
[b] The Jackson Township Engineer shall provide the
applicant with the existing and reasonably anticipated
capacity limits of the affected water supply system in
terms of average demand, peak demand and fire
demand.
[c] If the existing system does not have adequate capacity
as defined above to accommodate the applicant's
needs, the pro rata share shall be computed as
follows:
Total cost of
enlargement or
improvement =
Capacity of enlargement or
improvement
[gallons per day (GPD)]
Developer's cost Development-generated peak
rate of runoff, expressed in
cubic feet per second, to be
accommodated by the
enlargement or improvement
[4] Other improvements. The applicants' proportionate share
of other capital improvements shall be computed as
follows:
§ 244-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-35
1:753
Total cost of
enlargement or
improvement =
Capacity of enlargement
or improvement
Developer's cost Development share of
enlargement or improvement
C. Escrow accounts.
(1) Where the proposed off-tract improvement is to be undertaken at
some future date, the moneys required for the improvement shall
be deposited in an interest-bearing account to the credit of the
Township in a separate account until such time as the improvement
is constructed.
(2) If the off-tract improvement is not begun within 10 years of deposit,
all moneys and interest shall be returned to the applicant upon his
request. An off-tract improvement shall be considered "begun" if
the Township has taken legal steps to provide for design and
financing of such improvement.
(3) If the applicant does not request the return of the money with a
period of one year, the money shall be placed in the Township's
general capital improvement fund and shall not be returnable to
the applicant thereafter.
D. Redetermination upon completion of improvements.
(1) Upon completion of off-tract improvements required pursuant to
this section, the developer's liability hereunder shall be
recalculated in accordance with the actual, as compared with the
estimated, cost of the improvements. To the extent that it shall
decrease the amount thereof, the Township shall forthwith refund
the amount of such decrease to the developer.
(2) In the event that the payment by the applicant provided for herein
is less than his share of the actual cost of the off-tract
improvements, then the applicant shall be required to pay the
appropriate share of the cost thereof.
E. Referral to Township Committee.
(1) Where an application for development suggests the need for offtract
improvements, whether to be installed in conjunction with the
development in question or otherwise, the municipal agency shall
forward to the Township Committee a list and description of all
such improvements, together with a request that the Committee
determine and advise the municipal agency of the procedure to be
followed in installation thereof, including timing. The municipal
agency shall defer final action on the application for development
until receipt of the Township Committee's determination or the
expiration of 90 days after the forwarding of such a list and
§ 244-35 JACKSON CODE § 244-35
1:754
description to the Committee without determinations having been
made, whichever comes first.
(2) The Township Committee, within 90 days after receipt of said list
and description, shall determine and advise the municipal agency
of the procedure to be followed and may suggest conditions of
approval, if any, to adequately protect the Township.
(3) In the event that the municipal agency is required by statute to act
on the application prior to receipt of the Township Committee's
determination as to installation and/or payment of pro rata share of
off-tract improvements, it shall request the applicant to consent to
an extension of time within which to act, of sufficient duration to
enable the Township Committee to make the aforesaid
determination. In the event that the applicant is unwilling to
consent to the requested extension of time, the municipal agency
shall, in its discretion, either itself determine the procedure to be
followed in installation and/or payment of pro rata share of the
aforesaid off-tract improvements or shall condition its approval
upon the subsequent determination of the Township Committee.
F. Implementation of off-tract improvements.
(1) In all cases, applicants shall be required to enter into an agreement
with the Township in regard to installation and/or payment of their
pro rata share of off-tract improvements, in accordance with this
chapter and any other ordinances, policies, rules and regulations of
Jackson Township, Ocean County, the State of New Jersey and any
departments, authorities or agencies thereof deemed necessary.
(2) Where properties outside the subject tract will be benefited by the
improvements, the Township Committee may require the applicant
to escrow sufficient funds in accordance with this chapter to secure
the applicant's pro rata share of the eventual cost of providing
future improvements and/or facilities based on the standards set
forth herein.
(3) General improvement.
(a) Where properties outside the subject tract will benefit by the
improvement, the Township Committee may determine that
the improvement is to be installed by the Township as a
general improvement, the cost of which is to be borne as a
general expense.
(b) If the Township Committee determines that the improvement
shall be installed as a general improvement, the Committee
may direct the municipal agency to estimate, with the aid of
the Engineer of the municipal agency or such other persons
who have pertinent information or expertise, the amount, if
any, by which the total cost thereof will excess the total amount
by which all properties, including the subject tract, will be
§ 244-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-35
1:755
specifically benefited thereby, and the applicant shall be liable
to the Township for such expense.
(c) If the Township Committee determines that the improvement
shall be installed as a local improvement, all or part of the cost
of which is to be assessed against properties benefited thereby
in proportion to the benefits conferred by the improvement in
accordance with Chapter 56 of Title 40128 of the statutes of the
State of New Jersey, the applicant may be required to sign an
agreement acknowledging and agreeing to this procedure.
(d) In addition, the Township Committee may require that the
applicant be liable to the Township in addition to the amount of
any special assessments against the subject property for
benefits conferred by the improvement; the difference between
the total cost actually incurred and the total amount by which
all properties, including the subject tract, are specially
benefited by the improvement, as may be determined by the
Township.
(4) If the Township Committee determines that the improvement is to
be installed by the applicant, such agreement may contain
provisions consistent with the standards in this chapter and any
other ordinances, rules, regulations or policies of the Township of
Jackson, County of Ocean, the State of New Jersey and any
departments, authorities or agencies thereof with jurisdiction
therein; whereby the applicant shall be reimbursed by the
Township or otherwise, as a result of any participation fees,
connection charges, charges paid in regard to developer's
agreements with other applicants and the like; all in accordance
with an agreement between the Township Committee and the
applicant.
(5) In determining the procedures to be followed in the event of the
submission of a list and request from the municipal agency, the
Township Committee shall be guided by the following:
(a) The local trends in regard to the potential of development
within the drainage or circulation area in question and the
intensity of such development;
(b) The risk or exposure that neighboring areas are subject to in
the event that required improvements are delayed;
(c) The extent to which temporary measures may sufficiently
alleviate the condition or conditions requiring the off-tract
improvements and the likelihood that larger, regional or
subregional facilities will be required in the future to serve the
development tract and the general area of the Township in
which the same is located; and
128. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:56-1 et seq.
§ 244-35 JACKSON CODE § 244-35
1:756
§ 244-36. Inspection requirements.
(d) The extent to which the health, safety and welfare of both
present and future municipal residents depend upon the
immediate implementation of the off-tract improvement.
G. Assessment not precluded. Nothing in this section of this chapter shall
preclude the municipality from assessing any property benefiting from
the installation of any off-tract improvements as provided in this section
pursuant to the provisions of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey, an
allowance being made to the respective parcels of realty for payments
herein.
A. Inspection, testing and engineering administration fees. Prior to the
signing of any final plat, issuance of a development permit or the start
of construction of any improvements required by the provisions of this
chapter, the developer shall deposit, by cash or certified check, with the
Planning and Zoning Office an amount determined from the appropriate
schedule under this chapter. Said amount shall be used to defray the
cost of inspection, testing, engineering, administration and other costs
and fees paid by the Township in connection with the inspection and
acceptance of the installation of the required improvements.
B. Inspection notice. All required improvements, except those utility
improvements which are not the responsibility of the Township, shall be
subject to inspection and approval by the Township Engineer, who shall
be notified by the developer at least five days prior to the initial start of
construction and again 48 hours prior to the resumption of work after
any idle period exceeding one working day. All of the utility
improvements shall be subject to inspection and approval by the owner
of or agency controlling the utility, who shall be notified by the
developer in accordance with the utilities requirements. No
underground installation shall be covered until it is inspected and
approved by the owner of or agency controlling the utility or by the
Township Engineer in all other cases.
C. Modification of improvements. At any time, whether as a result of his
inspection of work underway or otherwise, the Township Engineer may
recommend that the developer be required to modify the design and
extent of the improvements required, notifying the Planning Board of
his recommendations. The Planning Board shall, if it considers such
modifications to be major or if requested by the developer or Township
Engineer, take formal action to approve or disapprove such
recommendations; provided, however, that it must first afford the
developer an opportunity to be heard. If the Board takes no formal
action within 30 days of such recommendations or where the developer
has not requested formal Planning Board action, its approval will be
assumed. Similarly, the Planning Board may grant or deny the
developer permission to effect such modification upon his application
and the Township Engineer's approval. In either event, where such
modification is to be effected, the appropriate plat must be revised by
§ 244-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-36
1:757
§ 244-37. Site maintenance during construction.
the developer or his engineer to reflect such modification and sufficient
copies thereof submitted to the administrative officer for distribution.
D. General inspection requirements. All improvements, except as
otherwise provided, shall be subject to inspection and approval by the
Township Engineer. No underground installation shall be covered until
inspected and approved by the Township Engineer or those agencies
having jurisdiction over the particular installation. If such installation is
covered prior to inspection, it shall be uncovered or other inspection
means used, such as a television or other pipeline camera, as may be
deemed necessary by the Township Engineer, and charges for such
work will be paid for by the developer.
E. Inspection not acceptance. Inspection of any work by the Township
Engineer or his authorized representative shall not be considered to be
final approval or rejection of the work but shall only be considered to be
a determination of whether or not the specific work involved was being
done to Township specifications or other required standards at the time
of inspection. Any damage to such work or other unforeseen
circumstances, such as the effect of the weather, other construction,
changing conditions, settlement, etc., between the time of installation
and the time that the developer wishes to be released from his
performance guaranty shall be the full responsibility of the developer,
and no work shall be considered accepted until release of the
performance guaranty.
F. Procedure on acceptance of public improvements. When the developer
has constructed and installed the streets, drainage facilities, curbs,
sidewalks, street signs, monuments and other improvements in
accordance with Township regulations, standards and specifications
and desires the Township to accept said improvements, he shall, in
writing, addressed to and in a form approved by the Township
Committee, with copies thereof to the Township Engineer, request the
Township Engineer to make a semifinal inspection of said
improvements. If the improvements have been constructed under a
performance guaranty after approval of a final plat, the developer shall
submit an as-built plan showing as-built grades, profiles and sections
and locations of all subsurface utilities, such as French drains,
combination drains, sanitary sewage disposal systems, both public and
individual waterlines and control valves, gas lines, telephone conduits,
monuments, iron property markers and any other utilities or
improvements installed other than as shown on the approved final plat.
Said as-built plan shall be certified to by a licensed New Jersey
professional engineer. If any improvements are constructed prior to
final plat approval, the final plat shall reflect all changes and as-built
conditions and be so certified. Said as-built plan(s) shall be submitted
on reproducible media.
§ 244-36 JACKSON CODE § 244-37
1:758
A. It shall be the responsibility of the developer to maintain the entire site
or subdivision in a safe and orderly condition during construction.
Necessary steps shall be taken by the developer to protect occupants of
the site or subdivision and the general public from hazardous and
unsightly conditions during the entire construction period. These steps
shall include but are not limited to the following:
(1) Open excavations shall be enclosed by fencing or barricades during
nonconstruction hours. Movable barricades shall be equipped with
yellow flashing hazard markers or other lighting during the hours
or darkness.
(2) The excavation of previously installed sidewalk and pavement
areas which provide access to occupied buildings in the site or
subdivision shall be clearly marked with signs and barricades.
Alternate safe access shall be provided for pedestrians and vehicles
to the occupied buildings.
(3) Materials stored on the site shall be screened from the view of
occupants of the subdivision or site and adjoining streets and
properties.
(4) Construction equipment, materials and trucks shall not be stored
within 150 feet of occupied buildings in the site or subdivision and
adjoining streets and properties during nonconstruction hours.
(5) Safe vehicular and pedestrian access to occupied buildings in the
site or subdivision shall be provided at all times.
(6) Construction activities which create obnoxious and unnecessary
dust, fumes, odors, smoke, vibrations or glare noticeable in
occupied buildings in the subdivision or site and adjoining
properties and streets shall not be permitted.
(7) Construction activities which will result in damage to trees and
landscaping in occupied buildings in the site or subdivision or
adjoining properties shall not be permitted.
(8) All locations and activities in the site or subdivision which present
potential hazards shall be marked with signs indicating the
potential hazard.
(9) Unsightly construction debris, including scrap materials, cartons,
boxes and wrappings must be removed daily at the end of each
working day.
(10) Whenever construction activities take place within or adjacent to
any traveled way or interfere with existing traffic patterns in any
manner, suitable warning signs, conforming to the requirements of
the Uniform Manual on Traffic Control Devices, shall be erected
and maintained by the developer.
B. Construction trailers.
§ 244-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-37
1:759
§ 244-38. Certificate of occupancy; requirements for issuance.
(1) Construction trailers shall be permitted on the construction site,
provided that they do not interfere with on-site construction,
maneuverability of construction equipment, public ingress and
egress to the site, site accessibility by emergency vehicles and
sight visibility to the traveling public and do not impede the public
health, safety and general welfare.
(2) All construction trailers shall be removed from the site prior to
release of the performance guaranty.
C. Should the developer fail in his obligation to maintain the site or
subdivision in a safe and orderly condition, the Township may, on five
days' written notice, or immediately in the case of hazard to life, health
or property, undertake whatever work may be necessary to return the
site or subdivision to a safe and orderly condition and deduct the cost
thereof from the 10% cash or certified check portion of the performance
guaranty. Upon notice of such deduction, the developer shall, within 10
days, restore the full 10% cash balance, or his performance guaranty
will be held to be void, and the Township may take action as if final plat
approval had not been obtained.
D. The Construction Official shall, upon receiving notice from the
Township Engineer that a developer is in violation of this section,
suspend further issuance of certificates of occupancy and building
permits and may order cessation of work on any outstanding permits.
A. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any use or building
involving the installation of utilities or street improvements, parking
areas, buffer areas, storm drainage facilities, other site improvements,
the alteration of the existing grade on a lot or the utilization of a new
on-site well or sanitary disposal system unless the Township Engineer
or other appropriate authority shall have, where applicable, certified to
the following:
(1) Utilities and drainage. All utilities, including but not limited to
water, gas, storm drains, sanitary sewers, electric lines and
telephone lines, shall have been properly installed, and service to
the lot, building or use from such utilities shall be available.
(2) Street rights-of-way.
(a) Grading of street rights-of-way. All street rights-of-way
necessary to provide access to the lot in question shall have
been completely graded, and all slope retaining devices or
slope plantings shall have been installed.
(b) Street rights-of-way. All street rights-of-way necessary to
provide access to the lot, building or use in question shall have
been completely graded, and all slope retaining devices or
slope plantings shall have been installed.
§ 244-37 JACKSON CODE § 244-38
1:760
(3) Sidewalks. All sidewalks necessary to provide access to the lot,
building or use in question shall have been properly installed.
(4) Streets. Curbing and the bituminous base course of bituminous
concrete streets or the curbing and pavement courses for portland
cement concrete streets necessary to provide access to the
proposed lot, building or use shall have been properly installed.
(5) Curbing and parking areas. Curbing and the bituminous base
course of parking areas necessary to provide access to the required
number of parking spaces for the building or use in question shall
have been properly installed.
(6) Obstructions. All exposed obstructions in parking areas, access
drives or streets, such as manhole frames, water boxes, gas boxes
and the like, shall be protected by building to the top of such
exposures with bituminous concrete as directed by the Township
Engineer.
(7) Screening, fences and landscaping. All required screening, fencing
and/or landscaping related to the lot, building or use in question
shall have been properly installed unless the Township Engineer
shall direct the developer to delay the planting of screening and
landscaping until the next planting season in order to improve the
chances of survival of such plantings.
(8) Site grading. All site grading necessary to permit proper surface
drainage and prevent erosion of soils shall have been completed in
accordance with an approved soil erosion and sediment control
plan.
(9) On-site wells. All on-site wells shall have been installed, tested and
approved by the Ocean County Board of Health.
(10) On-site sanitary disposal systems. All on-site sanitary disposal
systems shall have been installed and approved by the Ocean
County Board of Health.
(11) Public water supply. Where the proposed lot, building or use is
served by a public water supply, said supply shall have been
installed and tested, and all required fire hydrants or fire
connections shall have been installed and tested and approved by
the Bureau of Fire Prevention.
(12) Lighting. All outdoor lighting shall have been installed and shall be
operational.
(13) Street signs and traffic control devices. All street signs, paint lining
and/or traffic control devices affecting the proposed lot, building or
use, and required under the terms of approval of a subdivision or
site plan or by federal, state, county or municipal rules, regulations
or laws, shall have been installed.
§ 244-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-38
1:761
§ 244-39. Maintenance guarantee. [Amended 8-24-2010 by Ord. No.
17-10; 3-27-2018 by Ord. No. 05-18]
(14) Stabilized driveway.
(15) Removal of construction debris.
(16) Other. Any other conditions established for issuance of a certificate
of occupancy by the Planning Board as a condition of final site plan
approval shall be complied with.
B. Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the applicant shall post a
cash guaranty with the Township in an amount equal to the cost, to the
Township, of constructing all uncompleted improvements not covered
by performance guaranties previously posted.
A. A maintenance guarantee shall be furnished by the developer prior to
the release of the performance guarantee in an amount equal to 15% of
the installation of the improvements covered under the performance
guarantee along with the following private site improvements:
stormwater management basins, inflow and water quality structures
within the basins, and the outflow pipes and structures of the
stormwater management system, if any.
B. The developer may elect to furnish such maintenance guarantee either
by maintaining on deposit with the Township the ten-percent cash or
certified check portion of the performance guarantee provided in
accordance with § 244-32 of this chapter or by a bond issued by a
bonding company or surety company, or other type of surety acceptable
to and approved by the Township Attorney and Township Council.
C. The maintenance guarantee shall begin with the release of the
performance guarantee and shall run for a period of two years. The
guarantee shall automatically expire at the end of the established term.
D. The maintenance guarantee shall be to the effect that the applicant,
developer, owner or user guarantees the complete maintenance of all
improvements for a period of two years from the release of his
performance guaranty. Should he fail in his obligation to properly
maintain all improvements, the Township may, on 10 days' written
notice, or immediately in the case of hazard to life, health or property,
proceed with necessary repair or replacement of any unacceptable
improvements and charge the cost thereof against the guaranty. At the
end of the maintenance guaranty, the cash or certified check on deposit
will be returned to the developer less any sums, properly documented
by the Township, which have been expended to repair or replace any
unsatisfactory improvements.
§ 244-38 JACKSON CODE § 244-40
1:762
§ 244-40. Stormwater management system maintenance. [Added
2-9-1998 by Ord. No. 5-98; amended 8-14-2000 by Ord. No. 18-00]
An applicant shall be required to dedicate proposed stormwater
management systems to the Township and shall enter into an agreement
with the Township to that end. Such agreement shall be a condition of
final approval and shall be fully executed prior to release of performance
guaranties, and acceptance of the stormwater management agreement shall
require payment of the fee set forth in § 244-12K in consideration of the
Township assuming all future maintenance of the stormwater management
facilities. The form of agreement shall be approved by the Township
Attorney. The agreement, upon execution, shall be recorded by the
applicant in the office of the County Clerk. The applicant shall thereafter
file a copy of the recorded agreement with the Township. Upon certification
by the Township Engineer that the performance guaranty for the project
may be released, acceptance of the stormwater management facilities by
the Township shall be specifically stated in the resolution authorizing the
guaranty release. The Township shall retain from the cash portion of the
guaranty a sum equal to the maintenance fee approved as to amount by
the Township Engineer in accordance with the formula in Article III of this
chapter. In the event that the cash portion of the guaranty is less than
the required maintenance fee, the developer shall post the deficit in cash.
Any interim performance guaranty reductions authorized by the Township
shall not be construed to mean that all or any part of the stormwater
management system has been accepted by the Township nor shall any such
interim reduction reduce the cash portion of the guaranty to an amount less
than the required maintenance fee. It shall be the applicant's responsibility
to maintain the stormwater management system during construction.
§ 244-41. Design standards for stream corridors. [Added 9-9-2002
by Ord. No. 35-02]
Except as otherwise provided by federal or state law or any regulations
promulgated pursuant thereto, the following buffering standards shall apply
on any stream corridor:
A. Background.
(1) Whereas, buffers adjacent to stream systems provide numerous
environmental protection and resource management benefits
which can include the following:
(a) Storing and maintaining the chemical, physical and biological
integrity of the water resources.
(b) Removing pollutants delivered in urban stormwater.
(c) Reducing erosion and controlling sedimentation.
(d) Stabilizing stream banks.
(e) Providing infiltration of stormwater runoff.
§ 244-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-41
1:763
(f) Maintaining base flow of streams.
(g) Contributing the organic matter that is a source of food and
energy for the aquatic ecosystem.
(h) Providing tree canopy to shade streams and promote desirable
aquatic organisms.
(i) Providing riparian wildlife habitat.
(j) Furnishing scenic value and recreational opportunity.
(2) It is the desire of Jackson Township to protect and maintain the
native vegetation in riparian and wetland areas by implementing
specifications for the establishment, protection and maintenance of
vegetation along all stream systems within our jurisdictional
authority.
B. Conflict with other regulations. Where the standards and management
requirements of this buffer section are in conflict with other laws,
regulations, and policies regarding streams, erodible soils, wetlands,
floodplains, timber harvesting, land disturbance activities or other
environmental protective measures, the more restrictive shall apply.
However, this or section is not intended to, and shall not, supersede
federal and state standards and regulations pertaining to the same
subject matter that are in effect or adopted subsequent to the effective
date of this section, including any and all regulations regarding the
Pinelands zones or regarding freshwater wetlands. To the extent the
provisions of this section and applicable federal and state regulations
are in conflict, the federal and state regulations shall control.
C. Intent. The purpose of this section is to establish minimal acceptable
requirements for the design of buffers to protect the streams, wetlands
and floodplains of Jackson Township; to protect the water quality of
watercourses, reservoirs, lakes, and other significant water resources
within Jackson Township; to protect Jackson Township's riparian and
aquatic ecosystems; and to provide for the environmentally sound use
of Jackson Township's land resources.
D. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ACTIVE CHANNEL — The area of the stream channel that is subject
to flows of at least two weeks' duration annually, and that includes the
portion of the channel below where the floodplain flattens.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) — Conservation practices or
management measures which control soil loss and reduce water quality
degradation caused by nutrients, animal wastes, toxins, sediment and
runoff.
BUFFER — A vegetated area, including trees, shrubs and herbaceous
vegetation, which exists or is established to protect a stream system,
§ 244-41 JACKSON CODE § 244-41
1:764
lake, reservoir or coastal estuarine area. Alteration of this natural area
is strictly limited.
DEVELOPMENT —
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution which is generated by
various land use activities rather than from an identifiable or discrete
source, and is conveyed to waterways through natural processes, such
as rainfall, storm runoff or groundwater seepage rather than direct
discharge.
NONTIDAL WETLAND — Those areas not influenced by tidal
fluctuations that are inundated or saturated by surface water or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that
under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOODPLAIN — The area of land adjacent to a
stream that is subject to inundation during a storm event that has a
recurrence interval of 100 years.
POLLUTION — Any contamination or alteration of the physical,
chemical or biological properties of any waters that will render the
waters harmful or detrimental to public health, safety or welfare;
domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational or other
legitimate beneficial uses; livestock, wild animals or birds; fish or other
aquatic life.
STREAM CHANNEL — Part of a watercourse either naturally or
artificially created which contains an intermittent or perennial base
flow of groundwater origin. Base flows of groundwater origin can be
distinguished by any of the following physical indicators:
STREAM ORDER — A classification system for streams based on stream
hierarchy. The smaller the stream, the lower its numerical
classification. For example, a first order stream does not have
(1) The improvement of property for any purpose involving building;
Subdivision or the division of a tract or parcel of land into two or
more parcels;
(2)
The combination of any two or more lots, tracts, or parcels of
property for any purpose;
(3)
(4) The preparation of land for any of the above purposes.
Hydrophytic vegetation, hydric soil or other hydrologic indicators
in the area(s) where groundwater enters the stream channel in the
vicinity of the stream headwaters, channel bed or channel banks.
(1)
(2) Flowing water not directly related to a storm event.
Historical records of a local high groundwater table such as well
and stream gauge records.
(3)
§ 244-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-41
1:765
tributaries and normally originates from springs and/or seeps. At the
confluence of two first order streams, a second order stream begins,
and so on.
STREAMS — Perennial and intermittent watercourses identified
through site inspection and USGS maps. Perennial streams are those
which are depicted on a USGS map with a solid blue line. Intermittent
streams are those which are depicted or a USGS map with a dotted blue
line.
STREAM SYSTEM — A stream channel, together with one or both of
the following:
WATER POLLUTION HAZARD — A land use or activity that causes a
relatively high risk of potential water pollution.
(1) One-hundred-year floodplain; and/or
(2) Hydrologically related nontidal wetlands.
E. Applications.
(1) This section shall apply to all proposed development except for that
development which meets waiver criteria as outlined in Subsection
I of this section.
(2) This section shall apply to all timber harvesting activities, except
those timber harvesting operations which are implementing a
forest management plan which has been deemed to be in
compliance with the regulations of the buffer ordinance and has
received approval from the Pinelands Commission.
(3) This section shall apply to all surface mining operations, except
that the design standards shall not apply to active surface mining
operations which are operating in compliance with an approved
surface mining permit of the Pinelands Commission.
F. Plan requirements.
(1) In accordance with Subsection E of this section, a plan approved by
the appropriate agency is required for all development, forest
harvesting operations, surface mining operations and agricultural
operations.
(2) The plan shall set forth an informative, conceptual and schematic
representation of the proposed activity by means of maps, graphs,
charts or other written or drawn documents so as to enable the
agency an opportunity to make a reasonably informed decision
regarding the proposed activity.
(3) The plan shall contain the following information:
(a) A location or vicinity map.
§ 244-41 JACKSON CODE § 244-41
1:766
(b) Surveyed streams, springs, seeps, bodies of water and
wetlands (include a minimum of 200 feet into adjacent
properties).
(c) Field delineated and surveyed forest buffers.
(d) Limits of the ultimate one-hundred-year floodplain.
(e) Soil survey map delineating slight, moderate and severe
limitations.
(f) A narrative of the species and distribution of existing
vegetation within the buffer.
(4) The buffer plan shall be submitted in conjunction with the required
grading plan for any development, and the forest buffer should be
clearly delineated on the final grading plan.
(5) Permanent boundary markers shall be installed prior to final
approval of the required clearing and grading plan.
G. Design standards for forest buffers.
(1) Forest buffer for a stream system shall consist of a forested strip of
land extending along both sides of a stream and its adjacent
wetlands, floodplains or slopes. The forest buffer width shall be
adjusted to include contiguous sensitive areas, such as erodible
soils, where development or disturbance may adversely affect
water quality, streams, wetlands or other water bodies.
(2) The forest buffer shall begin at the edge of the stream bank of the
active channel.
(3) The required width for all forest buffers (i.e., the base width) shall
be a minimum of 75 feet, with the requirement to expand the buffer
depending on stream order, percent slope; one-hundred-year
floodplain; and wetlands or critical areas.
(a) In third order and higher streams, add 25 feet to the base
width.
(b) Forest buffer width shall be modified if there are steep slopes
which are within a close proximity to the stream and drain into
the stream system. In those cases, the forest buffer width can
be adjusted.
Method A
Percent Slope Width of Buffer
15% to 17% Add 10 feet
18% to 20% Add 30 feet
21% to 23% Add 50 feet
§ 244-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-41
1:767
Method A
Percent Slope Width of Buffer
24% to 25% Add 60 feet
Method B
Type of Stream Use
Percent Slope
Water Contact
Recreational Use
Sensitive Stream
Habitat
1% to 14% No change Add 50 feet
15% to 25% Add 25 feet Add 75 feet
Greater than 25% Add 50 feet Add 100 feet
(c) Forest buffers shall be extended to encompass the entire onehundred-
year floodplain and a zone with minimum width of 25
feet beyond the edge of the floodplain.
(4) Potential water pollution hazards.
(a) The following land uses and/or activities are designated as
potential water pollution hazards and must be set back from
any stream or water body by the distance indicated below:
[1] Storage of hazardous substances: 150 feet.
[2] Above or below ground petroleum storage facilities: 150
feet.
[3] Drainfields from on-site sewage disposal and treatment
system (i.e., septic systems: 100 feet.
[4] Raised septic systems: 250 feet.
[5] Solid waste landfills or junkyards: 300 feet.
[6] Confined animal feedlot operations: 250 feet.
[7] Subsurface discharges from a wastewater treatment plant:
100 feet.
[8] Land application of biosolids: 100 feet.
(b) For development within 4,000 feet of any water supply intake,
the setbacks should be doubled.
(5) The forest buffer shall be composed of three district zones, with
each zone having its own set of allowable uses and vegetative
targets as specified in this section.
(a) Zone 1 Streamside Zone.
§ 244-41 JACKSON CODE § 244-41
1:768
[1] The function of the Streamside Zone is to protect the
physical and ecological integrity of the stream ecosystem.
[2] The Streamside Zone will begin at the edge of the stream
bank of the active channel and extend a minimum of 25
feet from the top of the bank.
[3] Allowable uses within this zone are restricted to:
[a] Flood control structures.
[b] Utility rights-of-way.
[c] Footpaths.
[d] Road crossings, where permitted.
[4] The vegetative target for the Streamside Zone is
undisturbed native vegetation.
(b) Zone 2 Middle Zone.
[1] The function of the Middle Zone is to protect key
components of the stream and to provide distance between
upland development and the Streamside Zone.
[2] The Middle Zone will begin at the outer edge of the
Streamside Zone and extend a minimum of 50 feet, plus
any additional buffer width as specified in Subsection
G(5)(c).
[3] Allowable uses within the Middle Zone are restricted to:
[a] Biking or hiking paths.
[b] Stormwater management facilities.
[c] Recreational uses as approved by the reviewing
board.
[d] Limited tree clearing with approval from reviewing
board.
[4] The vegetative target for the Middle Zone is mature native
vegetation adapted to the region.
(c) Zone 3 Outer Zone.
[1] The function of the Outer Zone is to prevent encroachment
into the forest buffer and to filter runoff from residential
and commercial development.
[2] The Outer Zone will begin at the outward edge of the
Middle Zone and provide a minimum width of 25 feet
between Zone 2 and the nearest permanent structure.
§ 244-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-41
1:769
[3] There shall be no septic systems, permanent structures or
impervious cover, with the exception of paths, within the
Outer Zone.
[4] The vegetative target for the Outer Zone may vary,
although the planting of native vegetation should be
encouraged to increase the total width of the buffer.
H. Buffer management and maintenance.
(1) The forest buffer, including wetlands and floodplains, shall be
managed to enhance and maximize the unique value of these
resources. Management includes specific limitations on alteration
of the natural conditions of these resources. The following
practices and activities are restricted within Zones 1 and 2 of the
forest buffer, except with approval by the reviewing board.
(a) Clearing of existing vegetation.
(b) Soil disturbance by grading, stripping or other practices.
(c) Filling or dumping.
(d) Drainage by ditching, underdrains or other systems.
(e) Use, storage or application of pesticides, except for the spot
spraying of noxious weeds or nonnative species.
(f) Housing, grazing or other maintenance of livestock.
(g) Storage or operation of motorized vehicles, except for
maintenance and emergency use.
(2) The following structures, practices and activities ate permitted in
the forest buffer, with specific design or maintenance features
subject to the review of the approving board and the NJDEP.
(a) Roads, bridges, paths and utilities:
[1] An analysis needs to be conducted to ensure that no
economically feasible alternative is available.
[2] The right-of-way should be the minimum width needed to
allow for maintenance access and installation.
[3] The angle of the crossing shall be perpendicular to the
stream or buffer in order to minimize clearing
requirements.
[4] The minimum number of road crossings should be used
within each development.
[5] Permitted utilities shall include wastewater pumping
stations.
§ 244-41 JACKSON CODE § 244-41
1:770
(b) Stormwater management:
[1] An analysis needs to be conducted to ensure that no
economically feasible alternative is available and that the
project is either necessary for flood control or significantly
improves the water quality or habitat in the stream.
[2] In new developments, on-site and nonstructural
alternatives will be preferred over larger facilities within
the stream buffer.
[3] When constructing stormwater management facilities (i.e.,
BMPs), the area cleared will be limited to the area
required for construction and adequate maintenance
access as outlined in the most recent edition.
[4] Alternative stormwater management facilities shall be
considered to encourage the design of facilities that are
sufficient to capture a two-year storm event.
(c) Stream restoration projects, facilities and activities as
approved are permitted within the forest buffer.
(d) Water quality monitoring and stream gauging are permitted
within the forest buffer, as approved.
(e) Individual trees within the forest buffer may be removed which
are in danger of falling, causing damage to dwellings or other
structures or causing blockage of the stream.
(3) All plats prepared for recording and all right-of-way plats shall
clearly:
(a) Show the extent of any forest buffer on the subject property by
metes and bounds.
(b) Label the forest buffer.
(c) Provide a note to reference any forest buffet stating: "There
shall be no clearing, grading, construction or disturbance of
vegetation except as permitted by the agency."
(d) Provide a note to reference any protective covenants
governing all forest buffers areas stating: "Any forest buffer
shown hereon is subject to protective covenants which may be
found in the land records and which restrict disturbance and
use of these areas.
(4) All forest buffer areas shall be maintained through a declaration of
protective covenant, which is required to be submitted for approval
by the board. The covenant shall be recorded in the land records
and shall run with the land and continue in perpetuity.
§ 244-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-41
1:771
(5) All lease agreements must contain a notation regarding the
presence and location of protective covenants for forest buffer
areas and which shall contain information on the management and
maintenance requirements for the forest buffer for the new
property owner.
(6) An offer of dedication of a forest buffer area to the agency shall not
be interpreted to mean that this automatically conveys to the
general public the right of access to this area.
(7) The Township shall inspect the buffer annually and immediately
following severe storms for evidence of sediment deposition,
erosion or concentrated flow channels and corrective actions taken
to ensure the integrity and functions of the forest buffer.
(8) Forest buffer areas may be allowed to grow into their vegetative
target state naturally, but methods to enhance the successional
process such as active reforestation may be used when deemed
necessary to ensure the preservation and propagation of the buffer
area. Forest buffer areas may also be enhanced through
reforestation or other growth techniques as a form of mitigation for
achieving buffer preservation requirements.
I. Waivers.
(1) This section shall apply to all proposed development except for that
development which prior to the effective date of this section:
(a) Is covered by a valid, unexpired plat in accordance with
development regulations.
(b) Is covered by a current executed public works agreement.
(c) Is covered by a valid unexpired building permit.
(d) Has been accepted to apply for a building permit.
(e) Has been granted a waiver in accordance with current
development regulations.
(2) Waivers may be granted by the reviewing board under the
following conditions:
(a) Those projects or activities where it can be demonstrated that
strict compliance with the section would result in practical
difficulty.
(b) Those projects or activities serving a public need where no
feasible alternative is available.
(c) The repair and maintenance of public improvements where
avoidance and minimization of adverse impacts to nontidal
wetlands and associated aquatic ecosystems have been
addressed.
§ 244-41 JACKSON CODE § 244-41
1:772
(d) For those developments which have had buffers applied in
conformance with previously issued requirements.
(e) The buffer width may be relaxed and the buffer permitted to
become narrower at some points as long as the average width
of the buffer meets the minimum requirement. This averaging
of the buffer may be used to allow for the presence of an
existing structure or to recover a lost lot, as long as the
Streamside Zone (Zone 1) is not disturbed by the narrowing
and no new structures are built within the one-hundred-year
floodplain.
(3) The applicant shall submit a written request for a waiver. The
application shall include specific reasons justifying the waiver and
any other information necessary to evaluate the proposed request.
The agency may require an alternatives analysis that clearly
demonstrates that no other feasible alternatives exist and that
minimal impact will occur as a result of the project or development.
(a) In granting a request for a variance, the board may require site
design, landscape planting, fencing, the placement of signs
and the establishment of water quality best management
practices in order to reduce adverse impacts on water quality,
streams, wetlands and floodplains.
§ 244-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-41
1:773

ARTICLE VI
Non-Pinelands Area Zoning District Regulations
§ 244-42. List of zones. [Amended 12-23-2002 by Ord. No. 50-02;
1-22-2008 by Ord. No. 04-08; 8-12-2008 by Ord. No. 31-08;
11-9-2010 by Ord. No. 30-10; 11-9-2010 by Ord. No. 32-10;
11-9-2010 by Ord. No. 33-10; 11-9-2010 by Ord. No. 34-10;
11-9-2010 by Ord. No. 35-10; 7-27-2011 by Ord. No. 24-11;
3-16-2017 by Ord. No. 03-17; 6-13-2017 by Ord. No. 10-17;
6-27-2017 by Ord. No. 12-17; 6-27-2017 by Ord. No. 13-17;
2-11-2020 by Ord. No. 02-20]
For the purpose of this chapter, the non-Pinelands Area portion of the
Township of Jackson shall be divided into the following zoning districts:
R-3 Residential Zone
R-2 Residential Zone
R-5 Residential Zone
R-1 Residential Zone
R-20 Residential Zone
R-15 Residential Zone
R-9 Residential Zone
R-30 Residential Zone
MF Multifamily Zone
MF-AH-6 Multifamily Affordable Housing-6 Zone
MF-AH-7 Multifamily Affordable Housing-7 Zone
MF-AH-8 Multifamily Affortable Housing-8 Zone
MHP Mobile Home Park Zone
PRC Planned Retirement Community Zone
PMURD Planned Mixed Unit Residential Development Zone
LC Limited Commercial Zone
NC Neighborhood Commercial Zone
HC Highway Commercial Zone
HCMU Highway Commercial Mixed-Use Zone
MUNC/HC Mixed Use Neighborhood Center/Highway Commercial Zone
CR-1 Commercial Recreation Zone 1
CR-2 Commercial Recreation Zone 2
ROS Recreation — Open Space Zone
AR Agricultural Retention Zone
LM Commercial Office/Light Industrial Zone
MUNC/LM Mixed Use Neighborhood Center/Light Industrial Zone
§ 244-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-42
1:775
I Industrial Zone
§ 244-43. Zoning Map. [Amended 2-8-2011 by Ord. No. 02-11;
9-27-2016 by Ord. No. 22-16; 6-13-2017 by Ord. No. 10-17]
The boundaries of all zoning districts set forth in this chapter are shown
on a map entitled "Zoning Map, Township of Jackson, Ocean County, New
Jersey," prepared by Remington, Vernick & Vena Engineers, Township
Planner, dated May 12, 2017, which map is hereby made a part of this
chapter. A copy of the Zoning Map is on file in the Office of the Township
Clerk.
§ 244-44. Zone boundaries.
A. The boundaries of zoning districts shall be shown on the Zoning Map.
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the zone boundaries of any of
the zoning districts, as listed above in § 244-42 of this chapter and as
shown on the Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
(1) Along streets and highways. Where district boundaries are
indicated as approximately following the center lines of streets or
highways, street lines or highway right-of-way lines, such center
lines shall be construed to be such boundaries.
(2) Along lot lines. Where district boundaries are so indicated that they
approximately follow the lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed
to be said boundaries.
(3) District lines parallel to streets and highways. Where district
boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately parallel to
the center lines or street lines of streets or the center lines or rightof-
way lines of highways, such district boundaries shall be
construed as being parallel thereto and at such distances
therefrom as indicated on the Zoning Map. If no distance is given,
such dimension shall be determined by the use of the scale shown
on the Zoning Map.
(4) Along streams, lakes or other bodies of water. Where the boundary
of a district follows a stream, lake or other body of water, the
boundary shall be deemed to be at the limit of the jurisdiction of the
Township unless otherwise indicated. Where a district boundary is
shown as following a stream, the boundary shall be the center line
of the main channel of such stream, and the boundary shall be
deemed to be changed automatically if the main channel of the
stream should change or be changed by natural or artificial means,
if such new center line is no farther from the old center line than 20
feet at any point.
(5) Vacating of streets. Whenever any street or public right-of-way is
vacated by official action, the zoning districts adjoining the side of
such public way shall be automatically extended to include the
§ 244-42 JACKSON CODE § 244-44
1:776
§ 244-45. Conservation Zone Overlay. [Added 11-9-2010 by Ord. No.
28-10]
right-of-way thus vacated, which shall be subject to all regulations
of the extended district or districts. Where the vacated right-of-way
is bounded on either side by more than one district, the former
center line of the right-of-way shall determine the extension of each
district.
(6) Map dimensions. In the absence of specific distances being
indicated on the Zoning Map or as specified in any of the above, the
distance shall be determined by using the map scale.
B. Where a zoning district boundary line divides a lot other than by
following a stream, street or railroad, any use permitted in either
district may be extended not more than 20 feet into the adjacent
district. A use permitted in the zoning district so extended shall
thereafter be a permitted use in the extended area. A zoning district
line, however, shall be altered only once by utilizing this subsection of
this chapter, after which the lot use shall be governed by the
regulations of the zoning district in which it is located after the zoning
district boundary line adjustment.
C. The exact location of any disputed zoning district boundary line shall be
determined by the administrative officer. This decision may be appealed
to the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
A. Intent and purpose. The governing body of the Township of Jackson,
recognizing the extensive riparian lands, streams, lakes, surface water
bodies, wetlands, and woodlands which contain vegetation and
habitats, including habitats for many threatened and endangered
species, and which are found to exist on significant numbers of acreage
of the remaining undeveloped lands within the Township of Jackson;
and recognizing and anticipating the significant impacts on these lands
resulting from development, which impacts are mitigated by
comprehensive regulations as described and implemented by the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (N.J.A.C. 7:1 through
7:62), the Pinelands Commission and the Pinelands Comprehensive
Management Plan (N.J.A.C. 7:50), and the New Jersey State
Development and Redevelopment Plan (N.J.A.C. 17:32); and, in
furtherance of the Township of Jackson's commitment to preserve,
conserve, and protect those environmentally critical lands which
support and affect the watersheds, aquifers, and environmental
integrity of lands which are contiguous and extend outside of the
Township of Jackson; and in order to provide sound use of the land and
appropriate land densities as provided for in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-2;
identifies by the Conservation Zone Overlay those lands which are
therefore affected and are therefore subject to the following:
B. Applicability.
§ 244-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-45
1:777
(1) All properties where a portion or all of the lot is included within the
Conservation Zone Overlay boundaries, as determined and shown
as shaded areas overlaid on the Jackson Township Zoning Map, and
further clarified on the Conservation Plan Map.
(2) Modifications to this zone will be adjusted only as a result of a valid
NJDEP letter of interpretation or permit delineating wetlands,
streams, buffers, transition areas and/or identifying critical
habitats or the lack thereof.
C. Zone regulations.
(1) All properties which fall within the Conservation Zone Overlay shall
be regulated by the underlying zone or district within which they
are found, except that the following additional requirements shall
apply.
(a) All applications for major site plan or major subdivision
approvals shall be required to submit a valid NJDEP letter of
interpretation and/or permit which identifies all freshwater
wetlands and wetlands buffers/transition areas on the property
or properties included in the application before the application
can be deemed complete.
(b) All wetlands, wetlands buffers, transition areas, and riparian
buffers must be properly identified and delineated on all
submitted plans for major site plan or major subdivision
approvals before the application can be deemed complete.
(c) All wetlands, as identified and verified, pursuant to the LOI
(letter of interpretation) required before any application can be
deemed complete, as stated in Subsection C(1)(a) above, shall
be excluded from the gross acreage for purposes of calculating
gross residential density and for calculating maximum lot
coverage (building and impervious) for nonresidential
developments, except for commercial and industrial properties
for the term of economic priority established in Subsection D
below. [Amended 2-8-2011 by Ord. No. 09-11]
(d) All required setbacks shall be taken from the wetlands limits
pursuant to the LOI (letter of interpretation) required before
any application can be deemed complete as stated in
Subsection C(1)(a) above, and not the property line as
otherwise allowed, except for commercial and industrial
properties for the term of economic priority established in
Subsection D below. [Amended 2-8-2011 by Ord. No. 09-11]
(2) Exceptions. Density in the PRC Planned Retirement Community
and the PMURD Planned Mixed Unit Residential Development
Zones, where a net density maximum has been determined
anticipating the exclusion of wetlands and buffers, and as set forth
and defined in § 244-6, shall remain unchanged.
§ 244-45 JACKSON CODE § 244-45
1:778
§ 244-46. R-2, R-3 and R-5 Residential Zones. [Amended 8-13-2001
by Ord. No. 36-01]
D. The term of economic priority is a period of five years from January 1,
2011, through December 31, 2015, or such term as otherwise extended
or shortened by the governing body, in which commercial and industrial
developments shall be exempt as described above. [Added 2-8-2011
by Ord. No. 09-11]
A. Permitted principal uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) Community residences for the developmentally disabled.
[Amended 3-10-2003 by Ord. No. 4-03]
(2) Community shelters for victims of domestic violence. [Amended
3-10-2003 by Ord. No. 4-03]
(3) Detached single-family dwelling units.
(4) All farm and agriculture activities, horses, livestock and poultry
raising.
(5) Municipal parks, playgrounds and other such municipal buildings
and uses as are deemed appropriate and necessary by the
Township Committee.
(6) Federal, state, county and other public buildings and grounds,
including parks, playgrounds or other public recreational uses or
areas, excluding public schools. [Amended 3-16-2017 by Ord.
No. 03-17]
(7) (Reserved)129
(8) Essential services.
B. Permitted accessory uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) Dog pens, provided that they are located behind the rear building
line and not in the required side or rear yard setback for the
respective zone.
(2) Farm buildings for the storage of farm animals, farm products or
farm equipment or for the processing of farm products, and which
are located on the same premises as the principal use or building.
(3) Farm markets for the sale of produce and farm products grown or
raised on the premises.
(4) Fences and walls, subject to the provisions of § 244-190.
(5) Nurseries and greenhouses.
129. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection A(7), regarding private or parochial schools not
operated for profit, was repealed 3-16-2017 by Ord. No. 03-17.
§ 244-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-46
1:779
(6) Off-street parking and private garages.
(7) Private residential swimming pools, subject to the provisions of
§ 244-216.
(8) Satellite dish antennas, subject to the provisions of § 244-165.
(9) Sheds (garden, storage or tool).
(10) Signs, subject to the provisions of § 244-207.
(11) Other customary accessory uses, buildings and structures, which
are clearly incidental to the principal use and building.
(12) Family day-care home.
C. Conditional uses, subject to the provisions of Article VIII of this chapter,
are as follows:
(1) Cemeteries and mausoleums (§ 244-113).
(2) Child-care centers, nursery schools and day-care centers
(§ 244-114).
(3) Churches and place of worship (§ 244-115).130
(4) Farmers' markets (§ 244-119).
(5) Health care facilities (§ 244-120).
(6) Home occupations (§ 244-121).
(7) Home professional offices (§ 244-122).
(8) Hospitals, philanthropic or eleemosynary uses (§ 244-123).
(9) Life care facility or development (§ 244-125).
(10) Public utilities (§ 244-128).
(11) Quasi-public and private club recreation areas (§ 244-129).
(12) Veterinary clinics or hospitals or animal care facilities (§ 244-132).
D. Density, area, yard and building minimum requirements are as follows:
District
Requirements R-5 R-3 R-2
Maximum density 1 unit/5
acres
1 unit/3
acres
1 unit/2
acres
Standard lots:
130. Editor's Note: Original § 109-44C(4), Community residences for the developmentally
disabled, and C(5), Community shelters for victims of domestic violence, of the 1972 Code,
which immediately followed this subsection, were repealed 3-10-2003 by Ord. No. 4-03.
§ 244-46 JACKSON CODE § 244-46
1:780
District
Requirements R-5 R-3 R-2
Lot minimums:
Area (square feet) 215,000 130,000 87,000
Width (feet) 200 200 200
Frontage (feet) 100 100 100
Depth (feet) 400 400 400
Principal building minimum:
Front yard (feet) 80 80 60
Rear yard (feet) 50 50 50
Side yard (each) (feet) 60 50 30
Maximum height (feet) 35 35 35
Accessory building
requirements:
Barn, 3-sided lean-to with
roof, etc.:
Front yard setback
(feet)
Not permitted in front yard
Rear yard setback
(feet)
40 20 20
Side setback (feet) 40 20 20
Maximum building
height (feet)
25 25 25
Minimum distance from
dwelling on adjacent lot
(feet)
100 75 75
Greenhouses, nurseries:
Front yard setback
(feet)
Not permitted in front yard
Rear yard setback
(feet)
50 50 50
Side setback (feet) 100 50 50
Maximum building
height (feet)
25 25 25
Private garage (detached):
Front yard setback
(feet)
Not permitted in front yard
Rear yard setback
(feet)
100 100 50
Side setback (feet) 75 50 30
§ 244-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-46
1:781
District
Requirements R-5 R-3 R-2
Maximum building
height (feet)
25 25 25
Private residential
swimming pool:
Front yard setback
(feet)
Not permitted in front yard
Rear yard setback
(feet)
50 25 25
Side setback (feet) 50 50 30
Sheds (garden, storage or
tool):
Front yard setback
(feet)
Not permitted in front yard
Rear yard setback
(feet)
25 25 25
Side setback (feet) 40 40 25
Maximum building
height (feet)
25 25 25
Maximum building coverage
(combined coverage of all
principal and accessory
buildings)
10% 15% 15%
Clustered lots* requirements
for all zones:
Lot minimums:
Area (square feet) 43,560
Width (feet) 150
Frontage (feet) 75 (125 for corner lots)
Depth (feet) 200
Principal building minimum:
Front yard (feet) 40
Rear yard (feet) 50
Side yard (each) (feet) 20
Maximum height (feet) 35
Accessory building
requirements:
Private garage (detached):
§ 244-46 JACKSON CODE § 244-46
1:782
§ 244-47. R-1 Residential Zone. [Added 11-9-2010 by Ord. No.
30-10]
District
Requirements R-5 R-3 R-2
Front yard setback
(feet)
Not permitted in front yard
Rear yard setback
(feet)
50
Side setback (feet) 20
Maximum building
height (feet)
25
Private residential
swimming pool:
Front yard setback
(feet)
Not permitted in front yard
Rear yard setback
(feet)
15
Side setback (feet) 20
Shed (garden, storage or
tool):
Front yard setback
(feet)
Not permitted in front yard
Rear yard setback
(feet)
15
Side setback (feet) 15
Maximum building
height (feet)
25
Maximum building coverage 15%
NOTES:
* Minimum tract size for clustering shall be 10 acres; at least 50% of
the tract area outside of lots shall be non-wetlands.
E. Any structure conforming as to use in Zone R-2, R-3 or R-5 that has
received a certificate of occupancy or building permit or a structure
conforming on a lot that has received preliminary subdivision approval
as of the effective date of this chapter shall remain conforming under
the regulations existing as of the date of such certificate of occupancy,
building permit or approval.
A. Permitted principal uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) Community residences for the developmentally disabled.
§ 244-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-47
1:783
(2) Community shelters for victims of domestic violence.
(3) Detached single-family dwelling units.
B. Permitted accessory uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) Dog pens, provided that they are located behind the rear building
line and not in the required side or rear yard setback.
(2) Fences and walls, subject to the provisions of § 244-190.
(3) Off-street parking and private garages.
(4) Private residential swimming pools, subject to the provisions of
§ 244-216.
(5) Satellite dish antennas, subject to the provisions of § 244-165.
(6) Sheds (garden, storage or tool).
(7) Signs, subject to the provisions of § 244-207.
(8) Other customary accessory uses, buildings and structures which
are clearly incidental to the principal use and building.
(9) Family day-care home.
C. Conditional uses, subject to the provisions of Article VIII of this chapter,
are as follows:
(1) Child-care centers, nursery schools and day-care centers
(§ 244-114).
(2) Churches and places of worship (§ 244-115).
(3) Home occupations (§ 244-121).
(4) Home professional offices (§ 244-122).
(5) Public utilities (§ 244-128).
D. Density, area, yard and building minimum requirements are as follows
for existing lots.* New lots created by subdivision after the date of this
section shall comply with the R-3 zoning standards unless connected to
public sewer:
R-1 District
Type of Lot
Requirements Interior Corner
Maximum density 1 unit/1 acre* 1 unit/1 acre*
Standard lots (acres) 1 1
Lot minimums:
Area (square feet) 43,560 43,560
§ 244-47 JACKSON CODE § 244-47
1:784
R-1 District
Type of Lot
Requirements Interior Corner
Width (feet) 150 150
Frontage (feet) 75 125 each street
Depth (feet) 200 200
Principal building
requirements:
Minimum setbacks:
Front yard (feet) 40 40
Major street (feet) 60 60
Rear yard (feet) 50 —
Side yard (feet) (each) 20 20
Maximum height (feet) 35 35
Accessory building
requirements:
Private garage (detached):
Front yard setback Not permitted in front yard
Rear yard setback (feet) 50 50
Side yard setback (feet) 20 20
Maximum height 25 25
Private residential
swimming pool:
Front yard setback Not permitted in front yard
Rear yard setback (feet) 15 —
Side yard setback (feet) 20 20
Shed (garden, storage, tool):
Front yard setback (feet) Not permitted in front yard
Rear yard setback (feet) 15 —
Side yard setback (feet) 15 15
Maximum height (feet) 15 15
Maximum building coverage 15% 15%
Maximum lot coverage 50% 50%
§ 244-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-47
1:785
§ 244-48. R-20, R-15 and R-9 Residential Zones.
NOTE:
* All lots that were existing as conforming lots, either as part of
an approved subdivision or isolated with an existing residential
structure, in the R-1 Zoning Districts prior to November 9, 2010,
shall be considered conforming in size, but must conform to the R-1
standards for any future addition or accessory structure.
A. Permitted principal uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
[Amended 1-22-2001 by Ord. No. 03-01; 12-23-2002 by Ord. No.
50-02; 3-10-2003 by Ord. No. 4-03, 11-9-2010 by Ord. No. 31-10]
(1) Community residences for the developmentally disabled.
(2) Community shelters for victims of domestic violence.
(3) Detached single-family dwellings, subject to the provisions of the
standards set forth in § 244-48D, Schedule of Bulk Regulations
(attached as Schedule A).131
(4) Municipal parks, playgrounds and other such municipal buildings
and uses as are deemed appropriate and necessary by the
Township Committee.
(5) Federal, state, county and other public buildings and grounds,
including parks, playgrounds or other public recreational uses,
excluding, however, public schools, workshops, warehouses,
garages and storage yards. [Amended 3-16-2017 by Ord. No.
03-17]
(6) (Reserved)132
(7) Essential services.
(8) Family day-care home.
B. Permitted accessory uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) Dog pens, provided that they are located in the rear yard area and
not in the required side yard setback for the respective zone.
(2) Fences and walls, subject to the provisions of § 244-190.
(3) Off-street parking and private garages.
(4) Private residential swimming pools, subject to the provisions of
§ 244-216.
(5) Satellite dish antennas, subject to the provisions of § 244-165.
131. Editor's Note: Schedule A is included at the end of this chapter.
132. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection A(6), regarding private or parochial schools not
operated for profit, was repealed 3-16-2017 by Ord. No. 03-17.
§ 244-47 JACKSON CODE § 244-48
1:786
§ 244-49. R-30 Residential Zone. [Added 7-27-2011 by Ord. No.
24-11]
(6) Shed (garden, storage or tool).
(7) Signs, subject to the provisions of § 244-207.
(8) Other customary accessory uses, buildings and structures, which
are clearly incidental to the principal use and building.
C. Conditional uses, subject to the provisions of Article VIII of this chapter,
are as follows:
(1) Child-care centers, nursery schools and day-care centers
(§ 244-114).
(2) Churches and places of worship (§ 244-115).133
(3) Mixed-use development, only where contiguous to the MUD Zones.
(4) Home occupations (§ 244-121).
(5) Home professional offices (§ 244-122).
(6) Public utilities (§ 244-128).
(7) Quasi-public and private club recreation areas (§ 244-129).
(8) Single-family detached units on less than one acre, provided that
preliminary subdivision approval for the building lots has been
memorialized prior to the date of this subsection.134 [Added
1-22-2001 by Ord. No. 03-01]
D. Schedule of Bulk Regulations.135
A. Permitted principal uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) Community residences for the developmentally disabled.
(2) Community shelters for victims of domestic violence.
(3) Single-family dwelling units.
B. Permitted accessory uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) Dog pens, provided that they are located behind the rear building
line and not in the required side or rear yard setback.
133. Editor's Note: Original § 109-45C(3), Community residences for the developmentally
disabled, and C(4), Community shelters for victims of domestic violence, of the 1972 Code,
which immediately followed this subsection, were repealed 3-10-2003 by Ord. No. 4-03.
134. Editor's Note: Original § 109-45D of the 1972 Code, regarding area, yard and building
requirements, as amended 6-26-1993 by Ord. No. 26-93, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 1-22-2001 by Ord. No. 03-01.
135. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Bulk Regulations is included at the end of this chapter as
Schedule A.
§ 244-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-49
1:787
(2) Fences and walls, subject to the provisions of § 244-190.
(3) Off-street parking, subject to the provisions of § 244-197.
(4) Private residential swimming pools, subject to the provisions of
§ 244-216.
(5) Satellite dish antennas, subject to the provisions of § 244-165.
(6) Sheds (garden, storage or tool).
(7) Other customary accessory uses, buildings and structures which
are clearly incidental to the principal use and building.
(8) Family day-care home.
C. Conditional uses, subject to the provisions of Article VIII of this chapter,
are as follows:
(1) Home occupations (§ 244-121).
(2) Home professional offices (§ 244-122).
D. Density, area, yard and building minimum requirements are as follows
for existing lots. New lots created by subdivision after the date of this
section shall comply with the R-1 zoning standards unless connected to
public sewer:
Requirement Interior Lot
Lot minimums:*
Area (square feet) 30,000
Width (feet) 100
Frontage (feet) 75
Depth (feet) 200
Principal building requirements:
Minimum setbacks:
Front yard (feet) 35
Rear yard (feet) 40
Side yard (feet) (each) 20
Maximum height (feet) 35
Accessory building requirements:
Private garage (detached):
Front yard setback Not permitted in front yard
Rear yard setback (feet) 30
Side yard setback (feet) 20
Maximum height (feet) 25
§ 244-49 JACKSON CODE § 244-49
1:788
§ 244-50. MF Multifamily Zone.
Requirement Interior Lot
Private residential swimming pool:
Front yard setback Not permitted in front yard
Rear yard setback (feet) 15
Side yard setback (feet) 20
Shed (garden, storage, tool):
Front yard setback Not permitted in front yard
Rear yard setback (feet) 15
Side yard setback (feet) 15
Maximum height (feet) 15
Maximum building coverage 30%
Maximum lot coverage 70%
NOTE:
* All single-family dwellings in existence prior to the adoption of this
section shall be considered conforming for purposes of lot size
requirements, but shall be required to meet the above general,
setback, and height requirements for all new additions or accessory
structures and uses, except that all new accessory structures and
uses on Lexington Court must meet the general, setback, and height
requirements of the R-9 Zone.
A. Permitted principal uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) Community residences for the developmentally disabled.
[Amended 3-10-2003 by Ord. No. 4-03]
(2) Community shelters for victims of domestic violence. [Amended
3-10-2003 by Ord. No. 4-03]
(3) Multifamily dwellings at a gross density not to exceed six dwelling
units per acre and a net density not to exceed 10 dwelling units per
acre, subject to the provisions of this chapter.
(4) Attached single-family dwelling units at a gross density not to
exceed six dwelling units per gross acre and a net density not to
exceed 10 dwelling units per acre, subject to the provisions of this
chapter.
(5) Municipal parks, playgrounds and other such municipal buildings
and uses as are deemed appropriate and necessary by the
Township Committee.
(6) Federal, state, county and other public buildings and grounds,
including parks, playgrounds or other public recreational uses,
§ 244-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-50
1:789
excluding, however, public schools, workshops, warehouses,
garages and storage yards. [Amended 3-16-2017 by Ord. No.
03-17]
(7) (Reserved)136
(8) Raising of horses and other livestock.
(9) Essential services.
(10) Family day-care home.
B. Permitted accessory uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) Fences and walls, subject to the provisions of § 244-190.
(2) Off-street parking, subject to the provisions of this section and
§§ 244-197 and 244-198. [Amended 6-8-1998 by Ord. No.
15-98]
(3) Pump houses, which are directly used for the maintenance and
operation of a swimming pool serving a multifamily development.
(4) Satellite dish antennas, subject to the provisions of § 244-165.
(5) Sheds strictly for the storage of materials and equipment which are
directly used for the maintenance of the buildings and grounds of a
multifamily development. Private residential sheds shall not be
permitted.
(6) Signs, subject to the provisions of § 244-207.
(7) Swimming pools for residents of the multifamily development and
their guests, subject to the provisions of § 244-216. Private
residential swimming pools shall not be permitted.
(8) Other customary accessory uses and buildings, which are clearly
incidental to the principal use and buildings.
C. Conditional uses, subject to the provisions of Article VIII of this chapter,
are as follows:
(1) Churches and places of worship (§ 244-115).137
(2) Home occupations (§ 244-121).
(3) Public utilities (§ 244-128).
D. Area, yard and building minimum requirements for MF Zoning District
are as follows:
136. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection A(7), regarding private or parochial schools not
operated for profit, was repealed 3-16-2017 by Ord. No. 03-17.
137. Editor's Note: Original § 109-46C(2), Community residences for the developmentally
disabled, and C(3), Community shelters for victims of domestic violence, of the 1972 Code,
which immediately followed this subsection, were repealed 3-10-2003 by Ord. No. 4-03.
§ 244-50 JACKSON CODE § 244-50
1:790
Requirements Zoning District MF
Lot requirements:
Lot area (square feet) 435,600
Lot width (feet) 200
Lot frontage (feet) 200
Lot depth (feet) 200
Principal building requirements:
Front yard setback (feet) 100
Rear yard setback (feet) 100
Side yard setback, each side (feet) 50
Maximum building height (feet) 35
Accessory building requirements:
Pump house (swimming pool) or shed
(swimming pool):
Front yard setback (feet) Not permitted in front yard
Rear yard setback (feet) 50
Side yard setback (feet) 50
Maximum building height (feet) 15
Swimming pool:
Front yard setback (feet) Not permitted in front yard
Rear yard setback (feet) 50
Side yard setback (feet) 50
E. Buffer areas.
(1) Each and every parcel of land included in an application for
development under the provisions herein shall provide for a proper
buffer along the front, rear and side perimeter boundary lines
along the tract. Said buffer shall be measured from the perimeter
boundary line of the tract or from the future right-of-way of any
existing or proposed dedicated public street. The front and side
yard buffer shall be a minimum of 50 feet, and the rear yard buffer
shall be a minimum of 75 feet. In the case of a corner parcel
fronting on two streets, the fifty-foot front yard buffer shall be
measured along both street frontages. However, where a proposed
multifamily development adjoins an existing detached single-family
dwelling unit or a single-family residential zoning district, the
minimum side and rear yard tract buffer shall be 100 feet, provided
that the minimum front yard tract buffer to an existing street shall
be 50 feet. Any and all buffers required herein shall not contain the
area needed to satisfy the setback or distance between building
requirements of this chapter for the interior developed portion of
§ 244-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-50
1:791
the tract. Buffers shall be provided in addition to all bulk standards
and criteria.
(2) Buffer areas shall be developed in an aesthetic manner for the
primary purpose of screening views and reducing noise perception
beyond the lot. Buffer widths shall be measured horizontally and
perpendicularly to lot and street lines. No structure, except as
otherwise provided herein, activity, storage of materials, decks,
patio or parking of vehicles shall be permitted in a buffer area. The
location and design of buffers shall consider the use of the portion
of the property being screened; the distance between the use and
the adjoining property line; differences in elevation; the type of
buffer, such as dense planting, existing woods, a wall or fence;
buffer height; buffer width; and other combinations of man-made
and natural features. The buffer shall be designed, planted, graded,
landscaped and developed with the general guideline that the
closer a use or activity is to a property line or the more intense the
use, the more effective the buffer area must be in obscuring light
and vision and reducing noise beyond the lot.
(3) The preservation of all natural wooded tracts shall be an integral
part of all plans and may be calculated as part of the required
buffer area, provided that the growth is of a density and the area
has sufficient width to serve the purpose of a buffer, as determined
by the Planning Board.
(4) All buffer areas shall be planted and maintained in accordance with
the requirements of § 244-193.
F. Building length. No principal building, when viewed from any elevation,
shall be greater than 200 feet in length.
G. Courtyards. Courtyards bounded on three or more sides by wings of the
same building or by the walls of separate buildings shall have a
minimum court width of three feet for each one foot in height of the
tallest building or building wing.
H. Distances.
(1) Distances between principal buildings. The minimum distances
between principal buildings shall be as follows:
(a) Any building side wall to side wall shall have a minimum
distance of 30 feet between the midpoint of said side walls and/
or a minimum distance of 25 feet between the side wall
corners.
(b) Any building side wall to front or rear building walls shall be a
minimum distance of 40 feet between the midpoint of said
walls and/or a minimum distance of 30 feet between the side
wall building corner and front or rear wall building corner.
§ 244-50 JACKSON CODE § 244-50
1:792
(c) Any front-to-rear, front-to-front or rear-to-rear building wall
shall have a minimum distance of 50 feet between the midpoint
of said walls and/or a minimum distance of 40 feet between the
building wall corners.
(2) Distance between principal buildings and access driveways or
internal roadway. No multifamily dwellings shall be located closer
than 30 feet to the curbline of any access driveway or internal
roadway.
(3) Distance between principal buildings and parking areas. No
principal building shall be located closer than 20 feet to the
curbline of any parking area, except for access aisles or driveways
to garages and/or carports which are attached to principal
buildings, where the minimum distance shall be 25 feet.
I. Garages and/or carports.
(1) Garage and/or carport parking spaces to be counted toward
meeting off-street parking requirements shall comply with the
provisions of §§ 244-197 and 244-198. In addition, the driveway to
the garage and/or carport spaces is adjacent to and accessible from
an access aisle or internal roadway. [Amended 6-8-1998 by Ord.
No. 15-98]
(2) Garages and/or carports, when not attached to a principal building,
shall not be located any closer than 30 feet to any principal
building.
J. Homeowners' association.
(1) A homeowners' association organized under the Nonprofit
Corporation Act of the State of New Jersey138 shall be established
for the purposes of owning and assuming ownership and
maintenance responsibilities for the common open space and
common property designed within a multifamily development,
pursuant to state statutes.
(2) The homeowners' association of a multifamily development shall be
responsible for the following:
(a) Snowplows;
(b) Snow removal;
(c) Solid waste storage, collection, disposal and recycling; and
(d) The replacement, repair and maintenance of all private
utilities, streetlighting, internal roadway improvements,
access drive and parking lot improvements, curbs, sidewalks,
138. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 15A:1-1 et seq.
§ 244-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-50
1:793
landscaping, common open space and recreation facilities and
equipment.
K. Improvements. Unless specified otherwise herein, all public and private
improvements on the site of a multifamily development shall comply
with the standards, criteria and requirements of this chapter.
L. Landscaping. Landscaping within a multifamily development in an MF
District shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of
§ 244-193.
M. Laundry equipment. No outside area or equipment shall be provided for
the hanging or outside airing of laundry in any manner.
N. Lighting. All interior development roads, parking areas, dwelling
entranceways and pedestrian walks within a development in the MF
District shall be provided with sufficient illumination to minimize
hazards to pedestrians and motor vehicles utilizing the same, but in no
case shall such lighting be less than is required to provide a minimum
lighting level of five-tenths horizontal footcandle throughout such areas
from dusk to dawn. Lights shall be shielded to avoid glare disturbing to
occupants of the buildings and shall be so arranged as to reflect away
from all adjoining properties.
O. Open space and recreation. Every tract of land developed in the MF
Residential Zoning District shall include common open space and active
and passive recreation facilities in accordance with the following:
(1) A minimum of 40% of the gross tract acreage shall be dedicated to
public and/or private use for active and passive open space and
recreational purposes and for common open space.
(2) Lands used or deeded to public agencies for roads, streets or
utilities, including utility easements, shall not be defined as
common open space. However, bodies of water located within the
tract may be counted as common open space.
(3) All lands set aside for open space shall be developed with active
and passive recreational facilities to service the needs of the future
resident population. The municipal agency shall have complete and
final determination as to the adequacy, usefulness and
functionalism of the lands set aside for open space.
(4) There shall be a close visual and physical relationship between
open space and dwelling units. Open space areas shall be an
integral part of the development and shall be located to best suit
the purpose(s) for which they are intended.
(5) Every parcel offered to and accepted by the Township shall be
clearly indicated on the final plat by metes and bounds and
conveyed by deed at the time that final plat approval is granted.
Such acceptance is subject to any conditions the Township may
§ 244-50 JACKSON CODE § 244-50
1:794
impose. Said deeds shall contain restrictions stating to what use(s)
such land(s) shall be restricted.
(6) Any lands offered to the Township shall be subject to approval by
the governing body after review and recommendation by the
municipal agency. The municipal agency shall be guided by the
Master Plan, the ability to assemble and relate such lands to an
overall plan, the accessibility and potential utility of such lands and
such existing features which may enhance or detract from the
intended use of the lands. The municipal agency may request an
opinion from other agencies or individuals as to the advisability of
accepting any lands to be offered.
(7) Any lands dedicated for open space purposes shall contain
appropriate covenant and deed restrictions approved by the
municipal agency which ensure that:
(a) The open space area will not be further subdivided in the
future.
(b) The use of the open space area will continue in perpetuity for
the purpose(s) specified.
(c) Appropriate provisions are made for the maintenance of the
open space areas.
(8) Undeveloped open space, standards for determination.
(a) All common open space shall be either undeveloped open
space or developed open space. Undeveloped open space shall
generally be left in its natural state. To qualify as undeveloped
open space, the land shall include, wherever feasible, natural
features such as wetlands, streams, brooks, wooded areas,
steep slopes and other natural features of scenic and
conservation value. The developer may be required to plant
trees or make other similar landscaping improvements when
the natural cover is inadequate.
(b) There shall be no developments of any kind of undeveloped
open space land except the following:
[1] Footpath.
[2] Jogging trails.
[3] Bicycle path.
[4] Nature walk.
[5] Nature preserve.
[6] Ecological area.
[7] Buffer.
§ 244-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-50
1:795
[8] Body of water.
[9] Trees, shrubs and other plantings.
[10] Lighting and retaining walls and other features necessary
to protect the land or people who will use the land.
(9) Developed open space; standards for determination.
(a) Developed open space is intended to serve the active and
passive recreation needs of the residents of the community.
Developed open space differs from undeveloped open space in
that the former requires regular maintenance for the upkeep of
equipment and/or vegetation. In no case shall any part of the
developed open space be of such size and shape as to be
unsuited for the intended use.
(b) All lands set aside for developed open space shall be developed
with active and passive recreational facilities to service the
needs of the future resident population. The municipal agency
shall have complete and final determination as to the adequacy,
usefulness and functionalism of the lands set aside for open
spaces.
(c) Permitted uses; ponds and lakes.
[1] The following are permitted uses of developed open space
land: sitting areas, play fields, game courts, playgrounds,
tot lots, tennis courts, swimming pools, bath houses,
community centers, garden plots for use of residents,
jogging/exercise courses, bikeways, etc.
[2] To encourage the retention or creation of ponds and lakes
for aesthetic and/or recreational purposes, 20% of the area
of any ponds or lakes may be counted, upon request of the
applicant, as developed open space.
(d) Swimming pools shall be required in multifamily developments
and shall comply with the provisions of § 244-216.
(e) Developed open space shall be provided at the rate of 250
square feet of developed active recreation space per dwelling
unit.
(f) Outdoor play equipment shall be installed in each recreation
area in sufficient amount and variety to service the dwelling
units of the multifamily development.
(10) All recreation space to be provided in accordance with the above
shall be located within convenient walking distance of the dwelling
units it is intended to serve.
§ 244-50 JACKSON CODE § 244-50
1:796
(11) The sectioning or phasing plan for the development shall show that
250 square feet of recreation space have been provided for each
dwelling unit in a section. Additionally, developed open space and
recreational facilities shall proceed at the same rate as
development of the dwelling units.
(12) The municipal agency may require a developer to make certain site
preparation improvements to open spaces. The municipal agency
may provide that said site preparation improvements are made a
part of the plan and are noted therein. The same may include the
following:
(a) Removal of dead trees or diseased trees.
(b) Thinning of trees or other growth to encourage more desirable
growth.
(c) Removal of trees in areas planned for ponds, lakes or active
recreational facilities.
(d) Grading and seeding.
(e) Improvement or protection of the natural drainage system by
the use of protective structures.
(13) Wherever possible, all the following land areas and features shall
be preserved as undeveloped open space:
(a) Wetlands and floodplain areas, as defined by Township
ordinance, state statute or regulation.
(b) Areas containing significant clusters of trees.
(c) Lands with slopes of more than 15%.
(d) Lands with seasonal high water tables of less than 24 inches.
P. Parking.
(1) Parking shall be provided in accordance with §§ 244-197 and
244-198.139 [Amended 6-8-1998 by Ord. No. 15-98]
(2) Parking along all internal streets, driveways and parking lot aisles
within a multifamily development shall not be permitted. "No
Parking" signs shall be posted at regular intervals along such areas
at the developers expense.
Q. Sectionalization and staging plan. A sectionalization and staging plan
for the construction of all development shall be submitted as part of the
preliminary site plan application and shall show the following:
139. Editor's Note: Original § 109-46P(2) of the 1972 Code, pertaining to garages and carports,
which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 6-8-1998 by Ord. No. 15-98.
§ 244-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-50
1:797
(1) The anticipated date for commencing construction of each section
or stage. The staging of development on the site shall be such that
if development of the site were discontinued after the completion of
any stage, the developed portion of the site would comply in all
respects to the requirements of this chapter and be provided with
adequate drainage and utility systems.
(2) Those improvements that will be completed in each stage prior to
application for certificate of occupancy. The plan should
demonstrate that the staging of construction will minimize adverse
effects upon occupied buildings on the site and adjoining
properties.
R. Sidewalks and aprons. Sidewalks and aprons shall be provided in
accordance with the provisions of §§ 244-203 and 244-204 and shall be
designed and constructed as part of an integrated sidewalk system
within a multifamily development. [Amended 6-8-1998 by Ord. No.
15-98]
S. Solid waste storage.
(1) Solid waste storage shall be provided in accordance with the
provisions of § 244-208.
(2) The preliminary and final site development plans of a development
shall illustrate the method of refuse collection and shall note the
locations of refuse areas, in addition to the size, height and type of
screening for same.
(3) Solid waste storage, collection and disposal shall be the
responsibility of the homeowners' association.
(4) Separate collection bins, located in accordance with the
requirements of § 244-208, shall be provided for the collection of
recyclable materials.
T. Streets, internal.
(1) All streets with a development in a MF Zoning District shall be
provided in accordance with the requirements of §§ 244-210,
244-211 and 244-212. [Amended 6-8-1998 by Ord. No. 15-98]
(2) No street, driveway, parking aisle or parking area located within a
development in an MF Zoning District shall have a name which will
duplicate or so nearly duplicate so as to be confused with the
names of any other existing public or private street located within
the Township of Jackson. All street names shall be subject to the
approval of the municipal agency.
U. Dwelling units.
(1) Unit elevations. Each dwelling unit and combined complex of
dwelling units shall have a compatible architectural theme with
§ 244-50 JACKSON CODE § 244-50
1:798
§ 244-51. MF-AH-6 Multifamily Affordable Housing-6 Zone. [Added
1-22-2008 by Ord. No. 04-08]
variations in design to provide attractiveness to the development,
which shall include consideration of landscaping techniques,
building orientation to the site and to other structures, topography,
natural features and individual dwelling unit design, such as
varying unit widths, staggering unit setbacks, providing different
exterior materials, changing rooflines and roof designs, altering
building heights and changing types of windows, shutters, doors,
porches, color and vertical or horizontal orientation of the facades,
singularly or in combination for each dwelling unit.
(2) Unit offset. Not more than two consecutive dwelling units in the
same building shall be constructed without setbacks, offsets and/or
breaks in the front and rear building elevations of at least four feet.
(3) Unit storage. Each dwelling unit shall contain a minimum of 200
cubic feet of storage space within the walls of said unit. In addition
to storage which may be provided inside individual units in a
multifamily-building, there shall be provided 200 cubic feet, per
dwelling unit, of storage where personal effects and belongings
may be stored. Such storage shall be conveniently located and be
capable of being locked and separate from the belongings of other
occupants.
(4) Unit width. Each dwelling unit shall have a minimum width of 18
feet.
V. Utilities.
(1) All dwelling units in the project shall be served with public water,
sanitary sewers and underground electric, telephone and cable
television services. One cable television connection shall be
provided for each building.
(2) All dwelling units and clubhouse/community buildings shall be
connected to an approved and functioning public water supply
system and sanitary sewer system prior to the issuance of any
certificate of occupancy.
(3) All utilizing lines leading to and within the site of a multifamily
development shall be installed underground.
A. Intent. The intent of the MF-AH-6 Zone is to provide a suitable
location(s) for the construction of housing exclusively for low- and
moderate-income households consistent with the Township's duly
adopted Housing Element and Fair Share Plan.
B. Permitted principal uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
§ 244-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-51
1:799
(1) Multifamily dwellings at a gross density not to exceed six dwelling
units per acre.
C. Permitted accessory uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) Fences and walls, subject to the provisions of § 244-190.
(2) Off-street parking, subject to the provisions of this section and
§§ 244-197 and 244-198.
(3) Pump houses, which are directly used for the maintenance and
operation of utilities and/or a swimming pool serving a multifamily
development.
(4) Satellite dish antennas, subject to the owner's or homeowners'
association rules, as applicable.
(5) Sheds strictly for the storage of materials and equipment, which
are directly used for the maintenance of the buildings and grounds
of a multifamily development. Private residential sheds shall not be
permitted.
(6) Community identification signs, or monument signs, may be placed
on one or both sides of each entrance to the multifamily community.
Directional signs shall be permitted, as well as temporary sales,
leasing and community identification signs. Signs are subject to the
provisions of § 244-207.
(7) Swimming pools for residents of the multifamily development and
their guests, subject to the provisions of § 244-216. Private
residential swimming pools shall not be permitted.
(8) Recreational amenities (i.e., tot lots, courts, gazebos).
(9) Other customary accessory uses and buildings, which are clearly
incidental to the principal use and buildings including clubhouses,
community buildings, and management and leasing offices.
D. Area, yard and building minimum requirements for MF-AH-6 District
are as follows:
Requirements Zoning District MF-AH-6
Lot requirements:
Lot area (square feet) 435,600
Lot width (feet) 200
Lot frontage (feet) 50
Lot depth (feet) 200
Principal building requirements:
Front yard setback (feet) 50
Rear yard setback (feet) 100
§ 244-51 JACKSON CODE § 244-51
1:800
Requirements Zoning District MF-AH-6
Side yard setback, each side (feet) 50
Maximum building height (feet) 35
E. Buffer areas.
(1) Each and every parcel of land included in an application for
development under the provisions herein shall provide for a buffer
along the front, rear and side perimeter boundary lines along the
tract. Said buffer shall be measured from the perimeter boundary
line of the tract or from the future right-of-way of any existing or
proposed dedicated public street. The front, rear and side yard
buffer shall be a minimum of 50 feet. In the case of a corner parcel
fronting on two streets, the fifty-foot front yard buffer shall be
measured along both street frontages.
(2) Buffer areas shall be developed in an aesthetic manner for the
primary purpose of screening views and reducing noise perception
beyond the lot. Buffer widths shall be measured horizontally and
perpendicularly to lot and street lines. No structure, except as
otherwise provided herein, activity, storage of materials, decks,
patio or parking of vehicles shall be permitted in a buffer area.
Drainage and utility structures shall be permitted in the buffer
area. The location and design of buffers shall consider the use of
the portion of the property being screened; the distance between
the use and the adjoining property line; differences in elevation;
the type of buffer, such as dense planting, existing woods, a wall or
fence; buffer height; buffer width; and other combinations of manmade
and natural features. The buffer shall be designed, planted,
graded, landscaped and developed with the general guideline that
the closer a use or activity is to a property line or the more intense
the use, the more effective the buffer area must be in obscuring
light and vision and reducing noise beyond the lot.
(3) The preservation of all natural wooded tracts shall be an integral
part of all plans and may be calculated as part of the required
buffer area, provided that the growth is of a density and the area
has sufficient width to serve the purpose of a buffer, as determined
by the Planning Board.
(4) All buffer areas shall be planted and maintained to provide
screening and an aesthetically pleasing design. In general, the
Planning Board may approve waivers to the standard landscaping
requirements of this chapter, provided the plan presented is
appropriate and adequate to meet the intent of providing suitable
screening.
F. Building length. No principal building, when viewed from any elevation,
shall be greater than 200 feet in length.
§ 244-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-51
1:801
G. Distances.
(1) Distances between principal buildings. The minimum distances
between principal buildings shall be as follows:
(a) Any building side wall to side wall shall have a minimum
distance of 25 feet between the midpoint of said side walls and/
or a minimum distance of 20 feet between the side wall
corners.
(b) Any building side wall to front or rear building walls shall be a
minimum distance of 35 feet between the midpoint of said
walls and/or a minimum distance of 25 feet between the side
wall building corner and front or rear wall building corner.
(c) Any front-to-rear, front-to-front or rear-to-rear building wall
shall have a minimum distance of 45 feet between the midpoint
of said walls and/or a minimum distance of 35 feet between the
building wall corners.
(2) Distance between principal buildings and access driveways or
internal roadway. No multifamily dwellings shall be located closer
than 20 feet to the curbline of any access driveway or internal
roadway, except for access aisles or driveways to garages and/or
carports, where the minimum distance shall be 25 feet.
(3) Distance between principal buildings and parking areas. No
principal building shall be located closer than 15 feet to the
curbline of any parking area, except for access aisles or driveways
to garages and/or carports, which are attached to principal
buildings, where the minimum distance shall be 25 feet.
H. Garages and/or carports.
(1) Garage and/or carport parking spaces to be counted toward
meeting off-street parking requirements shall comply with the
provisions of §§ 244-197 and 244-198. In addition, the driveway to
the garage and/or carport spaces is adjacent to and accessible from
an access aisle or internal roadway.
(2) Garages and/or carports, when not attached to a principal building,
shall not be located any closer than 30 feet to any principal
building.
I. Maintenance of common areas. The condominium association,
homeowner association or owner of a multifamily development shall be
responsible for the following:
(1) Snowplowing/snow removal;
(2) The replacement, repair and maintenance of internal roadway
improvements, access drive and parking lot improvements, curbs,
§ 244-51 JACKSON CODE § 244-51
1:802
sidewalks, landscaping, common oven space and recreation
facilities and equipment; and
(3) Maintenance of stormwater collection system, drainage facilities,
and drainage basins.
(4) Solid waste storage, collection, disposal, and recycling.
J. Improvements. Unless specified otherwise herein, all public and private
improvements on the site of a multifamily development shall comply
with the standards, criteria and requirements of this chapter.
K. Landscaping. Landscaping within a multifamily development in an MFAH-
6 District shall be provided to create an aesthetically pleasing
design in accordance with the requirements of § 244-193. The Planning
Board may approve waivers to standard landscaping requirements of
this chapter, provided the plan presented is appropriate and adequate
to meet the intent of providing an interesting and attractive landscape.
L. Laundry equipment. No outside area or equipment shall be provided for
the hanging or outside airing of laundry in any manner.
M. Lighting. All interior development roads, parking areas, dwelling
entranceways and pedestrian walks within a development in the MFAH-
6 District shall be provided with sufficient illumination to minimize
hazards to pedestrians and motor vehicles utilizing the same, but in no
case shall such lighting be less than is required to provide a minimum
lighting level of 0.5 horizontal footcandle throughout such areas from
dusk to dawn. Lights shall be shielded to avoid glare disturbing to
occupants of the buildings and shall be so arranged as to reflect away
from all adjoining properties.
N. Open space and recreation. Every tract of land developed in the MFAH-
6 District shall include common open space and active and passive
recreation facilities in accordance with the following:
(1) Open space requirements. For the purposes of this section, the
term "open space" is defined to mean any area of land (exclusive of
buildings, streets, parking areas and utility rights-of-way or water)
which is open to the sky and which is set aside for active or passive
recreational use. Buffers may be included as passive recreation.
(2) A minimum of 25% of the gross tract acreage shall be set aside for
private use for active and passive open space and recreational
purposes and for common open space.
(3) Lands used or deeded to public agencies for roads, streets or
utilities, including utility easements, shall not be defined as
common open space. However, bodies of water located within the
tract may be counted as common open space.
§ 244-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-51
1:803
(4) Any lands set aside for open space shall be available for the
residents of the community to use for active and passive
recreational activities.
(5) There shall be a close visual and physical relationship between
open space and dwelling units. Open space areas shall be an
integral part of the development and shall be located to best suit
the purpose(s) for which they are intended.
(6) Open space may be offered for dedication to the Township. Every
parcel offered to and accepted by the Township shall be clearly
indicated on the final plat by metes and bounds and conveyed by
deed at the time that final plat approval is granted. Such
acceptance is subject to any conditions the Township may impose.
Said deeds shall contain restrictions stating to what use(s) such
land(s) shall be restricted.
(7) Any lands offered to the Township shall be subject to approval by
the governing body after review and recommendation by the
municipal agency. The municipal agency shall be guided by the
Master Plan the ability to assemble and relate such lands to an
overall plan, the accessibility and potential utility of such lands and
such existing features which may enhance or detract from the
intended use of the lands. The municipal agency may request an
opinion from other agencies or individuals as to the advisability of
accepting any lands to be offered.
(8) Any lands offered to the Township for open space purposes shall
contain appropriate covenant and deed restrictions approved by
the municipal agency which ensure that:
(a) The open space area will not be further subdivided in the
future.
(b) The use of the open space area will continue in perpetuity for
the purpose(s) specified.
(c) Appropriate provisions are made for the maintenance of the
open space areas.
O. Parking.
(1) Parking shall be provided in accordance with the New Jersey
Residential Site Improvement Standards (N.J.A.C. 5:21).
(2) Parking along all internal streets, driveways and parking lot aisles
within a multifamily development shall not be permitted, except
where parking is otherwise approved by the Planning Board. "No
Parking" signs shall be posted at regular intervals along such areas
where parking is prohibited at the developer's expense.
P. Sidewalks and aprons. Unless otherwise required pursuant to the New
Jersey Residential Site Improvement Standards (N.J.A.C. 5:21),
§ 244-51 JACKSON CODE § 244-51
1:804
sidewalks and aprons shall be provided, at a minimum on one side
of the street, and shall be designed and constructed as part of an
integrated sidewalk system within a multifamily development located to
facilitate safe pedestrian circulation throughout the community.
Q. Solid waste.
(1) Solid waste storage shall be provided in accordance with the
provisions of § 244-208.
(2) The preliminary and final site development plans of a development
shall illustrate the method of refuse collection and shall note the
locations of refuse areas, in addition to the size, height and type of
screening for same.
(3) Solid waste storage, collection and disposal shall be the
responsibility of the condominium association, the homeowners'
association, or the owner or as otherwise permitted in the
Municipal Services Act (N.J.S.A. 40:67).
(4) Separate collection bins, located in accordance with the
requirements of § 244-208, shall be provided for the collection of
recyclable materials.
R. Streets, internal.
(1) All streets, driveways, parking aisles and parking areas within a
development in an MF-AH-6 District shall be provided in
accordance with the requirements of the New Jersey Residential
Site Improvement Standards (N.J.A.C. 5:21)
(2) No street, driveway, parking aisle or parking area located within a
development in an MF-AH-6 District shall have a name which will
duplicate or so nearly duplicate so as to be confused with the
names of any other existing public or private street located within
the Township of Jackson. All street names shall be subject to the
approval of the municipal agency.
S. Utilities.
(1) All dwelling units in the project shall be served with public water,
sanitary sewers and underground electric, telephone and cable
television services.
(2) All dwelling units and clubhouse/community buildings shall be
connected to an approved and functioning public water supply
system and sanitary sewer system prior to the issuance of any
certificate of occupancy.
(3) All utility lines leading to and within the site of a multifamily
development shall be installed underground.
§ 244-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-51
1:805
§ 244-51.1. MF-AH-7 Multifamily Affordable Housing-7 Zone.
[Added 6-27-2017 by Ord. No. 13-17]
T. Affordable housing requirements. The developer of a development in
the MF-AH-6 District shall provide proof of a developer's agreement
with the Township of Jackson setting forth the terms, conditions,
requirements, and obligations of the respective parties. If the units are
to be rented, the owner and managing agent of a development shall at
all times be required to maintain consistency with applicable New
Jersey Council on Affordable Housing (COAH) Regulations and
monitoring requirements.
A. Intent. The intent of the MF-AH-7 Zone is to provide a suitable
location(s) for the construction of inclusionary housing, which will
provide the construction of a substantial amount of low- and moderateincome
households consistent with the Township's duly adopted
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan for the period 1999 to 2025. To
the extent that the regulations of this MF-AH-7 District conflict with any
other provision(s) and/or regulation(s) within the Township's Land Use
and Development Regulations, § 190-224 et seq., the provisions of this
section shall control.
B. Permitted principal uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) Multifamily dwellings at a total tract density not to exceed 216 total
units, of which 40 units shall be reserved as affordable units (as
"affordable unit" is defined by the regulations of the Council on
Affordable Housing and the Township's Land Use and Development
Regulations).
C. Permitted accessory uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) Fences and walls, subject to the provisions of § 244-190, with the
exception that the maximum wall height within the MF-AH-7
District shall be 10 feet.
(2) Off-street parking shall be subject to the provisions of this section
and §§ 244-197 and 244-198; provided that parking fields in the
MF-AH-7 District shall be permitted in the front yard setback,
provided that said parking fields are no less than 50 feet from the
property line.
(3) Pump houses, which are directly used for the maintenance and
operation of utilities and/or a swimming pool serving a multifamily
development.
(4) Satellite dish antennas, subject to the owner's or homeowners'
association rules, as applicable.
(5) Sheds strictly for the storage of materials and equipment, which
are directly used for the maintenance of the buildings and grounds
§ 244-51 JACKSON CODE § 244-51.1
1:806
of a multifamily development. Private residential sheds shall not be
permitted.
(6) Community identification signs, or monument signs, may be placed
on one or both sides of each entrance to the multifamily community.
Directional signs shall be permitted, as well as temporary sales,
leasing and community identification signs. Signs are subject to the
provisions of § 244-207.
(7) Swimming pools for residents of the multifamily development and
their guests, subject to the provisions of § 244-216. Private
residential swimming pools shall not be permitted.
(8) Recreational amenities (i.e., tot lots, courts, gazebos).
(9) Garages, provided said garages remain within ownership control of
the owner of the multifamily development or the homeowners'
association.
(10) Management and leasing offices and buildings or structures
necessary for the administration and/or maintenance of the
infrastructure, streets, off-street parking facilities, drainage
facilities, recreational facilities, open space areas, and other
facilities and areas that are the maintenance responsibility of a
homeowners' association for, or owner of, the development.
(11) Other customary accessory buildings, which are clearly incidental
to the principal use and buildings and for the exclusive use of
residents of the development, and which shall be limited to social
and recreational uses.
D. Area, yard and building minimum requirements for MF-AH-7 District
are as follows:
(1) Applicable bulk standards.
Standard MF-AH-7 Requirements
Density Requirements
Maximum residential yield (units) 216
Affordable housing set-aside (units) 40
Lot Requirements
Minimum lot area (acres) 35
Minimum lot width (feet) 200
Minimum lot frontage (feet) 200
Minimum lot depth (feet) 200
Principal Building
Requirements
Minimum front yard setback (feet) 100
§ 244-51.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-51.1
1:807
Standard MF-AH-7 Requirements
Minimum rear yard setback (feet) 100
Minimum side yard setback (feet) 50
Maximum building height
(including Clubhouse) (feet)
42 and 3 stories
Maximum building length (feet) 230
Accessory Building
Requirements - Garages
Minimum distance from principal
building
30
Minimum front yard setback (feet) 100
Minimum rear yard setback (feet) 50
Minimum side yard setback (feet) 50
Maximum building height (feet) 15
Minimum Buffer Area
Requirements
Front yard buffer (feet) 35
Rear yard buffer (feet) 75
Side yard buffer (feet) 50
Buffer adjacent to single-family
dwelling unit or single-family
residential zoning district (feet)
100
Front yard buffer to an existing
street (feet)
35
Minimum Building Distance
Requirements
Side wall to side wall at midpoint
(feet)
30
Side wall to front or rear wall at
midpoint (feet)
40
Front wall to rear wall at midpoint
(feet)
50
Rear wall to rear wall at midpoint
(feet)
50
Distance between principal
building and access driveway or
internal driveway curbline (feet)
25
Distance between principal
building and parking area curbline
(feet)
20
§ 244-51.1 JACKSON CODE § 244-51.1
1:808
Standard MF-AH-7 Requirements
Distance between principal
building and access aisle or
driveway to garage or carport (feet)
25
Monument Sign Requirements
Maximum number of signs 2
Maximum sign height (feet) 6
Maximum sign size (square feet) 48
Minimum distance to street rightof-
way (feet)
25
Minimum distance to a property
line (feet)
5
(2) Buffering and landscaping requirements. Buffer areas shall be
developed in an aesthetic manner for the primary purpose of
screening views and reducing noise perception beyond the lot.
Buffer widths shall be measured horizontally and perpendicularly
to lot and street lines. No structure, except as otherwise provided
herein, activity, storage of materials, decks, patio or parking of
vehicles shall be permitted in a buffer area. Drainage and utility
structures shall be permitted in the buffer area. The location and
design of buffers shall consider the use of the portion of the
property being screened; the distance between the use and the
adjoining property line; differences in elevation; the type of buffer,
such as dense planting, existing woods, a wall or fence; buffer
height; buffer width; and other combinations of man-made and
natural features. The buffer shall be designed, planted, graded,
landscaped and developed with the general guideline that the
closer a use or activity is to a property line or the more intense the
use, the more effective the buffer area must be in obscuring light
and vision and reducing noise beyond the lot.
(a) All applications, to the extent feasible, shall seek to preserve
all natural wooded tracts along perimeter areas of a given tract
and may be calculated as part of the required buffer area,
provided that the growth is of a density and the area has
sufficient width to serve the purpose of a buffer.
(b) All buffer areas shall be planted and maintained to provide
screening and an aesthetically pleasing design. In general, the
Planning Board may approve waivers to the standard
landscaping requirements of this chapter, provided the plan
presented is appropriate and adequate to meet the intent of
providing suitable screening.
(c) Landscaping within a multifamily development in an MF-AH-7
District shall be provided to create an aesthetically pleasing
design in accordance with the requirements of § 244-193,
§ 244-51.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-51.1
1:809
provided that buffers along major collector roads within the
MF-AH-7 District shall be a minimum of 35 feet. The Planning
Board may approve waivers to standard landscaping
requirements of this chapter, provided the plan presented is
appropriate and adequate to meet the intent of providing an
interesting and attractive landscape.
E. Laundry equipment. No outside area or equipment shall be provided for
the hanging or outside airing of laundry in any manner.
F. Lighting. All interior development roads, parking areas, dwelling
entranceways and pedestrian walks within a development in the MFAH-
7 District shall be provided with sufficient illumination to minimize
hazards to pedestrians and motor vehicles utilizing the same, but in no
case shall such lighting be less than is required to provide a minimum
lighting level of 0.5 horizontal footcandle throughout such areas from
dusk to dawn. Lights shall be shielded to avoid glare disturbing to
occupants of the buildings and shall be so arranged as to reflect away
from all adjoining properties.
G. Open space and recreation. Every tract of land developed in the MFAH-
7 District shall include common open space and active and passive
recreation facilities in accordance with the following:
(1) Open space requirements. For the purposes of this section, the
term "open space" is defined to mean any area of land (exclusive of
buildings, streets, parking areas and utility rights-of-way or water)
which is open to the sky and which is set aside for active or passive
recreational use. Buffers may be included as passive recreation.
(2) A minimum of 25% of the gross tract acreage shall be set aside for
private use for active and passive open space and recreational
purposes and for common open space.
(3) Lands used or deeded to public agencies for roads, streets or
utilities, including utility easements, shall not be defined as
common open space. However, bodies of water located within the
tract may be counted as common open space.
(4) Any lands set aside for open space shall be available for the
residents of the community to use for active and passive
recreational activities.
(5) There shall be a close visual and physical relationship between
open space and dwelling units. Open space areas shall be an
integral part of the development and shall be located to best suit
the purpose(s) for which they are intended.
H. Parking.
(1) Parking shall be provided in accordance with the New Jersey
Residential Site Improvement Standards (N.J.A.C. 5:21).
§ 244-51.1 JACKSON CODE § 244-51.1
1:810
(2) Parking along all internal streets, driveways and parking lot aisles
within a multifamily development shall be permitted.
I. Sidewalks and aprons. Unless otherwise required pursuant to the New
Jersey Residential Site Improvement Standards (N.J.A.C. 5:21),
sidewalks and aprons shall be provided, at a minimum on one side of
the street, and shall be designed and constructed as part of an
integrated sidewalk system within a multifamily development located to
facilitate safe pedestrian circulation throughout the community.
J. Solid waste.
(1) Solid waste storage shall be provided in accordance with the
provisions of § 244-208, provided that in the MF-AH-7 District, the
provisions of § 244-208J shall not be applicable. With respect to the
area and distance requirements within the MF-AH-7 District, there
shall be provided at least three outdoor solid waste storage areas,
and such solid waste storage areas shall not be located further than
500 feet from the entrance of any dwelling unit which is intended to
be served. The foregoing requirements shall not be applicable if a
trash compactor is proposed to serve the development.
(2) The preliminary and final site development plans of a development
shall illustrate the method of refuse collection and shall note the
locations of refuse areas, in addition to the size, height and type of
screening for same.
(3) Solid waste storage, collection and disposal shall be the
responsibility of the condominium association, the homeowners'
association, or the owner or as otherwise permitted in the
Municipal Services Act (N.J.S.A. 40:67).
(4) Separate collection bins, located in accordance with the
requirements of § 244-208, shall be provided for the collection of
recyclable materials.
K. Streets, internal.
(1) All streets, driveways, parking aisles and parking areas within a
development in an MF-AH-7 District shall be provided in
accordance with the requirements of the New Jersey Residential
Site Improvement Standards (N.J.A.C. 5:21).
(2) No street, driveway, parking aisle or parking area located within a
development in an MF-AH-7 District shall have a name which will
duplicate or so nearly duplicate so as to be confused with the
names of any other existing public or private street located within
the Township of Jackson. All street names shall be subject to the
approval of the municipal agency.
L. Utilities.
§ 244-51.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-51.1
1:811
(1) All dwelling units in the project shall be served with public water,
sanitary sewers and underground electric, telephone and cable
television services.
(2) All dwelling units and community buildings shall be connected to
an approved and functioning public water supply system and
sanitary sewer system prior to the issuance of any certificate of
occupancy.
(3) All utility lines leading to and within the site of a multifamily
development shall be installed underground.
(4) For any public improvement(s) required to be installed and/or
upgraded by an applicant as a condition of approval for any
development within the MF-AH-7 District, the applicant shall be
entitled to a credit against applicable connection fees for units
within the development up to the total construction costs of such a
public improvement(s), less the portion of such construction costs
representing applicant's pro-rata share of the costs of such public
improvements in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-42. In the event that the Township or any other public
entity is required to construct and/or upgrade any public
improvement(s), which construction is necessitated by any
development within the MF-AH-7 District, the applicant shall be
required to contribute its pro-rata share of the costs of such public
improvements in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-42.
M. Conformance with Township's tree removal provisions (§ 405-1 et seq.).
Tree removal for developments within the MF-AH-7 District shall be in
accordance with the provisions of § 405-1 et seq., provided that:
(1) The exemption area for any development within the MF-AH-7
District, as such exemption areas are defined at § 405-11E, shall be
established as 50% of the total tract size, which exemption area
shall be contiguous; and
(2) For purposes of tree replacement fees, developments within the
MF-AH-7 District shall be treated as commercial uses within the
meaning of § 405-9D.
N. Affordable housing requirements.
(1) An applicant for final site plan approval shall submit for approval
by the Township Affordable Housing Planner or designated
Administrative Agent as part of the submission for final approval a
project affordable housing plan demonstrating compliance with the
Township's Housing Element and Fair Share Plan; prevailing COAH
regulations, and the Uniform Housing Affordability Controls.
(2) The developer for any development within the MF-AH-7 District
shall enter into a developer's agreement with the Township of
§ 244-51.1 JACKSON CODE § 244-51.1
1:812
§ 244-51.2. MF-AH-8 Mixed Residential-Affordable Housing-8 Zone.
[Added 6-27-2017 by Ord. No. 12-17]
Jackson setting forth the terms, conditions, requirements and
obligations of the respective parties.
(3) Assuming a development yield of 216 total units, 40 of such
residential units developed with the MF-AH-7 Zone shall be
reserved for occupancy by low-income and moderate-income
households (hereinafter "affordable units"), as the term "affordable
units" is defined by the COAH regulations per the provisions of
N.J.A.C. 5:93-1 et seq.
O. Expedited application review process and exemption from cost
generative measures. The following review provisions shall apply to
development applications in the MF-AH-7 Zone:
(1) The applicant shall submit all plans and documents to the Planning
Board for review and approval. Completion review shall be done
within 20 business days of the receipt of the initial application and
within 10 days of any subsequent filing if the prior filing was
deemed incomplete. As soon as the application is deemed
complete, the Planning Board shall distribute the plans to those
persons and agencies desired and/or required by the Planning
Board and/or law to review, comment upon and/or approve
development plans and to all other municipal agencies which
normally review, comment upon and/or approve development
plans. The failure of a municipal agency to submit a report to the
Planning Board shall not extend the time for review and action by
the Board.
(2) The development plans submitted shall contain the information
ordinarily required by ordinance for complete applications,
reserving the applicant's right to request waivers from such
submission requirements.
(3) To the extent practical, counsel for the Board shall attempt to have
a memorialization resolution prepared the night of the Board's vote
on the application such that the Board can vote on the application
and resolution simultaneously.
A. Intent. The intent of the MR-AH-8 Zone is to provide a suitable
location(s) for the construction of inclusionary housing, which will
provide the construction of between 192 and 220 low- and moderateincome
households in a manner that is consistent with the Township's
duly-adopted Housing Element and Fair Share Plan for the period 1999
to 2025.
B. Permitted principal uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) Detached single-family dwellings.
§ 244-51.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-51.2
1:813
(2) Two-family dwellings.
(3) Multifamily dwellings.
(4) Open space and recreational uses and facilities.
(5) Retention drainage basin(s) and related structures; provided,
however, that said basin(s) is (are) designed and used as an
amenity and for aesthetic purposes, as well as for drainage, flood
control, water recharge and fire-protection purposes.
(6) Essential services.
(7) Clubhouses/community buildings for social and recreational uses.
[Added 3-13-2018 by Ord. No. 03-18]
C. Permitted accessory uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) Fences and walls, subject to the provisions of § 244-190.
(2) Gatehouses.
(3) Off-street parking and garages, subject to the provisions of
§ 244-197 and § 244-198.
(4) Satellite dish antennas, subject to the provisions of § 244-165.
(5) Sheds (garden, storage or tool): A maximum of one shed shall be
permitted per residential lot.
(6) Signs, subject to the provisions of § 244-207.
(7) Buildings or structures necessary for the administration and/or
maintenance of the infrastructure, streets, off-street parking
facilities, drainage facilities, recreational facilities, open space
areas and other facilities and areas that are the maintenance
responsibility of a homeowners' association for the development.
(8) Other customary accessory buildings, which are clearly incidental
to the principal use and buildings and for the exclusive use of
residents of the development, and which shall be limited to social
and recreational uses.
D. Conditional uses, subject to the provisions of Article VIII of this chapter,
are as follows:
(1) Public utilities subject to § 244-51.2; however, the minimum lot size
for a pump station shall be 20,000 square feet with minimum lot
width of 100 feet. [Amended 3-13-2018 by Ord. No. 03-18]
E. Area, yard and building requirements are as follows:
(1) The minimum tract area for a mixed residential development shall
be 100 contiguous acres under a single ownership or control.
§ 244-51.2 JACKSON CODE § 244-51.2
1:814
(2) The minimum tract frontage of a mixed residential development
shall be 250 continuous feet along an existing minor arterial or
major collector as identified in the Circulation Plan Element of the
Jackson Township Master Plan.
(3) The minimum tract width of a mixed residential development shall
be 250 feet.
(4) The minimum tract depth of a mixed residential development shall
be 250 feet.
(5) The maximum number of dwelling units in the MR-AH-8 Zone shall
be 1,100 units.
(6) The minimum unoccupied open space in a mixed residential
development shall be 30%.
(7) All parking areas and other aboveground improvements, with the
exception of access drives or access roadways, landscaping and
screening areas, and permitted signs shall be set back a minimum
of 35 feet from the exterior tract boundary of the mixed residential
development.
(8) Principal buildings shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet from the
exterior tract boundary of the mixed residential development.
(9) The following standards shall apply to multifamily residential
buildings in a mixed residential development:
(a) The maximum principal building height shall be 45 feet and not
more than three stories, subject to the provisions of § 244-156.
(b) The maximum building length viewed from any elevation shall
be 200 feet.
(c) No multifamily residential building shall contain more than 24
units.
(d) No multifamily residential building containing more than 16
units shall be located within 100 feet of any exterior boundary
of the mixed residential development.
(e) No multifamily residential building shall be located closer than
30 feet to any access drive or internal roadway.
(f) No multifamily residential building shall be located closer than
20 feet to any parking area, except for access aisles or
driveways to garages and/or carports that serve the
multifamily residential building.
(g) The minimum distances between multifamily residential
buildings and other principal buildings shall be as follows:
§ 244-51.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-51.2
1:815
[1] Any building side wall to side wall shall have a minimum
distance of 30 feet between the midpoint of said side walls,
and/or a minimum distance of 25 feet between the side
wall corners.
[2] Any building side wall to front or rear building walls shall
be a minimum distance of 40 feet between the midpoint of
said walls and/or a minimum distance of 30 feet between
the side wall building corner and front or rear wall
building corner.
[3] Any front-to-rear, front-to-front or rear-to-rear building
wall shall have a minimum distance of 50 feet between the
midpoint of said walls and/or a minimum distance of 40
feet between the building wall corners.
(10) Area, yard and building requirements for detached single-family
development and two-family development shall be as follows:
[Amended 3-13-2018 by Ord. No. 03-18]
(a) Single-family dwellings:
[1] Lot area: 9,000 square feet.
[2] Lot width: 75 feet.
[3] Lot frontage: 60 feet.
[4] Lot depth: 120 feet.
[5] Front yard setback: 30 feet.
[6] Rear yard setback: 30 feet.
[7] One side yard setback: 10 feet.
[8] Combined side yard setback: 20 feet.
[9] Maximum building height: 35 feet.
[10] Maximum accessory building height: 15 feet.
[11] Maximum building coverage: 30%.
[12] Maximum lot coverage: 70%.
[13] Environmentally constrained areas may be considered as a
portion of a 9,000 square foot lot; however, no
development shall be permitted on the environmentally
constrained area(s).
(b) Two-family dwellings:
[1] Lot area: 14,000 square feet.
§ 244-51.2 JACKSON CODE § 244-51.2
1:816
[2] Lot width: 110 feet.
[3] Lot frontage: 90 feet.
[4] Lot depth: 120 feet.
[5] Front yard setback: 30 feet.
[6] Rear yard setback: 30 feet.
[7] Side yard setback: 15 feet.
[8] Maximum building height: 35 feet.
[9] Maximum accessory building height: 15 feet.
[10] Maximum building coverage: 30%.
[11] Maximum lot coverage: 70%.
(c) Notwithstanding the bulk requirements for lots for two-family
dwellings that are set forth in this section, fee simple units on a
duplex lot shall be permitted, provided that the combined lots
for each duplex building shall meet the bulk requirements of
Subsection E(10)(b) above and further provided that one side
yard may be zero.
(d) No accessory building shall be located in any required front
yard area on single-family residential and two-family
residential lots.
(e) Environmentally constrained areas may be considered as a
portion of a 14,000 square foot lot; however, no development
shall be permitted on the environmentally constrained area(s).
(11) The maximum building height for clubhouses/community buildings
shall be 35 feet. [Added 3-13-2018 by Ord. No. 03-18]
F. Affordable housing requirements. [Amended 3-13-2018 by Ord. No.
03-18]
(1) Twenty percent of the residential units within a mixed residential
development, but no less than 192 units, shall be set aside for lowand
moderate-income households without court approval. A
minimum of 17% of the low- and moderate-income units shall be set
aside for very-low-income households per court-approved
settlement agreement, the Jackson Township Housing Element and
Fair Share Plan, COAH regulations and the Uniform Housing
Affordability Controls. The required very-low-income unit
requirement for the purposes of determining satisfaction of the
required 20% set-aside.
§ 244-51.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-51.2
1:817
(2) No fewer than 40% of the required low- and moderate-income units
shall be located in any given section of a mixed-residential
development.
G. Buffer requirements.
(1) No use, building, or structure shall be constructed, placed, located
or erected within 50 feet of an exterior boundary of the mixed
residential development, with the exception of entrance roadways,
gatehouses, signs, utilities, fences or walls.
(2) No portion of the tract buffer area shall be part of a private
residential or nonresidential lot, but instead shall be part of the
common open space used and maintained by the homeowners'
association.
(3) All buffer areas shall be in accordance with the provisions of
§ 244-50E(2), (3) and (4).
H. Solid waste storage.
(1) For multifamily residential units, without attached garages, solid
waste storage shall be provided in accordance with the provisions
of § 244-208.
(2) Solid waste storage areas shall be in accordance with the
provisions of § 244-50S(2), (3) and (4).
I. Outdoor lighting.
(1) All interior development roads, parking areas, dwelling
entranceways and pedestrian walks shall be provided with
sufficient illumination to minimize hazards to pedestrians and
motor vehicles utilizing the same, but in no case shall such lighting
be less than is required to provide a minimum lighting level of 0.5
horizontal footcandle throughout such areas from dawn to dusk.
Where necessary, lights shall be shielded to avoid glare disturbing
to occupants of the buildings. Lighting shall be so arranged as to
reflect away from all adjoining residential buildings.
J. Recreation. [Amended 3-13-2018 by Ord. No. 03-18]
(1) Passive and active recreation areas, such as pathways, natural
woods and fields, seating areas and lawns, shall be provided and
suitably arranged throughout the site.
K. Parking. [Amended 3-13-2018 by Ord. No. 03-18]
(1) Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the New
Jersey Residential Site Improvement Standards (N.J.A.C. 5:21-1).
(2) Off-street parking areas.
§ 244-51.2 JACKSON CODE § 244-51.2
1:818
(a) Shall be set back at least 25 feet from any road or drive aisle if
no parking is provided in front of a multifamily building; or
(b) Shall be set back 20 feet from the back of the curb if parking in
front of a multifamily building is provided.
(c) De minimus exceptions to these requirements may be granted
by the Planning Board to avoid cost-generative improvements
during the approval process.
L. Courtyards.
(1) Courtyards bounded on three or more sides by wings of the same
building or by the walls of separate buildings shall be a minimum
court width of three feet for each one foot in height of the tallest
building or building wing.
M. Garages and/or carports.
(1) Garages and/or carports serving multifamily development, when
provided in a mixed residential development, shall be in
accordance with § 244-501, § 244-197 and § 244-198.
N. Homeowners' association. [Amended 3-13-2018 by Ord. No. 03-18]
(1) A homeowners' association, composed of all of the residents of a
mixed residential development, shall be created and shall be
responsible for all of the activities per § 244-50J; provided,
however, that the association may obligate the owners or occupants
of individual units to remove snow from driveways and sidewalks
servicing their respective units.
O. Improvements.
(1) Unless specified otherwise herein, all public and private
improvements on the site of a mixed residential development shall
comply with the standards, criteria and requirements of this
chapter.
P. Landscaping.
(1) Landscaping within a mixed residential development shall be
provided in accordance with the requirements of § 244-193.
Q. Laundry equipment.
(1) No outside area or equipment shall be provided for the hanging or
outside airing of laundry in any manner.
R. Sectionalization and staging plan.
(1) A sectionalization and staging plan for the construction of a mixed
residential development shall be submitted as part of the
§ 244-51.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-51.2
1:819
preliminary site plan application and shall comply with the
requirements set forth in § 244-50Q.
S. Sidewalks and aprons. [Amended 3-13-2018 by Ord. No. 03-18]
(1) Sidewalks and aprons shall be provided in accordance with the
RSIS standards.
(2) De minimus exceptions to these requirements may be granted by
the Planning Board to avoid cost-generative improvements during
the approval process.
T. Dwelling units.
(1) Unit elevations. Each dwelling unit and combined complex of
dwelling units shall have a compatible architectural theme with
variations in design to provide attractiveness to the development,
which shall include consideration of landscaping techniques,
building orientation to the site and to other structures, topography,
natural features and individual dwelling unit design, such as
varying unit widths, staggering unit setbacks, providing different
exterior materials, changing rooflines and roof designs, altering
building heights and changing types of windows, shutters, doors,
porches, colors and vertical or horizontal orientation of the
facades, singularly or in combination.
(2) Unit offset. [Amended 3-13-2018 by Ord. No. 03-18]
(a) For townhomes and stacked townhomes, not more than two
consecutive dwelling units in the same building measured
horizontally shall be constructed without setbacks, offsets and/
or breaks in the front and rear building elevations of at least
two feet.
(b) For multifamily buildings other than townhomes and stacked
townhomes, not more than two consecutive dwelling units in
the same building measured horizontally shall be constructed
without setbacks, offsets and/or breaks in the front and rear
building elevations of at least four feet; provided, however, the
four-foot offset may be satisfied by a deck or patio for each
unit.
(3) Unit width. Each attached dwelling unit shall have a minimum
width of 18 feet.
U. Utilities.
(1) No individual wells or individual sewage disposal systems shall be
permitted, and each building shall be serviced with said utilities by
a central supply or disposal system, which is approved by the
Jackson Township Board of Health, Jackson Township Municipal
Utilities Authority and other controlling agencies. No building
permit shall be issued unless and until plans for such facilities have
§ 244-51.2 JACKSON CODE § 244-51.2
1:820
been submitted to the proper authorities for approval and adequate
provisions are made to ensure that such necessary facilities shall
be installed.
(2) All buildings shall be connected to an approved and functioning
public water supply system and sanitary sewer system prior to the
issuance of any certificate of occupancy.
(3) All utility lines within the site of a mixed residential development
shall be installed underground. [Amended 3-13-2018 by Ord.
No. 03-18]
(4) Unless otherwise required by the respective utility companies, all
utility lines leading to the site may be installed above ground.
[Added 3-13-2018 by Ord. No. 03-18]
V. General development plan approval permitted.
(1) A developer of a parcel of land greater than 100 acres in size for
which the developer is seeking approval of a mixed residential
development pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law, P.L. 1975, c.
291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.) may submit a general development
plan to the Planning Board prior to the granting of preliminary
approval of that development by the Planning Board.
(2) The general development plan shall set forth the permitted number
and type of dwelling units for the mixed residential development, in
its entirety, according to a schedule that sets forth the timing of the
various sections of the development. The mixed residential
development shall be developed in accordance with the general
development plan approved by the Planning Board notwithstanding
any provision of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.), or an
ordinance or regulation adopted pursuant thereto after the
effective date of the approval.
(3) The term of the effect of the general development plan approval
shall be determined by the Planning Board using the guidelines set
forth in Subsection V(4) of this section, except that the term of the
effect of the approval shall not exceed 20 years from the date upon
which the developer receives final approval of the first section of
the planned development pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.).
(4) In making its determination regarding the duration of the effect of
approval of the development plan, the Planning Board shall
consider the number of dwelling units to be constructed; prevailing
economic conditions, the timing schedule to be followed in
completing the development and the likelihood of its fulfillment;
the developer's capability of completing the proposed
development; and the contents of the general development plan
and any conditions which the Planning Board attaches to the
approval thereof.
§ 244-51.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-51.2
1:821
(5) The following details shall be submitted as part of the general
development plan:
(a) A general land use plan indicating the tract area and general
location of the permitted uses and residential dwelling unit
types to be included in the planned development at a scale of
not smaller than one inch equals 200 feet. The total number of
dwelling units proposed shall be set forth and the locations of
same shall be provided.
(b) A circulation plan showing the general location and types of
transportation facilities, including facilities for pedestrian
access within the planned development and any proposed
improvements to the existing transportation system outside
the planned development.
(c) An open space plan showing the proposed land area and a
general location of open space and recreation and any other
land areas to be set aside for conservation and purposes and a
general description of improvements proposed to be made
thereon, including a plan for the operation and maintenance of
parks, recreational lands and community facilities.
(d) A utility plan indicating the need for and showing the proposed
location of sewage and water lines; any drainage facilities
necessitated by the physical characteristics of the site;
proposed methods for handling solid waste disposal; and a plan
for the operation and maintenance of proposed utilities.
(e) A stormwater management plan setting forth the proposed
method of controlling and managing stormwater on the site.
(f) An environmental inventory, including a general description of
the vegetation, soils, topography, geology, surface hydrology,
climate and cultural resources of the site, existing man-made
structures or features, and the probable impact of the
development on the environmental attributes of the site.
(g) A community facility plan indicating the scope and type of
supporting community facilities, which may include but not be
limited to educational or cultural facilities, historic sites,
libraries, hospitals, firehouses and police stations.
(h) A housing plan outlining the number of housing units to be
provided and the extent to which the proposed development is
consistent with the affordable housing requirements pursuant
to the Jackson Township Housing Element and Fair Share Plan,
COAH Rules, and the Uniform Housing Affordability Controls.
(i) A local service plan indicating those public services which the
applicant proposes to provide and which may include, but not
be limited to, water, sewer, cable and solid waste disposal.
§ 244-51.2 JACKSON CODE § 244-51.2
1:822
(j) A fiscal report describing the anticipated demand on municipal
services to be generated by the mixed residential development
and any other financial impacts to be faced by Jackson
Township as a result of the completion of the development. The
fiscal report shall also include a detailed projection of property
tax revenues that will accrue to the county, Township and
school district according to the timing schedule provided
under Subsection V(5)(k) of this section, and following the
completion of the planned development in its entirety.
(k) A proposed timing schedule in the case of a planned
development whose construction is contemplated over a period
of years, including any terms or conditions which are intended
to protect the interests of the planned development prior to the
completion of the development in its entirety.
(l) A municipal development agreement, which shall mean a
written agreement between Jackson Township and a developer
relating to the proposed development.
(6) Required findings of the Planning Board. Prior to approval of a
general development plan, the Planning Board shall find the
following facts and conclusions:
(a) That departures by the proposed development from zoning
regulations otherwise applicable to the subject property
conform to the zoning ordinance standards for mixed
residential development.
(b) That the proposals for maintenance and conservation of the
common open space are reliable, and the amount, location and
purpose of the common open space are adequate.
(c) That provisions, through the physical design of the proposed
development, for public services, control over vehicular and
pedestrian traffic, and the amenities of light and air, recreation
and visual enjoyment are adequate.
(d) That the proposed development will not have an unreasonably
adverse impact upon the area in which it is proposed to be
established.
(e) In the case of a proposed development that contemplates
construction over a period of years, that the terms and
conditions intended to protect the interests of the public and of
the residents, occupants and owners of the proposed
development in the total completion of the development are
adequate.
(7) In addition, the Board may set forth those conditions which it
deems necessary to protect the interests of the general public and
§ 244-51.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-51.2
1:823
the residents of the mixed residential development. Such
conditions shall be predicated on the following criteria:
(a) That each stage of development shall include required open
space in proportion to that part of the total residential units in
the development. Such open space shall include both
recreation and conservation uses accessible to the resident
population within the development.
(b) That the size and timing of successive stages of a mixed
residential development shall be conditioned upon the
availability and provision of suitable capacity of facilities such
as arterial highways, primary roadways of Ocean County,
primary roadways of Jackson Township, sewer, water,
stormwater drainage, and other services whose capacities
must be expanded as a result of the development.
(8) General development plan; timing schedule modification. In the
event that the developer seeks to modify the proposed timing
schedule, such modification shall require the approval of the
Planning Board. The Planning Board shall, in deciding whether or
not to grant approval of the modification, take into consideration
prevailing economic and market conditions, anticipated and actual
need for residential units within Jackson Township and the region,
and the availability and capacity of public facilities to accommodate
the proposed development.
(9) General development plan hearing on modifications required.
(a) The developer may make amendments or revisions to the
general development plan. However, the developer shall be
required to gain the prior approval of the Planning Board if,
after approval of the mixed residential development, the
developer wishes to make any variation in the location of land
uses or to increase the density of residential development.
(b) Any variation in the location of land uses or increase in density
proposed in reaction to a negative decision of or condition of
development approval imposed by the Pinelands Commission
pursuant to P.L. 1979, c. 111 (N.J.S.A. 13:18A-1 et seq.), or
Department of Environmental Protection pursuant to P.L. 1979,
c. 111 (N.J.S.A. 13:18A-1 et seq.), shall be approved by the
Planning Board if the developer can demonstrate, to the
satisfaction of the Planning Board, that the variation being
proposed is a direct result of such determination by the
Pinelands Commission or the Department of Environmental
Protection, as the case may be.
(10) General development plan on modifications not required. Once a
general plan has been approved by the Planning Board, it may be
amended or revised only upon application by the developer
approved by the Planning Board.
§ 244-51.2 JACKSON CODE § 244-51.2
1:824
(11) Certification upon completion; failure to complete or comply;
termination of approval.
(a) Upon the completion of each section of the development as set
forth in the approved general development plan, the developer
shall notify the administrative officer, by certified mail, as
evidence that the developer is fulfilling his obligation under the
approved plan. For the purposes of this section, "completion"
of any section of the development shall mean that the
developer has acquired a certificate of occupancy for every
residential unit as set forth in the approved general
development plan and pursuant to Section 15 of P.L. 1975, c.
217 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-133).
[1] If the Township does not receive such notification at the
completion of any section of the development, the
Township shall notify the developer, by certified mail, in
order to determine whether or not the terms of the
approved plan are being complied with.
[2] If a developer does not complete any section of the
development within two years of the date provided for in
the approved plan, or if at any time the Township has
cause to believe that the developer is not fulfilling his
obligations pursuant to the approved plan, the Township
shall notify the developer, by certified mail, and the
developer shall have 30 days within which to give evidence
that he is fulfilling his obligations pursuant to the
approved plan. The Township thereafter shall conduct a
hearing to determine whether or not the developer is in
violation of the approved plan. If, after such a hearing, the
Township finds good cause to terminate the approval, it
shall provide written notice of same to the developer and
the approval shall be terminated 30 days thereafter.
(b) In the event that a developer who has general development
plan approval does not apply for preliminary approval for the
planned development that is the subject of that general
development plan approval within five years of the date upon
which the general development plan has been approved by the
Planning Board, the Township shall have cause to terminate
the approval.
(12) General development plan satisfactory completion. In the event
that a development that is the subject of an approved general
development plan is completed before the end of the term of the
approval, the approval shall terminate with the completion of the
development. For the purposes of this section, a development shall
be considered complete on the date upon which a certificate of
occupancy has been issued for the final residential unit in the last
section of the development in accordance with the timing schedule
§ 244-51.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-51.2
1:825
§ 244-52. MHP Mobile Home Park Zone.
set forth in the approved general development plan and the
developer has fulfilled all obligations pursuant to the approval.
(13) General development plan approval procedure. The Planning Board
shall grant or deny general development plan approval within 95
days after submission of a complete application to the
administrative officer, or within such further time as may be
consented to by the applicant. Failure of the Planning Board to act
within the period prescribed shall constitute general development
plan approval of the planned development.
W. Open space requirements. Every tract of land developed in the MFAH-
8 shall include common open space and active and passive
recreation areas in accordance with the following: [Added 3-13-2018
by Ord. No. 03-18]
(1) Open space requirements: For the purposes of this section, the
term "open space" is defined to mean any area of land (exclusive of
buildings, streets, parking areas, stormwater retention basins and
utility rights-of-way or water) which is open to the sky and which is
set aside for active or passive recreational use. Buffers may be
included as passive recreation.
(2) A minimum of 25% of the gross tract acreage shall be set aside for
private use for active and passive open space and recreational
purposes and for common open space.
(3) A minimum of 50% of the required open space shall be exclusive of
the environmentally constrained areas as listed in § 244-199A(3)(a)
through (d).
(4) Lands used or deeded to public agencies for roads, streets or
utilities, including utility easements, shall not be defined as
common open space. Bodies of water located within the tract may
be counted as common open space.
(5) Any lands set aside for open space shall be available for the
residents and guests of the residents to use for active and passive
recreational activities.
(6) There shall be a close visual and physical relationship between
open space and dwelling units. Open space areas shall be an
integral part of the development and shall be located to best suit
the purposes for which they are intended.
A. Permitted principal uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) Mobile homes occupied for dwelling purposes.
(2) Essential services.
§ 244-51.2 JACKSON CODE § 244-52
1:826
B. Permitted accessory uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) Recreation, and cultural facilities for the sole use of the residents of
the mobile home park and their guests, including but not limited to
the following:
(a) Clubhouse.
(b) Lake.
(c) Picnic grounds.
(d) Horseshoe pits.
(e) Shuffleboard courts.
(2) Fences and walls, subject to the provisions of § 244-190.
(3) Off-street parking, subject to the provisions of §§ 244-197 and
244-198. [Amended 6-8-1998 by Ord. No. 15-98]
(4) Satellite dish antennas, subject to the provisions of § 244-165.
(5) Sheds (garden, storage or tool).
(6) Signs, subject to the provisions of § 244-207.
(7) Other customary accessory uses, buildings and structures which
are clearly incidental to the principal use and building, including
facilities for maintenance and administration, streets and off-street
parking facilities.
C. Conditional uses, subject to the provisions of Article VIII of this chapter,
are as follows:
(1) Public utilities (§ 244-128).
D. Area, yard and building minimum requirements for MHP Zoning
District. [Amended 5-24-1993 by Ord. No. 24-93; 7-23-2001 by
Ord. No. 25-01]
(1) No building, structure or land shall be used or erected, altered,
enlarged or maintained except for a mobile home park within the
area which is in accordance with a site development plan approved
by the municipal agency. Such site development plan shall meet at
least the following minimum requirements:
Requirements Zoning District MHP
Tract requirements:
Tract area (square feet) 435,600
Mobile home space requirements:
Space area (square feet) 2,800
Space width (feet) 35
§ 244-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-52
1:827
Requirements Zoning District MHP
Mobile home location requirements:
Distance between units (as
originally located) (feet)
25
Distance between units (with
additions constructed) (feet)
25
Distance of unit from dwelling (feet) 50
Distance of unit from public right-ofway
(feet)
100
Distance of unit from internal street
(feet)
10
Distance of unit from rear and side
tract boundaries, each (feet)
10
Accessory building requirements:
Sheds (garden, storage or tool):
Front yard setback (feet) Not permitted in front
yard
Rear yard setback (feet) 3
Side yard setback (feet) 3
Maximum building height (feet) 12
(2) Required space between mobile home units.
(a) No mobile home unit shall be closer than 25 feet at any point to
an adjoining unit on either side and shall have a combined total
of 50 feet on both sides. In the case of replacement mobile
home units installed between May 24, 1993, and the effective
date of this act, said units shall comply with the standards and
regulations governing at the time of installation.
(b) Notwithstanding the requirements for minimum distances
between units and setbacks from internal streets cited above,
an existing mobile home unit within the mobile home park may
be replaced consistent with the following: [Added 5-6-2002
by Ord. No. 23-02]
[1] When replacing a single-wide mobile home with a singlewide
mobile home, or when replacing a double-wide
mobile home with a double-wide mobile home, the side
yard setback shall be 25 feet between units or the existing
setback, whichever is less. If a single-wide unit is being
replaced and the removed unit was less than 14 feet wide
and the new unit is 14 feet wide, the replacement home
will be permitted even if the setback distance is less than
25 feet; provided, however, in no case will the setback
distance be less than 10 feet.
§ 244-52 JACKSON CODE § 244-52
1:828
[2] When dealing with a replacement home, a park owner or
tenant resident shall be allowed to replace a single-wide
mobile home with a double-wide mobile home as long as
they comply with the twenty-five-foot side yard setback;
provided, however that a double-wide mobile home will be
allowed to be installed on the lot even if the twenty-fivefoot
side yard set back requirement cannot be achieved as
long as the applicant for the building permit submits a
notarized consent form from the occupants of both mobile
homes on either side of the replacement mobile home
which indicates that these occupants have no objection to
the placement of the double-wide mobile home on the lot;
and further provided that a minimum setback distance of
10 feet can be achieved.
[3] Decks with a setback distance of less than 25 feet will be
permitted if the applicant for the building permit submits a
notarized consent form from the occupant of the mobile
home which adjoins the area where the deck will be
located; provided, however, that all decks will maintain a
minimum setback distance of 10 feet.
E. Density.
(1) The maximum permitted gross residential density in an MHP
District shall be eight dwelling units/acre.
(2) The maximum permitted net residential density in an MHP District
shall be 12 dwelling units/acre.
F. Guaranties. Performance and maintenance guaranties shall comply
with the requirements established in Article V of this chapter.
G. Homeowners' association.
(1) A homeowners' association, organized under the Nonprofit
Corporation Act of the State of New Jersey,140 shall be established
for the purposes of owning and assuming ownership and
maintenance responsibilities for the common open space and
common property designed within a mobile home park, pursuant to
state statutes.
(2) The homeowners' association of a mobile home park shall be
responsible for the following:
(a) Snowplowing;
(b) Snow removal;
(c) Solid waste storage, collection, disposal and recycling; and
140. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 15A:1-1 et seq.
§ 244-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-52
1:829
(d) The replacement, repair and maintenance of all private
utilities, streetlighting, internal roadway improvements,
access drive and parking lot improvements, curbs, sidewalks,
landscaping, common open space and recreation facilities and
equipment.
H. Lighting. Interior development roads, parking areas, dwelling
entranceways and pedestrian walks shall be provided with sufficient
illumination to minimize hazards to pedestrians and motor vehicles
utilizing the same, but in no case shall such lighting be less than is
required to provide a minimum lighting level of 0.5 horizontal
footcandle throughout such areas from dusk to dawn. Lights shall be
shielded to avoid glare disturbing to occupants of the buildings and
shall be so arranged as to reflect away from all adjoining properties.
I. Open space and recreation. A minimum of 25% of the tract area shall be
provided as open space and recreation areas in an MHP District in
accordance with the provisions established in §§ 244-50O and 244-199.
J. Ordinance compliance. Mobile home parks shall comply with the
requirements set forth in Chapter 280, Mobile Home Parks, of the
Jackson Township Code.
K. Parking.
(1) Two off-street parking spaces per dwelling unit shall be provided.
(2) Off-street parking for other purposes shall be in accordance with
§ 244-197.
L. Sidewalks and aprons. Sidewalks and aprons shall be provided in
accordance with the provisions of §§ 244-203 and 244-204 and shall be
designed and constructed as part of an integrated sidewalk system
within a PRC. [Amended 6-8-1998 by Ord. No. 15-98]
M. Solid waste.
(1) Solid waste storage shall be provided in accordance with the
provisions of § 244-208.
(2) The preliminary and final site development plans of an MHP shall
illustrate the method of refuse collection and shall note the
locations of refuse areas in addition to the size, height and type of
screening for same.
(3) Solid waste storage, collection and disposal shall be the
responsibility of the homeowners' association.
(4) Separate collection bins, located in accordance with the
requirements of § 244-208, shall be provided for the collection of
recyclable materials.
N. Streets (internal).
§ 244-52 JACKSON CODE § 244-52
1:830
§ 244-53. PRC Planned Retirement Community Zone.
(1) All streets within a PRC, whether public or private, shall be
provided in accordance with the requirements of §§ 244-210,
244-211 and 244-212. [Amended 6-8-1998 by Ord. No. 15-98]
(2) No street or driveway located within a mobile home park shall have
a name which will duplicate or so nearly duplicate so as to be
confused with the names of any other existing public or private
street located with the Township of Jackson. All names shall be
subject to the approval of the municipal agency.
O. Utilities.
(1) No private individual wells or individual sewage disposal systems
shall be permitted, and each building shall be serviced with said
utilities by a central supply or disposal system which is approved by
the Jackson Township Board of Health, Jackson Township Municipal
Utilities Authority and other controlling agencies. No building
permit shall be issued unless and until plans for such facilities have
been submitted to the proper authorities for approval and adequate
provisions are made to ensure that such necessary facilities shall
be installed.
(2) All utility lines leading to and within the site of a mobile home park
shall be installed underground.
A. Permitted principal uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) Detached single-family dwellings.
(2) Two-family dwellings.
(3) Multifamily dwellings.
(4) Clubhouse/community buildings.
(5) Open space and recreational uses and facilities.
(6) Retention drainage basin(s) and related structures; provided,
however, that said basin(s) is (are) designed and used as an
amenity and for aesthetic purposes, as well as for drainage, flood
control, water recharge and fire-protection purposes.
(7) The following may be permitted within a PRC. If, however, the
following are provided, they shall be located within the PRC and
not on the perimeter of the development; they shall be for the
exclusive use of the residents of the PRC and their guests; and they
shall not consume more than 5% of the gross area of the tract of the
PRC:
(a) Cultural facilities.
§ 244-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-53
1:831
(b) Facilities reserved for doctors, dentists, medical clinics, first
aid facilities, other related medical facilities and opticians to
fulfill the professional needs of the residents of a PRC.
(c) A church use; provided, however, that it is located within the
clubhouse/community building; schools for religious education
and parish houses and convents shall not be permitted.
(d) Principal uses permitted in the Neighborhood Commercial
Zone.
(8) Fire stations.
(9) First aid stations.
(10)Raising of horses and other livestock.
(11) Essential services.
(12) Golf courses.
B. Permitted accessory uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) Fences and walls, subject to the provisions of § 244-190.
(2) Gatehouse.
(3) Off-street parking and garages, subject to the provisions of
§§ 244-197 and 244-198. [Amended 6-8-1998 by Ord. No.
15-98]
(4) Satellite dish antennas, subject to the provisions of § 244-165.
(5) Sheds (garden, storage or tool): A maximum of one shed shall be
permitted per residential lot.
(6) Signs, subject to the provisions of § 244-207.
(7) Accessory uses, buildings or structures necessary for the
administration and/or maintenance of the infrastructure, streets,
off-street parking facilities, drainage facilities, recreational
facilities, open space areas and other facilities and areas which
become the maintenance responsibility of the homeowners'
association of a PRC.
(8) Backup or emergency generator, conditioned upon review and
approval by the homeowner’s association of the PRC in which the
property is located. [Added 3-12-2019 by Ord. No. 08-19]
C. Conditional uses, subject to the provisions of Article VIII of this chapter,
are as follows:
(1) Public utilities (§ 244-128).
§ 244-53 JACKSON CODE § 244-53
1:832
(2) Age-restricted multifamily dwellings subject to the following
conditions: [Added 12-27-1999 by Ord. No. 27-99]
(a) The multifamily units are located on that portion of existing
Block 80, Lot 6, west of the approximate hypothetical southerly
extension of the easterly edge of Tilford Street right-of-way
across the full width of Lot 6.
(b) The age-restricted multifamily dwellings comprise the low- and
moderate-income housing component of Affordable Housing
Site No. 3 pursuant to the Township's approved housing
element of the Master Plan and Fair Share Plan.
(c) The development shall be subject to a developer's agreement
with the Township.
(d) The primary access to the development shall be from South
Boston Road. Improvements to South Boston Road shall be
made at the cost of the developer and shall be included in the
developer's agreement. Secondary or emergency access to the
development shall be provided.
(e) The number of low- and moderate-income units within the
development shall not exceed by more than 5% the set-aside
requirements established pursuant to § 244-224A(1).
(f) The developer of low- and moderate-income rental units
developed pursuant to this subsection shall receive a credit
against the number of low- and moderate-income units
required pursuant to § 244-224A(1). Such credit shall be
earned at a rate of one dwelling unit of credit per three lowand
moderate-rental units constructed and occupied, and
further provided that the maximum total of units credited for
the project shall be 19. Any such crediting shall be subject to
the required developer's agreement.
(g) The maximum permitted density shall be 22 dwelling units per
gross acre.
(h) The minimum lot area shall be five acres.
(i) To the maximum extent practicable, measures shall be
incorporated into the design of the low- and moderate-income
section of the development to foster the image that the units
are an integral part of the overall PRC. Such measures shall
include, as a minimum, architectural and aesthetic
compatibility and inclusion within the confines of any security
gating.
(j) The following additional requirements shall apply:
[1] Setback from public streets. All parking areas and other
aboveground improvements, with the exception of access
§ 244-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-53
1:833
drives or access roadways, landscaping and screening
areas, shall be set back a minimum of 35 feet from the
right-of-way of all public streets. Principal buildings shall
be set back a minimum of 55 feet from the right-of-way of
all public streets.
[2] Setback from other property lines. All parking areas and
other aboveground improvements including access drives,
with the exception of landscaping and screening areas,
shall be set back a minimum of 30 feet from all side and
rear lot lines.
[3] Minimum distance between principal buildings:
[a] Any building, side wall to side wall, shall have a
minimum distance of 30 feet between the midpoint of
said walls and/or a minimum distance of 25 feet
between the side wall corners.
[b] Any building, side wall to front or rear building walls,
shall be a minimum distance of 40 feet between the
midpoint of said walls and/or a minimum distance of
30 feet between the side wall building corner and
front or rear wall.
[c] Any front-to-rear, front-to-front or rear-to-rear
building wall shall have a minimum distance of 50 feet
between the midpoint of said walls and/or a minimum
distance of 40 feet between the building wall corners.
[4] Courtyards. Courtyards bounded on three or more sides by
wings of the same building or by the walls of separate
buildings shall have a minimum court width of three feet
for each one foot in height of the tallest building or
building wing.
[5] Building length. No principal building, when viewed from
any elevation, shall be greater than 425 feet in length.
[6] The maximum permitted principal building height shall be
35 feet and not more than three stories, subject to the
provisions of § 244-156. The maximum permitted height of
any accessory structure shall be 20 feet.
[7] Garages and/or carports, when not attached to a principal
building, shall be located no closer than 30 feet to a
principal building.
[8] Distance between principal buildings and internal drives.
No multifamily dwellings shall be located closer than 30
feet to any access drive or internal roadway.
§ 244-53 JACKSON CODE § 244-53
1:834
[9] Distance between principal buildings and parking areas.
No principal building shall be located closer than 15 feet
to any parking area, except for access aisles or driveways
to garages and/or carports which are attached to principal
buildings.
[10] Garage and/or carport parking spaces shall not be counted
toward meeting off-street parking requirements, unless
the garage or carport space has a driveway in front of it
which is a minimum of 20 feet in depth and which
driveway is adjacent and accessible from an access aisle or
internal roadway.
[11] Refuse storage. For multibuilding development, there shall
be provided at least one outdoor refuse storage area of at
least 100 square feet for each 20 dwelling units. The
refuse storage area shall be suitably located and screened
and arranged for access and ease of collection and shall
not be part of, restrict or occupy any parking aisle and
shall not be located further than 300 feet from the
entrance to any unit which it is intended to serve and shall
be properly screened. For single or two building
multifamily development, plans shall be submitted to the
Planning Board demonstrating the adequacy of refuse
storage and removal.
[12] Outdoor lighting. Interior development roads, parking
areas, dwelling entranceways and pedestrian walks shall
be provided with sufficient illumination to minimize
hazards to pedestrians and motor vehicles utilizing the
same, but in no case shall such lighting be less than is
required to provide a minimum lighting level of 0.5
horizontal footcandle throughout such areas from dawn to
dusk. Where necessary, lights shall be shielded to avoid
glare disturbing to occupants of the buildings. Lighting
shall be so arranged as to reflect away from all adjoining
residential buildings.
[13] Recreation. Passive recreation areas, such as pathways,
natural woods and fields, seating areas and lawns, shall be
provided, suitably arranged, throughout the site. In
addition, an active recreation area shall be provided.
[14] Concrete walkways, at least four feet wide or of such other
dimension and composition as may be approved by the
Planning Board, shall be provided where normal
pedestrian traffic is likely to occur.
[15] The maximum number of dwelling units in a building shall
be 95.
§ 244-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-53
1:835
[16]Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with
RSIS standards.
[17] The minimum unoccupied open space shall be 30%.
[18]No use, building or structure shall be constructed, placed,
located or erected within 50 feet of an exterior boundary
of the PRC, with the exception of entrance roadways,
gatehouses, signs, utilities, fences or walls.
[19] The following provisions of § 244-53 shall not be
applicable to age-restricted multifamily residential
dwellings otherwise developed in accordance with the
requirements of this § 244-53C(2): Subsection D(1)(a), (b),
(c) and (d); Subsection E(1), (2) and (3); Subsection N;
Subsection T; and Subsection W(1), (2), (3) and (4).
D. Area, yard and building minimum requirements are as follows:
(1) Minimum tract requirements.
(a) Tract area. The minimum tract area for a PRC shall be 100
contiguous acres under one ownership or control.
(b) Tract frontage. The minimum tract frontage for a PRC shall be
250 continuous feet and shall be located on an existing minor
arterial or major collector, as shown on the Circulation Plan
Exhibit adopted as part of the Jackson Township Master Plan.
(c) Tract width. The minimum tract width for a PRC shall be 250
feet.
(d) Tract depth. The minimum tract depth for a PRC shall be 250
feet.
(2) Lot and building requirements (in feet). [Amended 11-19-1998
by Ord. No. 28-98]
Type of Lot
Requirements Interior Corner
Single-family dwellings:
Lot area (square feet) 5,000 5,500
Lot width (feet) 554 75
Lot frontage (feet) 40 701
Lot depth (feet) 85 90
Front yard setback (feet) 20 25
Rear yard setback (feet) 25 —
Side yard setback (feet) 7 7
§ 244-53 JACKSON CODE § 244-53
1:836
Type of Lot
Requirements Interior Corner
Combined side yard setbacks
(feet)
15 25
Two-family dwellings:3
Lot area (square feet) 7,500 9,000
Lot width (feet) 75 90
Lot frontage (feet) 60 801
Lot depth (feet) 85 95
Front yard setback (feet) 20 25
Rear yard setback (feet) 25 —
Side yard setback (feet) 102 102
Combined side yard setback
(feet)
205 255
Multifamily buildings of four
dwelling or less:
Setback from streets or
access drive
20
Setback from streets or
access drive
30
Minimum distance between
buildings
30
NOTES:
1 Along each street.
2 One side yard may be zero, if part of a duplex.
3 Notwithstanding the bulk requirements for lots for two-family
dwellings set forth in this section, fee simple units with a duplex
shall be permitted, provided the combined lots for each duplex
building shall meet the bulk requirements of this section.
4 Notwithstanding the minimum lot width requirement for
detached single-family dwellings, a maximum of 20% of the
detached single-family lots within a PRC may have minimum lot
widths of at least 50 feet, but less than 55 feet, provided all
dwelling units within the PRC are detached single-family units
and further provided that all other bulk requirements are met.
5 No combined setback required if one side yard is zero as part of
duplex.
(3) Building height.
§ 244-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-53
1:837
(a) The maximum permitted building height for principal buildings
shall be 35 feet, subject to the provisions of § 244-156. In any
event, no building shall contain more than three usable floor
levels, counted vertically at any point in the building above the
grade level, as determined by the average grade elevation of
the corners of the building.
(b) The maximum permitted height of any accessory structure
which is located on the same lot as the principal building it is
intended to serve shall be 15 feet.
(c) The maximum permitted height of water towers and other
similar structures shall be established by the municipal agency
on an individual basis.
E. Buffer area.
(1) No use, building or structure shall be constructed, placed, located
or erected within 50 feet of the exterior tract boundary of the PRC,
with the exception of entrance roadways, gatehouses, signs,
utilities, fences or walls; provided, however, that the approving
authority may require a buffer of up to 100 feet along portions of
the tract boundary where it adjoins existing development and in its
reasonable discretion such additional buffer is warranted.
[Amended 11-19-1998 by Ord. No. 28-98]
(2) No portion of the tract buffer area shall be part of a private
residential or nonresidential lot, but instead shall be part of the
common open space used and maintained by the homeowners'
association.
(3) All buffer areas shall be in accordance with the provisions of
§ 244-50E(2), (3) and (4).
F. Building length. No building, viewed from any elevation, shall be
greater than 200 feet in length.
G. Courtyards. Courtyards bounded on three or more sides by wings of the
same building or by the walls of separate buildings shall be a minimum
court width of three feet for each one foot in height of the tallest
building or building wing.
H. Density.
(1) The maximum permitted gross residential density of a PRC shall be
four dwelling units/acre.
(2) The maximum permitted net residential density of a PRC shall be
six units/acre.
I. Distances.
§ 244-53 JACKSON CODE § 244-53
1:838
(1) Distances between principal buildings (multifamily, greater than
four dwelling units). The minimum distances between buildings
shall be as follows: [Amended 11-19-1998 by Ord. No. 28-98]
(a) Any building side wall to side wall shall have a minimum
distance of 30 feet between the midpoint of said side walls and/
or a minimum distance of 25 feet between the side wall
corners.
(b) Any building side wall to front or rear building walls shall be a
minimum distance of 40 feet between the midpoint of said
walls and/or a minimum distance of 30 feet between the side
wall building corner and front or rear wall building corner.
(c) Any front-to-rear, front-to-front or rear-to-rear building wall
shall have a minimum distance of 50 feet between the midpoint
of said walls and/or a minimum distance of 40 feet between the
building wall corners.
(2) Distance between principal buildings and internal access drives or
internal roadway. No multifamily dwellings shall be located closer
than 30 feet to the curbline of any internal access drive or internal
roadway.
(3) Distance between principal buildings and parking areas. No
principal building shall be located closer than 20 feet to the
curbline of any parking area, except for access aisles or driveways
to garages and/or carports which are attached to principal
buildings, where the minimum distance shall be 25 feet.
J. Dwelling units per building. No more than 16 dwelling units shall be
permitted in any multifamily building, provided that multifamily
buildings containing more than 16 units, but not exceeding 48 units per
building, shall be permitted subject to all of the following limitations:
[Amended 2-11-2008 by Ord. No. 06-08]
(1) The PRC includes an affordable housing set aside, in accordance
with the Township's Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, to be
satisfied by the on-site construction of the affordable units;
(2) Not more than 30% of the total number of dwelling units in the PRC
shall be located in multifamily buildings containing more than 16
dwelling units;
(3) No multifamily building containing more than 16 dwelling units
shall be located within 100 feet of any Township street;
(4) The cumulative total of dwelling units in multifamily buildings
containing in excess of 16 dwelling units and having a common
primary access point to a public street shall be 144; and
(5) Notwithstanding the provisions of § 244-53C(2)(j)[6], the maximum
permitted building height of multifamily buildings containing more
§ 244-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-53
1:839
than 16 dwelling units shall be 42 feet and not more than three
stories and require sloping roofs; however, the Planning Board may
grant exception to the sloping roof requirement to promote green
building design features.
K. Garages and/or carports. Garages and/or carports, when provided in a
PRC, shall be done so in accordance with §§ 244-50I, 244-197 and
244-198. [Amended 6-8-1998 by Ord. No. 15-98]
L. Homeowners' association. A homeowners' association, composed of all
of the residents of a PRC, shall be created and shall be responsible for
the activities per § 244-50J.
M. Improvements. Unless specified otherwise herein, all public and private
improvements on the site of a PRC shall comply with the standards,
criteria and requirements of this chapter.
N. Landscaping. Landscaping within a PRC shall be provided in
accordance with the requirements of § 244-193.
O. Laundry equipment. No outside area or equipment shall be provided for
the hanging or outside airing of laundry in any manner.
P. Lighting. All interior development roads, parking areas, dwelling
entranceways and pedestrian walks of a PRC shall be provided with
sufficient illumination to minimize hazards to pedestrians and motor
vehicles utilizing the same, but in no case shall such lighting be less
than what is required to provide a minimum lighting level of 0.5
horizontal footcandle throughout such areas from dusk to dawn. Lights
shall be shielded to avoid glare disturbing to occupants of the buildings
and shall be so arranged as to reflect away from all adjoining
properties.
Q. Open space and recreation. A minimum of 25% of the tract area shall be
provided as open space and recreation in accordance with the
requirements set forth in §§ 244-50O(2) through (8), (9)(a) through (c)
and (10) through (12) and 244-199. [Amended 11-19-1998 by Ord.
No. 28-98]
R. Parking. [Amended 6-8-1998 by Ord. No. 15-98]
(1) Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of § 244-197 or as otherwise provided pursuant to the
New Jersey Residential Site Improvement Standards (N.J.A.C.
5:21-1). [Amended 11-19-1998 by Ord. No. 28-98]
(2) Off-street parking shall comply with the requirements set forth in
§ 244-50P.
S. Sectionalization and staging plan. A sectionalization and staging plan
for the construction of a PRC shall be submitted as part of the
preliminary site plan application and shall comply with the
requirements set forth in § 244-50Q.
§ 244-53 JACKSON CODE § 244-53
1:840
T. Sidewalks and aprons. Sidewalks and aprons shall be provided in
accordance with the provisions of § 244-203 and shall be designed and
constructed as part of an integrated sidewalk system within a PRC.
U. Solid waste storage.
(1) Solid waste storage shall be provided in accordance with the
provisions of § 244-208.
(2) Solid waste storage areas shall be in accordance with the
provisions of § 244-50S(2), (3) and (4).
V. Streets (internal).
(1) All streets within a PRC shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of §§ 244-210 and 244-211 or as otherwise provided
pursuant to the New Jersey Residential Site Improvement
Standards (N.J.A.C. 5:21-1). [Amended 11-19-1998 by Ord. No.
28-98]
(2) No street, driveway, parking aisle or parking area located within a
PRC shall have a name which will duplicate or so nearly duplicate
so as to be confused with the names of any other existing public or
private street located within the Township of Jackson. All names
shall be subject to the approval of the municipal agency.
W. Dwelling units.
(1) Unit elevations. Each dwelling unit and combined complex of
dwelling units shall have a compatible architectural theme with
variations in design to provide attractiveness to the development,
which shall include consideration of landscaping techniques,
building orientation to the site and to other structures, topography,
natural features and individual dwelling unit design, such as
varying unit widths, staggering unit setbacks, providing different
exterior materials, changing rooflines and roof designs, altering
building heights and changing types of windows, shutters, doors,
porches, colors and vertical or horizontal orientation of the
facades, singularly or in combination.
(2) Unit offset. Not more than two consecutive dwelling units in the
same building shall be constructed without setbacks, offsets and/or
breaks in the front and rear building elevations of at least four feet.
(3) Unit storage. Each attached dwelling unit shall contain a minimum
of 200 cubic feet of storage space within the walls of said unit. In
addition to storage which may be provided inside individual units in
a multifamily building, there shall be provided 200 cubic feet, per
dwelling unit, of storage where personal effects and belongings
may be stored. Such storage shall be conveniently located and be
capable of being locked and separate from the belongings of other
occupants.
§ 244-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-53
1:841
(4) Unit width. Each attached dwelling unit shall have a minimum
width of 18 feet.
X. Utilities.
(1) No individual wells or individual sewage disposal systems shall be
permitted, and each building shall be serviced with said utilities by
a central supply or disposal system which is approved by the
Jackson Township Board of Health, Jackson Township Municipal
Utilities Authority and other controlling agencies. No building
permit shall be issued unless and until plans for such facilities have
been submitted to the proper authorities for approval and adequate
provisions are made to ensure that such necessary facilities shall
be installed.
(2) All dwelling units and clubhouses/community buildings shall be
connected to an approved and functioning public water supply
system and sanitary sewer system prior to the issuance of any
certificate of occupancy.
(3) All utility lines leading to and within the site of a PRC shall be
installed underground.
Y. General development plan approval permitted. [Added 12-27-1999 by
Ord. No. 26-99]
(1) A developer of a parcel of land greater than 100 acres in size for
which the developer is seeking approval of a planned retirement
community pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law, P.L. 1975, c.
291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.) may submit a general development
plan to the planning board prior to the granting of preliminary
approval of that development by the Planning Board.
(2) The general development plan shall set forth the permitted number
of dwelling units and the residential density ratio for the planned
retirement community, in its entirety, according to a schedule
which sets forth the timing of the various sections of the
development. The planned retirement community shall be
developed in accordance with the general development plan
approved by the Planning Board notwithstanding any provision of
P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.), or an ordinance or
regulation adopted pursuant thereto after the effective date of the
approval.
(3) The term of the effect of the general development plan approval
shall be determined by the Planning Board using the guidelines set
forth in Subsection Y(4) of this section, except that the term of the
effect of the approval shall not exceed 20 years from the date upon
which the developer receives final approval of the first section of
the planned development pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.).
§ 244-53 JACKSON CODE § 244-53
1:842
(4) In making its determination regarding the duration of the effect of
approval of the development plan, the Planning Board shall
consider the number of dwelling units to be constructed; prevailing
economic conditions, the timing schedule to be followed in
completing the development and the likelihood of its fulfillment;
the developer's capability of completing the proposed
development; and the contents of the general development plan
and any conditions which the Planning Board attaches to the
approval thereof.
(5) The following details shall be submitted as part of the general
development plan:
(a) A general land use plan indicating the tract area and general
location of the land uses to be included in the planned
development at a scale of not smaller than one inch equals 200
feet. The total number of dwelling units proposed shall be set
forth and a residential density shall be provided.
(b) A circulation plan showing the general location and types of
transportation facilities, including facilities for pedestrian
access within the planned development and any proposed
improvements to the existing transportation system outside
the planned development.
(c) An open space plan showing the proposed land area and a
general location of parks and any other land areas to be set
aside for conservation and recreational purposes and a general
description of improvements proposed to be made thereon,
including a plan for the operation and maintenance of parks,
recreational lands and community buildings.
(d) A utility plan indicating the need for and showing the proposed
location of sewage and water lines; any drainage facilities
necessitated by the physical characteristics of the site;
proposed methods for handling solid waste disposal; and a plan
for the operation and maintenance of proposed utilities.
(e) A stormwater management plan setting forth the proposed
method of controlling and managing stormwater on the site.
(f) An environmental inventory, including a general description of
the vegetation, soils, topography, geology, surface hydrology,
climate and cultural resources of the site, existing man-made
structures or features, and the probable impact of the
development on the environmental attributes of the site.
(g) A community facility plan indicating the scope and type of
supporting community facilities, which may include but not be
limited to educational or cultural facilities, historic sites,
libraries, hospitals, firehouses and police stations.
§ 244-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-53
1:843
(h) A housing plan outlining the number of housing units to be
provided and the extent to which any housing obligation
assigned to Jackson Township pursuant to P.L. 1985, c. 222
(N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et al.) will be fulfilled by the development.
(i) A local service plan indicating those public services which the
applicant proposes to provide and which may include, but not
be limited to, water, sewer, cable and solid waste disposal.
(j) A fiscal report describing the anticipated demand on municipal
services to be generated by the planned retirement community
and any other financial impacts to be faced by Jackson
Township as a result of the completion of the planned
retirement community. The fiscal report shall also include a
detailed projection of property tax revenues which will accrue
to the county, Township and school district according to the
timing schedule provided under Subsection Y(5)(k) of this
section, and following the completion of the planned
development in its entirety.
(k) A proposed timing schedule in the case of a planned
development whose construction is contemplated over a period
of years, including any terms or conditions which are intended
to protect the interests of the planned development prior to the
completion of the development in its entirety.
(6) A municipal development agreement, which shall mean a written
agreement between Jackson Township and a developer relating to
the proposed planned retirement community.
(7) Required findings of the Planning Board. Prior to approval of a
general development plan, the Planning Board shall find the
following facts and conclusions:
(a) That departures by the proposed development from zoning
regulations otherwise applicable to the subject property
conform to the zoning ordinance standards for planned
retirement community development.
(b) That the proposals for maintenance and conservation of the
common open space are reliable, and the amount, location and
purpose of the common open space are adequate.
(c) That provisions, through the physical design of the proposed
development, for public services, control over vehicular and
pedestrian traffic, and the amenities of light and air, recreation
and visual enjoyment are adequate.
(d) That the proposed planned development will not have an
unreasonably adverse impact upon the area in which it is
proposed to be established.
§ 244-53 JACKSON CODE § 244-53
1:844
(e) In the case of a proposed development which contemplates
construction over a period of years, that the terms and
conditions intended to protect the interests of the public and of
the residents, occupants and owners of the proposed
development in the total completion of the development are
adequate.
(8) In addition, the Board may set forth those conditions which it
deems necessary to protect the interests of the general public, and
the residents and occupants of the planned retirement community.
Such conditions shall be predicated on the following criteria:
(a) That each stage of development shall include required open
space in proportion to that part of the total residential
development units in the planned retirement community. Such
open space shall include both recreation and conservation uses
accessible to the resident population within the planned
retirement community.
(b) That the size and timing of successive stages of a planned
retirement community shall be conditioned upon the
availability and provision of suitable capacity of facilities such
as arterial highways, primary roadways of Ocean County,
primary roadways of Jackson Township, sewer, water,
stormwater drainage, and other services whose capacities
must be expanded as a result of the development of the
retirement community.
(9) General development plan; timing schedule modification. In the
event that the developer seeks to modify the proposed timing
schedule, such modification shall require the approval of the
Planning Board. The Planning Board shall, in deciding whether or
not to grant approval of the modification, take into consideration
prevailing economic and market conditions, anticipated and actual
need for residential units within Jackson Township and the region,
and the availability and capacity of public facilities to accommodate
the proposed development.
(10) General development plan hearing on modifications required.
(a) The developer may make amendments or revisions to the
general development plan. However, the developer shall be
required to gain the prior approval of the Planning Board if,
after approval of the planned retirement community, the
developer wishes to make any variation in the location of land
uses or to increase the density of residential development.
(b) Any variation in the location of land uses or increase in density
proposed in reaction to a negative decision of or condition of
development approval imposed by the Pinelands Commission
pursuant to P.L. 1979, c. 111 (N.J.S.A. 13:18A-1 et seq.), or
Department of Environmental Protection pursuant to P.L. 1979,
§ 244-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-53
1:845
c. 111 (N.J.S.A. 13:18A-1 et seq.), shall be approved by the
Planning Board if the developer can demonstrate, to the
satisfaction of the Planning Board, that the variation being
proposed is a direct result of such determination by the
Pinelands Commission or the Department of Environmental
Protection, as the case may be.
(11) General development plan on modifications not required. Once a
general plan has been approved by the Planning Board, it may be
amended or revised only upon application by the developer
approved by the Planning Board.
(12) Certification upon completion; failure to complete or comply;
termination of approval.
(a) Upon the completion of each section of the development as set
forth in the approved general development plan, the developer
shall notify the administrative officer, by certified mail, as
evidence that the developer is fulfilling his obligation under the
approved plan. For the purposes of this section, "completion"
of any section of the development shall mean that the
developer has acquired a certificate of occupancy for every
residential unit as set forth in the approved general
development plan and pursuant to Section 15 of P.L. 1975, c.
217 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-133).
[1] If the Township does not receive such notification at the
completion of any section of the development, the
Township shall notify the developer, by certified mail, in
order to determine whether or not the terms of the
approved plan are being complied with.
[2] If a developer does not complete any section of the
development within eight months of the date provided for
in the approved plan, or if at any time the Township has
cause to believe that the developer is not fulfilling his
obligations pursuant to the approved plan, the Township
shall notify the developer, by certified mail, and the
developer shall have 10 days within which to give evidence
that he is fulfilling his obligations pursuant to the
approved plan. The Township thereafter shall conduct a
hearing to determine whether or not the developer is in
violation of the approved plan. If, after such a hearing, the
Township finds good cause to terminate the approval, it
shall provide written notice of same to the developer and
the approval shall be terminated 30 days thereafter.
(b) In the event that a developer who has general development
plan approval does not apply for preliminary approval for the
planned development which is the subject of that general
development plan approval within five years of the date upon
§ 244-53 JACKSON CODE § 244-53
1:846
§ 244-54. PMURD Planned Mixed Unit Residential Development
Zone.
which the general development plan has been approved by the
Planning Board, the Township shall have cause to terminate
the approval.
(13) General development plan satisfactory completion. In the event
that a development which is the subject of an approved general
development plan is completed before the end of the term of the
approval, the approval shall terminate with the completion of the
development. For the purposes of this section, a development shall
be considered complete on the date upon which a certificate of
occupancy has been issued for the final residential unit in the last
section of the development in accordance with the timing schedule
set forth in the approved general development plan and the
developer has fulfilled all of his obligations pursuant to the
approval.
(14) General development plan approval procedure.
(a) The Planning Board shall grant or deny general development
plan approval within 95 days after submission of a complete
application to the administrative officer, or within such further
time as may be consented to by the applicant. Failure of the
Planning Board to act within the period prescribed shall
constitute general development plan approval of the planned
development.
A. Permitted principal uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) Community residences for the developmentally disabled.
[Amended 3-10-2003 by Ord. No. 4-03]
(2) Community shelters for victims of domestic violence. [Amended
3-10-2003 by Ord. No. 4-03]
(3) Detached single-family dwelling units, subject to the provisions of
the R-3 Residential Zone (§ 244-46). [Amended 12-23-2002 by
Ord. No. 50-02]
(4) Multifamily and detached single-family residential dwelling units,
in accordance with the provisions of this section for a planned
mixed unit residential development.
(5) Clubhouses/community buildings.
(6) Municipal parks, playgrounds and other such municipal buildings
and uses as are deemed appropriate and necessary by the
Township Committee.
§ 244-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-54
1:847
(7) Federal, state, county and other public buildings and grounds,
including public schools, parks, playgrounds or other public
recreational uses or areas.
(8) Private or parochial schools not operated for profit; except,
however, that public and private colleges or universities shall not
be permitted.
(9) Open spaces and recreational uses and facilities.
(10) Fire stations.
(11) First aid stations.
(12) Golf courses.
(13)Raising of horses and other livestock.
(14) Essential services.
(15) Attached dwelling units such as townhouses. [Added 2-2-2016 by
Ord. No. 01-16]
B. Permitted accessory uses, buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) Dog pens, provided that they are located behind the rear building
line and not in the required side or rear yard. Dog pens shall only
be permitted on lots containing a detached single-family dwelling
unit.
(2) Fences and walls, subject to the provisions of § 244-190.
(3) Gatehouse.
(4) Off-street parking and private garages, subject to the provisions of
§§ 244-197 and 244-198. [Amended 6-8-1998 by Ord. No.
15-98]
(5) Private residential swimming pools, subject to the provisions of
§ 244-216. Private residential swimming pools shall only be
permitted on lots with detached single-family dwellings.
(6) Satellite dish antennas, subject to the provisions of § 244-165.
(7) Shed (garden, storage and tool): A maximum of one shed shall be
permitted per residential lot.
(8) Signs, subject to the provisions of § 244-207.
(9) Other customary accessory uses, buildings and structures which
are clearly incidental to the principal use and building.
(10) Accessory uses, buildings or structures necessary for the
administration and/or maintenance of the infrastructure, streets,
off-street parking facilities, drainage facilities, recreational
§ 244-54 JACKSON CODE § 244-54
1:848
facilities, open space areas and other facilities and areas which
become the maintenance responsibility of the residents of the
Planned Mixed Unit Residential Development (PMURD).
C. Conditional uses, subject to the provisions of Article VIII of this chapter,
are as follows:
(1) Child-care centers, nursery schools and day-care centers
(§ 244-114).
(2) Churches and places of worship (§ 244-115).141
(3) Hospitals, philanthropic or eleemosynary uses (§ 244-123).
(4) Public utilities (§ 244-128).
D. Area, yard and building minimum requirements are as follows:
(1) Minimum tract requirements.
(a) Tract area. The minimum tract area of a PMURD shall be 500
contiguous acres under one ownership or control.
(b) Tract frontage. The minimum tract frontage for a PMURD shall
be 500 continuous feet and shall be located on an existing
major arterial, minor arterial or major collector, as shown on
the Circulation Plan Exhibit adopted as part of the Jackson
Township Master Plan.
(c) Tract width. The minimum tract width for a PMURD shall be
500 feet.
(d) Tract depth. The minimum tract depth for a PMURD shall be
500 feet.
(e) Multifamily dwellings. Buildings containing multifamily
dwelling units shall be located on tracts with a minimum area
of five acres.
(f) Attached dwelling units (townhouses). Buildings containing
attached dwelling units (townhouse units) shall provide an
individual lot for each attached dwelling unit of a minimum of
1,000 square feet. [Added 2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 01-16]
(2) Lot and building requirements (in feet). [Amended 2-2-2016 by
Ord. No. 01-16]
141. Editor's Note: Original § 109-49C(3), Community residences for the developmentally
disabled, and C(4), Community shelters for victims of domestic violence, of the 1972 Code
were repealed 3-10-2003 by Ord. No. 4-03.
§ 244-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-54
1:849
Requirements Type of Lot
Detached single-family
dwellings: Interior Corner
Lot area (square feet) 12,500 14,500
Lot width (feet) 90 90
Lot frontage (feet) 50 110*
Lot depth (feet) 120 120
Front yard setback:
Each street (feet) 40 40
Major street (feet) 50 50
Rear yard setback (feet) 40 —
Side yard setback:
Each side (feet) 10 10
Total (feet) 25 25
Maximum building height
(feet)
35 35
Attached dwelling units:
Lot area (square feet) 1,000 1,000
Lot width (feet) 18 18
Lot frontage (feet) 18 18
Lot depth (feet) 55 55
Front yard setback:
Each street (feet) 25 25
Major street (feet) 25 25
Rear yard setback (feet) 20 20
Side yard setback:
Individual lots (feet) 0 0
Buildings (feet) 15 15
Maximum building height
(feet)
35 35
Accessory building requirements
(for lots with detached singlefamily
dwellings
Private garage (detached):
Front yard setback (feet) Not permitted in front yard
Rear yard setback (feet) 20 20
Side yard setback, each side
(feet)
15 15
§ 244-54 JACKSON CODE § 244-54
1:850
Requirements Type of Lot
Detached single-family
dwellings: Interior Corner
Maximum building height
(feet)
15 15
Private residential swimming
pool:
Front yard setback (feet) Not permitted in front yard
Rear yard setback (feet) 15 15
Side yard setback, each side
(feet)
15 15
Shed (garden, storage, or tool):
Front yard setback (feet) Not permitted in front yard
Rear yard setback (feet) 10 10
Side yard setback, each side
(feet)
10 10
Maximum building height
(feet)
15 15
Maximum building coverage
(Combined coverage of all
principal and accessory
buildings)
20% 20%
NOTES:
* Each street.
(3) Building height.
(a) The maximum permitted building height for principal buildings
shall be 35 feet, subject to the provisions of § 244-156. In any
event, no building shall contain more than three usable floor
levels, counted vertically at any point in the building above the
grade level, as determined by the average grade elevation of
the corners of the building.
(b) The maximum permitted height of an accessory structure,
which is located on the same lot as the principal building it is
intended to serve, shall be 15 feet.
(c) The maximum permitted height of water towers, antenna
facilities and other similar structures shall be established by
the municipal agency on an individual basis.
E. Buffer area.
(1) No use, building, structure, internal street, driveway or parking
area shall be constructed, placed, located, erected or assembled
§ 244-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-54
1:851
within 40 feet of the exterior tract boundary line of a PMURD, with
the exception of entrance gatehouses, fences or walls.
(2) No portion of the tract buffer area shall be part of a private
residential or nonresidential lot, but instead shall be part of the
common open space owned and maintained by the homeowners'
association.
(3) All buffer areas shall be in accordance with the provisions of
§ 244-50E(2), (3) and (4).
F. Building arrangement. All multifamily buildings shall be situated on the
site so as to not form a rigid or uniform pattern.
G. Building construction. All structures shall be constructed of thick and/
or fire resistant exterior material. This requirement shall not, however,
preclude the use of wood trim and siding or other such material
necessary or integral to the architectural appearance of the structure.
H. Building length. No building, when viewed from any elevation, shall be
greater than 200 feet in length.
I. Density.
(1) The maximum permitted gross residential density of a PMURD
shall be four dwelling units/acre.
(2) The maximum permitted net residential density of a PMURD shall
be six dwelling units/acre.
(3) Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection I(1) and (2) above,
the developer of an affordable housing (AH) site may develop a
section(s) of a PMURD at a maximum gross residential density of
five and 5.2 dwelling units per acre and a net residential density of
seven and 7.8 dwelling units per acre, subject to the following:
[Added 4-26-1993 by Ord. No. 13-93]
(a) The section(s) of the AH site to be developed under this section
shall be restricted to rental units.
(b) The total number of additional units (bonus units) permitted
pursuant to this subsection shall be limited to 116, all of which
shall be low- and moderate-income units.
(c) The developer of a low- and moderate-income rental housing
AH site shall receive, in addition to the bonus units permitted
pursuant to this subsection, a credit toward the number of lowand
moderate-income units required pursuant to § 244-224 or
a previous valid subdivision or site plan approval. Such credits
shall be earned at a rate of one unit of credit per three units of
low- and moderate-income rental housing constructed and
occupied within the AH site, and further provided that the
maximum cumulative total of such credits, Township-wide,
§ 244-54 JACKSON CODE § 244-54
1:852
shall be 39. The cumulative total of bonus units, Townshipwide,
which are eligible for the bonus described above, shall
be limited to 116.
(4) The density limitations described in Subsection I(1), (2) and (3)
above pertain to the entire tract and should not be construed to
limit the size of any individual lot. [Added 2-2-2016 by Ord. No.
01-16]
J. Distances. [Amended 2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 01-16]
(1) Distance between multifamily buildings other than attached
dwellings (townhouses). The minimum distances between
multifamily buildings other than attached dwellings (townhouses)
shall be as follows:
(a) Any building side wall to side wall shall have a minimum
distance of 30 feet between the midpoint of said side walls and/
or a minimum distance of 25 feet between the side wall
corners.
(b) Any building side wall to front or rear building walls shall be a
minimum distance of 40 feet between the midpoint of said
walls and/or a minimum distance of 30 feet between the side
wall building corner and front or rear wall building corner.
(c) Any front-to-rear, front-to-front or rear-to-rear building wall
shall have a minimum distance of 50 feet between the midpoint
of said walls and/or a minimum distance of 40 feet between the
building wall corners.
(2) Distance between multifamily buildings and detached single-family
dwelling units. The required minimum distance between the
property lines of detached single-family dwelling units and the
highest exterior building wall of a multifamily building closest to
the aforementioned property lines shall be 100 feet or three times
the height of the highest exterior building wall of a multifamily
building, whichever is greater.
(3) Distance between multifamily buildings other than attached
dwellings (townhouses) and adjacent streets.
(a) The required minimum setback of the front exterior building
wall of a multifamily building other than attached dwellings
(townhouses) shall be:
[1] Seventy-five feet from major streets.
[2] Fifty feet from all other streets.
(b) The required minimum setback of the rear exterior building
wall of a multifamily building other than attached dwellings
(townhouses) shall be:
§ 244-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-54
1:853
[1] One hundred feet from major streets.
[2] Sixty feet from all other streets.
(4) Distance between multifamily buildings other than attached
dwellings (townhouses) and parking areas. No multifamily building
shall be located closer than 15 feet to the curbline of any parking
area, except for access aisles or driveways to garages and/or
carports which are attached to multifamily buildings, where the
minimum distance shall be 25 feet.
(5) Distance between buildings containing up to 12 attached dwellings
(townhouses). The minimum distances between buildings
containing up to 12 attached dwellings shall be as follows:
(a) Any building side wall to side wall shall have a minimum
distance of 30 feet between the midpoint of said side walls and/
or a minimum distance of 25 feet between the side wall
corners.
(b) Any building side wall to front or rear building walls shall be a
minimum distance of 30 feet between the midpoint of said
walls and/or a minimum distance of 30 feet between the side
wall building corner and front or rear wall building corner.
(c) Any front-to-rear, front-to-front or rear-to-rear building wall
shall have a minimum distance of 30 feet between the midpoint
of said walls and/or a minimum distance of 25 feet between the
building wall corners.
(6) Distance between attached dwellings (townhouses) and adjacent
streets.
(a) The required minimum setback of the front exterior building
wall of an attached dwelling (townhouse) shall be 25 feet from
major streets and all other streets.
(b) The required minimum setback of the rear exterior building
wall of an attached dwelling (townhouse) shall be 20 feet from
major streets and all other streets.
(7) Distance between attached dwellings (townhouses) and parking
areas. No attached dwelling building shall be located closer than
15 feet to the curbline of any parking area.
K. Dwelling units per building. No more than 12 dwelling units shall be
permitted in any multifamily building.
L. Environmental impact statement. An environmental impact statement
shall be submitted as part of a preliminary application for development
in the PMURD Zone in accordance with the provisions of § 244-189.
§ 244-54 JACKSON CODE § 244-54
1:854
M. Guaranties. Performance and maintenance guaranties shall comply
with the requirements established in Article V of this chapter.
N. Homeowners' association. A homeowners' association, composed of all
the residents of a PMURD, shall be created and shall be responsible for
the activities per § 244-50J.
O. Improvements. Unless specified otherwise, all public and private
improvements on the site of a PMURD shall comply with the standards,
criteria and requirements of this chapter.
P. Landscaping. Landscaping within a PMURD shall be provided in
accordance with the requirements of § 244-193.
Q. Laundry equipment. No outside area or equipment shall be provided for
the hanging or outside airing of laundry in any manner.
R. Lighting. All roads, parking areas, dwelling entranceways and
pedestrian walks within a PMURD shall be provided with sufficient
illumination to minimize hazards to pedestrians and motor vehicles
utilizing the same, but in no case shall said lighting be less than what is
required to provide a minimum lighting level of 0.5 horizontal
footcandles throughout such areas from dark to dawn. Lights shall be
shielded to avoid glare disturbing to occupants of the buildings and
shall be so arranged as to reflect away from all adjoining properties.
S. Open space and recreation. A minimum of 25% of the tract area shall be
provided as open space and recreation in accordance with the
requirements set forth in §§ 244-50O and 244-199.
T. Parking.
(1) Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of §§ 244-197 and 244-198. [Amended 6-8-1998 by
Ord. No. 15-98]
(2) Off-street parking shall comply with the requirements set forth in
§ 244-50P.
U. Sectionalization and staging plan. A sectionalization and staging plan
for the construction of a PMURD shall be submitted as part of the
preliminary site plan application and shall comply with the
requirements set forth in § 244-50Q.
V. Sidewalks and aprons. Sidewalks and aprons shall be provided in
accordance with the provisions of §§ 244-203 and 244-204 and shall be
designed and constructed as part of an integrated sidewalk system
within a PMURD. [Amended 6-8-1998 by Ord. No. 15-98]
W. Solid waste storage.
(1) Solid waste storage shall be provided in accordance with the
provisions of § 244-208.
§ 244-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-54
1:855
(2) Solid waste storage areas shall be in accordance with the
provisions of § 244-50S.
X. Streets (internal).
(1) All streets within a PMURD, whether public or private, shall be
provided in accordance with the requirements of §§ 244-210,
244-211 and 244-212. [Amended 6-8-1998 by Ord. No. 15-98]
(2) No street, driveway, parking aisle or parking area located within a
PMURD shall have a name which will duplicate or so nearly
duplicate so as to be confused with the names of any other existing
public or private street located within the Township of Jackson. All
names shall be subject to the approval of the municipal agency.
Y. Dwelling units.
(1) Unit elevations. Each dwelling unit within a multifamily building
and combined complex of dwelling units within a multifamily
building shall have a compatible architectural theme with
variations in design to provide attractiveness to the PMURD, which
shall include consideration of the landscaping techniques, building
orientation to the site and to other structures, topography, natural
features and individual dwelling unit design, such as varying unit
widths (except for attached dwelling units such as townhouses,
which may maintain uniform widths), staggering unit setbacks,
providing different exterior materials, changing rooflines and roof
designs, altering building heights and changing types of windows,
shutters, doors, porches, colors and vertical or horizontal
orientation of the facades, singularly or in combination. [Amended
2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 01-16]
(2) Unit exposures. All dwelling units in a multifamily building shall be
provided with at least two exterior exposures.
(3) Unit offset. Not more than two consecutive dwelling units in the
same multifamily building shall be constructed without setbacks,
offsets and/or breaks in the front and rear building elevations of at
least four feet.
(4) Unit storage. In addition to storage, which may be provided inside
individual units, in a multifamily building there shall be provided
200 cubic feet of storage per dwelling unit where personal effects
and belongings may be stored. Such storage shall be conveniently
located and be capable of being kept locked and separate from the
belongings of other occupants.
(5) Unit width. Each dwelling unit in a multifamily building shall have a
minimum width of 18 feet.
Z. Utilities.
§ 244-54 JACKSON CODE § 244-54
1:856
§ 244-55. LC Limited Commercial Zone. [Added 11-9-2010 by Ord.
No. 32-10142]
(1) Utilities shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of
§ 244-53X.
(2) All utility lines leading to and within the site of a PMURD shall be
installed underground.
A. Permitted principal uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) Medical offices.
(2) Professional offices.
(3) Continuing care facilities, subject to the requirements of § 244-120.
(4) Assisted living facilities, subject to the requirements of § 244-120.
(5) Rehabilitation facilities, subject to the requirements of § 244-120.
(6) The following stand-alone facilities (one building, one use per lot):
(a) Day-care center subject to the requirements of § 244-114.
(b) Preschool subject to the requirements of § 244-114.
(c) Adult day-care center, subject to the requirements of
§ 244-120.
(d) Churches and places of worship subject to the requirements of
§ 244-115.
(e) Mini storage facility, subject to the requirements of § 244-126.
(f) Funeral home.
(g) Art gallery.
(h) Library.
(i) Museum.
(7) Single-family residences in existence prior to the adoption of this
section (November 9, 2010) subject to the R-1 Residential District
regulations.
(8) Municipal parks, playgrounds and other such municipal buildings
and uses as are deemed appropriate and necessary by the
Township.
142. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed original § 109-50, PMUD Planned and Mixed
Use Development Zone, of the 1972 Code, as amended, and original § 109-50.1, PMUD
Planned Mixed Use Development Zone requirements, of the 1972 Code, added 11-19-1998
by Ord. No. 28-98, as amended.
§ 244-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-55
1:857
(9) Federal, state, county and other public buildings and grounds,
including public schools, parks, playgrounds or other public
recreational uses or areas.
B. Permitted accessory uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) Fences and walls, subject to the provisions of § 244-190.
(2) Off-street loading, subject to the provisions of § 244-196.
(3) Off-street parking, subject to the provisions of § 244-197.
(4) Satellite dish antennas, subject to the provisions of § 244-165.
(5) Signs, subject to the provisions of § 244-207.
(6) Other customary accessory uses, buildings and structures which
are clearly incidental to the principal use(s) and building(s).
C. Conditional uses, subject to the provisions of Article VIII of this chapter,
are as follows:
(1) Public utilities subject to the provisions of § 244-128.
D. Area, yard and building requirements for the LC Zoning District are as
follows, except where otherwise the requirements are greater (See
subsections above.):
Type of Lot
Requirements Interior Corner
Lot area (acres) 1 1.5
Lot width (feet) 200 200
Lot frontage (feet) 200 200 (each)
Lot depth (feet) 225 225
Principal building requirements:
Front yard setback (feet) 50 50
Rear yard setback (feet) 50 —
Side yard setback (feet) 30 30 (each)
Maximum building height (feet) 35 35
Accessory building/use
requirements:
Front yard setback (feet) Not permitted in front yard
Rear yard setback (feet) 20 20
Side yard setback (feet) 15 15
Maximum height 15 15
Maximum building coverage 25% 25%
Maximum lot coverage 60% 60%
§ 244-55 JACKSON CODE § 244-55
1:858
§ 244-56. NC Neighborhood Commercial Zone.
Type of Lot
Requirements Interior Corner
Parking area setbacks:
Setback from right-of-way
(feet)
25 25
Setback from side yard property
line:
Residential use (feet) 20 20
Nonresidential use (feet) 10 10
A. Permitted principal uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) Antique shop.
(2) Appliance store.
(3) Art/graphic/photo supply store.
(4) Artist/photo studio.
(5) Bakery.
(6) Bank and financial institution.
(7) Barbershop or beauty/hair salon.
(8) Bookstore.
(9) Business office.
(10) Candy store.
(11) Clothing/dry goods store.
(12) Convenience store.
(13) Delicatessen.
(14) Dry cleaners.
(15) Municipal parks, playgrounds and other such municipal buildings
and uses as are deemed appropriate and necessary by the
Township Committee.
(16) Federal, state, county and other public buildings and grounds,
including public schools, parks, playgrounds or other public
recreational uses or areas.
(17) Florist shop.
(18) Gift shop.
§ 244-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-56
1:859
(19) Hardware, paint or wallpaper store.
(20) Household supply store.
(21) Ice cream store.
(22) Jewelry store.
(23) Liquor store.
(24) Luncheonette.
(25) Pharmacy.
(26) Professional office.
(27) Repair/service shop for household or personal goods.
(28) Restaurants; however drive-through restaurants and drive-in
restaurants are not permitted. [Amended 5-6-2002 by Ord. No.
25-02; 3-28-2005 by Ord. No. 20-05]
(29) Self-service laundry.
(30) Shoe repair shop.
(31) Stationery, tobacco, newspaper or periodical store.
(32) Tailor/dressmaking shop.
(33) Variety/notion store.
(34) Combination of two or more of the above permitted uses in one
principal building.
(35) Other uses similar to those listed above.
(36)Raising of horses and other livestock.
(37) Essential services.
(38) Art gallery. [Added 5-27-2003 by Ord. No. 12-03]
(39) Library. [Added 5-27-2003 by Ord. No. 12-03]
(40) Museum. [Added 5-27-2003 by Ord. No. 12-03]
B. Permitted accessory uses of building and structures are as follows:
(1) Fences and walls, subject to the provisions of § 244-190.
(2) Off-street loading, subject to the provisions of § 244-196.
(3) Off-street parking, subject to the provisions of § 244-197.
(4) Satellite dish antennas, subject to provisions of § 244-165.
(5) Signs, subject to the provisions of § 244-207.
§ 244-56 JACKSON CODE § 244-56
1:860
(6) Other customary accessory uses, buildings and structures which
are clearly incidental to the principal use(s) and building(s).
C. Conditional uses, subject to the provisions of Article VIII of this chapter,
are as follows:
(1) Child-care centers, nursery schools and day-care centers
(§ 244-114).
(2) Churches and places of worship (§ 244-115).
(3) Public utilities (§ 244-128).
(4) Single-family residences lawfully existing as of September 1, 2002,
subject to the bulk requirements of the prior zoning district.
[Added 12-23-2002 by Ord. No. 50-02]
(5) Automobile service station (gas station or motor vehicle service
station) (§ 244-111), situated on properties with a minimum lot size
of three acres located at a signalized intersection on a state or
county road, with 300 feet of frontage. [Added 2-13-2013 by Ord.
No. 02-13]
D. Area, yard and building requirements for the NC Zoning District are as
follows: [Amended 5-27-2003 by Ord. No. 12-03]
Type of Lot
Requirements Interior Corner
Lot requirements:
Lot area (square feet) 20,000 25,000
Lot width (feet) 125 150
Lot frontage (feet) 125 150*
Lot depth (feet) 150 150
Principal building requirements:
Front yard setback (feet) 60 60*
Rear yard setback (feet) 30 —
Side yard setback:
Each side (feet) 20 20
Total (feet) 50 50
Maximum building height (feet) 35 35
Accessory building requirements:
Front yard setback (feet) Not permitted in front yard
Rear yard setback (feet) 15 —
Side yard setback, each side
(feet)
15 15
§ 244-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-56
1:861
§ 244-57. HC Highway Commercial Zone.
Type of Lot
Requirements Interior Corner
Maximum building height (feet) 15 15
Maximum building coverage
(combined coverage of all
principal and accessory buildings)
25% 25%
Maximum impervious coverage 60% 60%
Parking area setbacks:
Setback from ROW (feet) 20 20
Setback from side property line
(feet):
Residential use 20 20
Nonresidential use 10 10
A. Permitted principal uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) All principal uses permitted in the NC Neighborhood Commercial
Zone.
(2) Art, dance, gymnastics, music or other similar instructional school.
(3) Auto parts store; excluding, however, auto repair shop and
installation services.
(4) Bar/cocktail lounge/nightclub.
(5) Bicycle rental, repair or sales establishment.
(6) Bowling alley.
(7) Building materials retail sales establishment; excluding, however,
lumberyards or other similar uses requiring outdoor storage.
(8) Commercial office.
(9) Commercial retail use.
(10) Contractor's office, showroom, garage, warehouse and shop;
provided, however, that all materials and equipment are stored
within a completely enclosed building.
(11) Department store.
(12) Municipal parks, playgrounds and other municipal buildings and
uses as are deemed appropriate and necessary by the Township
Committee.
§ 244-56 JACKSON CODE § 244-57
1:862
(13) Federal, state, county and other public buildings and grounds;
excluding, however, public schools, parks, playgrounds or other
public recreational uses or areas.
(14) Funeral home.
(15) Furniture store.
(16) Garden center.
(17) Indoor commercial health/recreational facility.
(18) Nurseries and greenhouses.
(19) Personal or professional service establishment.
(20) Pet shop; excluding, however, the boarding or treatment of
animals.
(21) Printing, lithography, publishing or photocopying establishment.
(22) Restaurant with or without a liquor license, including drivethrough
and fast-food restaurants where space permits safe traffic
movement. Drive-in restaurants are not permitted. [Amended
3-28-2005 by Ord. No. 20-05]
(23) Shopping centers.
(24) Shops of artisans, carpenters, craftsmen, electricians, painters,
plumbers, printers or other similar trade.
(25) Sign shop.
(26) Supermarket.
(27) Theater (indoor only).
(28) Vocation/trade school, operated for profit.
(29) Combinations of two or more of the above permitted uses in one
principal building.
(30) Other uses similar to those listed above.
(31)Raising of horses and other livestock.
(32) Essential services.
(33) Mini warehousing and self-storage. [Added 12-23-2002 by Ord.
No. 50-02]
(34) Bank and financial institution. [Added 5-27-2003 by Ord. No.
12-03]
B. Permitted accessory uses of building and structures are as follows:
§ 244-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-57
1:863
(1) Bulk storage, subject to the provisions of § 244-152.
(2) Fences and walls, subject to the provisions of § 244-190.
(3) Off-street loading, subject to the provisions of § 244-196.
(4) Off-street parking, subject to the provisions of § 244-197.
(5) Satellite dish antennas, subject to the provisions of § 244-165.
(6) Signs, subject to the provisions of § 244-207.
(7) Other customary accessory uses, buildings and structures which
are clearly incidental to the principal use(s) and building(s).
(8) Hospitals and philanthropic eleemosynary uses (§ 244-123).
[Added 5-27-2003 by Ord. No. 12-03]
C. Conditional uses, subject to the provisions of Article VIII of this chapter,
are as follows:
(1) Automobile repair shop (motor vehicle repair shop) (§ 244-109).
(2) Automobile sales establishment for new and/or used cars
(§ 244-110).
(3) Automobile service station (gas station or motor vehicle service
station (§ 244-111).
(4) Car wash (§ 244-112).
(5) Churches and places of worship (§ 244-115).
(6) Commercial recreational activities (§ 244-116).
(7) Drive-in restaurant (§ 244-118).
(8) Health care facility (§ 244-120).
(9) Hotel or motel (§ 244-124).
(10) Mini storage facility (§ 244-126).
(11) Public utilities (§ 244-128).
(12) Veterinary clinic, hospital or animal care facility (§ 244-132).
(13) Solar energy facilities. In addition to the conditional use
requirements set forth at § 244-133.1, solar energy facilities in the
HC Zone shall be subject to the following conditions: [Added
1-27-2015 by Ord. No. 01-15; amended 8-25-2015 by Ord. No.
20-15]
(a) The solar collectors and accessory equipment setback shall be
50 feet or the accessory building setback requirement of the
applicable zoning district, whichever distance is greater. For
§ 244-57 JACKSON CODE § 244-57
1:864
contiguous properties under common ownership, the setback
may be reduced to zero feet along the common property lines.
(b) The height of the solar collectors and any mounts shall not
exceed 12 feet when oriented at maximum tilt. For solar
collectors attached to open-sided carports located within
parking areas, the maximum height shall not exceed 25 feet.
(c) All projects are net-metered projects limited in annual energy
generation capacity to the previous calendar year's energy
demand.
(d) All solar or photovoltaic energy systems shall require major
site plan approval.
(e) When a new driveway or road is required for access to the
solar or photovoltaic systems, the surface shall be suitable to
accommodate maintenance as well as emergency vehicles.
(f) All solar or photovoltaic energy system installations must be
performed by a qualified installer, and prior to operation the
electrical connections must be inspected by the Township or
other appropriate electrical inspection agency, as determined
by the Township. In addition, any interconnection to the public
utility grid must be inspected by the appropriate public utility.
(g) Ground areas beneath solar panels shall be planted with a seed
mixture of grasses that are both native and non-native to the
region, are noninvasive and are best suited to prevent soil
erosion and the spread of weeds or other invasive species and
will promote biodiversity. The ground area shall be mowed as
needed, the frequency of such mowing to be determined in
consultation with the Township’s professionals, the Ocean
County Soil Conservation District and any other agency having
jurisdiction over the installation of the solar panels. [Amended
3-8-2016 by Ord. No. 05-16]
(h) Solar panels shall not be included in any calculation of
impervious surface or impervious cover in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-38.1.
(i) With the exception of carport installations, ground areas
beneath solar panels shall be planted with a seed mixture of
native, noninvasive, shade-tolerant grasses in order to prevent
soil erosion and the spread of weeds or other invasive species
and to promote biodiversity and a natural habitat; the ground
area shall be mowed on a regular basis.
D. Area, yard and building requirements for the HC Zoning District are as
follows: [Amended 5-27-2003 by Ord. No. 12-03]
§ 244-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-57
1:865
§ 244-57.1. MUNC/HC Mixed Use Neighborhood Center/Highway
Commercial Zone. [Added 5-9-2017 by Ord. No. 06-17]
Type of Lot
Requirements Interior Corner
Lot requirements:
Lot area (square feet) 40,000 45,000
Lot width (feet) 175 200
Lot frontage (feet) 175 200*
Lot depth (feet) 200 200
Principal building requirements:
Front yard setback (feet) 60 60
Rear yard setback (feet) 40 —
Side yard setback, each side
(feet)
25 25
Maximum building height (feet) 35 35
Accessory building requirements:
Front yard setback (feet) Not permitted in front yard
Rear yard setback (feet) 25 —
Side yard setback (feet) 25 25
Maximum building height (feet) 15 15
Maximum building coverage
(combined coverage of all
principal and accessory
buildings)
30% 30%
Maximum impervious coverage 75% 75%
Parking area setbacks:
Setback from right-of-way
(feet)
20 20
Setback from property line
(feet):
Residential use 20 20
Nonresidential use 10 10
A. Permitted principal uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) All principal uses permitted in the HC Highway Commercial Zone;
and
(2) Mixed Use Neighborhood Centers in accordance with the
provisions of § 244-239 of this chapter.
§ 244-57 JACKSON CODE § 244-57.1
1:866
§ 244-57.2. HCMU Highway Commercial Mixed-Use Zone. [Added
2-11-2020 by Ord. No. 02-20]
There is hereby established a new Zoning District to be entitled "HCMU
Highway Commercial Mixed-Use Zone," which will include those areas
generally located on the south side of County Route 537 between the
Interstate 195 corridor and the Hurricane Harbor Water Park as follows:
B. Permitted accessory uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) All accessory uses of buildings and structures permitted in the HC
Highway Commercial Zone.
C. Conditional uses, subject to the provisions of Article VIII of this chapter,
as follows:
(1) All conditional uses in the HC Highway Commercial Zone.
D. Area, yard and building requirements for the MUNC/HC Zoning District
are as follows:
(1) Same as in HC Highway Commercial Zone.
A. Permitted principal uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) All principal uses permitted in the NC Neighborhood Commercial
Zone.
(2) All principal uses permitted in the HC Highway Commercial Zone.
(3) Hospitals, medical research, surgery center and philanthropic
eleemosynary uses.
(4) Convention or conference center.
(5) Exhibition hall.
(6) Convenience store with gasoline fueling stations.
(7) Stadiums.
(8) Banquet facility.
(9) Distribution center, fulfillment center and warehouse, inclusive of
assembly and finishing of materials or products.
(10) Open-air theater.
(11) Multifamily residential dwelling units.
(12) Combinations of two or more of the above permitted uses in one
principal building.
(13) Other uses similar to those listed above.
B. Permitted accessory uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
§ 244-57.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-57.2
1:867
(1) All accessory uses of buildings and structures permitted in the HC
Highway Commercial Zone.
C. Conditional uses, subject to the provisions of Article VIII of this chapter,
are as follows:
(1) All conditional uses permitted in the HC Highway Commercial
Zone.
D. Area, yard and building requirements for the HCMU Zoning District are
as follows:
Table of Area, Yard and Building Requirements
Lot requirements
Lot area (acres) 70
Lot width (feet) 2,900 contiguous
Lot frontage (feet) 2,900 contiguous
Lot depth (feet) 1,000
Any property within the HCMU Zone that does not comply with the lot
requirements is subject to the provisions of the HC Highway
Commercial Zone, § 244-57.
Principal building requirements:
Front yard setback (feet) 60
Rear yard setback (feet) 40
Side yard setback, each side
(feet)
25
Maximum building height (feet) 35
Accessory building requirements
Front yard setback (feet) Not permitted in front yard
Rear yard setback (feet) 25
Side yard setback, each side
(feet)
25
Maximum building height (feet) 25
Maximum building coverage
(combined coverage of all
principal and accessory buildings)
30%
Maximum impervious coverage 75%
Parking area setbacks
Setback from right-of-way (feet) 20
Setback from property line (feet)
Residential use 20
Nonresidential use 10
§ 244-57.2 JACKSON CODE § 244-57.2
1:868
Notes:
(1) The maximum height for all buildings and structures shall be
35 feet, provided:
(a) The maximum height may be increased by one foot for
each 10 feet of increased distance from a public right-ofway
limit to a maximum of 90 feet.
(2) A fifty-foot buffer shall be provided along any property
boundary abutting lands zoned for residential use.
(3) Off-street parking shall be determined utilizing a shared
parking analysis.
E. Residential use requirements.
(1) Residential units shall only be permitted on a tract that conforms to
the HCMU tract requirements;
(2) The maximum number of dwelling units is four units per gross acre,
including affordable units;
(3) A minimum of 10% of the number of residential dwelling units shall
be reserved for special needs, and shall be affordable to low- and
moderate-income households. Units shall be developed and rented
in accordance with the applicable COAH and Uniform Housing
Affordability Controls (UHAC) N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.
(4) All roadway and parking improvements shall comply with the
residential site improvement standards;
(5) No detached single-family dwellings shall be permitted in the
HCMU Zone;
(6) No principal building, when viewed from any elevation, shall be
greater than 220 feet in length;
(7) Distances.
(a) Distances between principal buildings. The minimum distances
between principal buildings shall be as follows:
[1] Any building side wall to side wall shall have a minimum
distance of 30 feet between the midpoint of said side walls
and/or a minimum distance of 25 feet between the side
wall corners;
[2] Any building side wall to front or rear building walls shall
be a minimum distance of 40 feet between the midpoint of
said walls and/or minimum distance of 30 feet between the
side wall building corner and front or rear wall building
corner;
§ 244-57.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-57.2
1:869
[3] Any front to rear, front to front or rear to rear building wall
shall have a minimum distance of 50 feet between the
midpoint of said walls and/or a minimum distance of 40
feet between the building wall corners;
[4] Distance between principal buildings and access
driveways or internal roadway. No multifamily dwellings
shall be located closer than 30 feet to the curbline of any
access driveway or internal roadway.
[5] Distance between principal buildings and parking areas.
No principal building shall be located closer than 20 feet
to the curbline of any parking area, except for access
aisles or driveways to garages and/or carports which are
attached to principal buildings, where the minimum
distance shall be 25 feet;
(8) The owner (landlord) shall be responsible for the following:
(a) Snowplows;
(b) Snow removal;
(c) Solid waste storage, collection, disposal and recycling;
(d) The replacement, repair and maintenance of all private
utilities, streetlighting, internal roadway improvements,
access drive and parking lot improvements, curbs, sidewalks,
landscaping, common open space and recreation facilities and
equipment;
F. Technical subdivision.
(1) It is acknowledged that a project to be developed pursuant to this
subsection may be of such a size or type so as to make
sectionalization by subdivision and the use of different forms of
ownership a practical necessity. Therefore, a technical subdivision
for such a project may be required for marketing or financing
purposes.
(2) An application for technical subdivision approval may be submitted
with an application for approval of a site plan, or subsequent to the
issuance of such an approval.
(3) Such an application shall be considered as a technical subdivision
and treated as a minor subdivision application without the
necessity to obtain bulk variances that would technically be
required.
(a) The purpose of the application is to create a new lot for the
purpose of financing or transfer of ownership within a
development which is, or has been, the subject of site plan
approval.
§ 244-57.2 JACKSON CODE § 244-57.2
1:870
§ 244-58. CR-1 Commercial Recreation Zone 1.143
(b) A technical subdivision may not substantially modify or
otherwise adversely impact on the integrity of a previously
approved development plan.
(c) A technical subdivision must not reduce, limit or modify
parking or access to parking.
(d) If a technical subdivision includes the division of parking or
other common areas or facilities, the subdivision shall be
conditioned upon appropriate easements for parking, access,
drainage and/or utilities where necessary.
A. Permitted principal uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) Bank and financial institution.
(2) Bar/cocktail lounge/nightclub.
(3) Clothing/dry goods store.
(4) Convenience store.
(5) Delicatessen.
(6) Gift shop.
(7) Ice cream store.
(8) Indoor commercial health/recreational facility.
(9) Luncheonette.
(10) Museum.
(11) Restaurant, with or without a liquor license; however, drive-in
restaurants and fast-food restaurants shall not be permitted.
(12) Municipal parks, playgrounds and other such municipal buildings
and uses as are deemed appropriate and necessary by the
Township Committee.
(13) Federal, state, county and other public buildings and grounds;
excluding, however, public schools, parks, playgrounds or other
public recreational uses or areas.
(14) Stadiums.
(15) Amusements.
143. Editor's Note: The name of this district was changed from "RC Recreational Commercial
Zone" to "CR-1 Commercial Recreation Zone 1" 11-9-2010 by Ord. No. 33-10. Except
where noted, the provisions of this section were otherwise unchanged.
§ 244-57.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-58
1:871
(16) Theater (indoor or open-air only); however, drive-in theaters shall
not be permitted.
(17) Combinations of two or more of the above permitted uses in more
than one principal building. [Amended 11-9-2010 by Ord. No.
33-10]
(18) Other uses similar to those listed above.
(19)Raising of horses and other livestock.
(20) Essential services.
(21) Zoological park.
(22) Art gallery. [Added 5-27-2003 by Ord. No. 12-03]
(23) Convention or conference center. [Added 5-27-2003 by Ord. No.
12-03]
(24) Exhibition hall. [Added 5-27-2003 by Ord. No. 12-03]
(25) Music conservatory. [Added 5-27-2003 by Ord. No. 12-03]
(26) Hotels with a minimum of 30 guest rooms. [Added 7-11-2005 by
Ord. No. 29-05]
B. Permitted accessory uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) Fences and walls, subject to the provisions of § 244-190.
(2) Off-street loading, subject to the provisions of § 244-196.
(3) Off-street parking, subject to the provisions of § 244-197.
(4) Satellite dish antennas, subject to the provisions of § 244-165.
(5) Signs, subject to the provisions of § 244-207.
(6) Swimming pools, subject to the provisions of § 244-216A, except
that no additional parking spaces shall be required if the pool is not
open to the public. [Added 7-11-2005 by Ord. No. 29-05]
(7) Other customary accessory uses, buildings and structures which
are clearly incidental to the principal use(s) and building(s).
C. Conditional uses, subject to the provisions of Article VIII of this chapter,
are as follows:
(1) Automobile repair shop (motor vehicle repair garage) (§ 244-109).
(2) Automobile service station (gas station or motor vehicle service
station) (§ 244-111).
(3) Commercial recreational activities (§ 244-116).
§ 244-58 JACKSON CODE § 244-58
1:872
(4) Drive-in restaurants (§ 244-118).144
(5) Public utilities (§ 244-128).
(6) Solar energy facilities. In addition to the conditional use
requirements set forth at § 244-133.1, solar energy facilities in the
CR-1 Zone shall be subject to the following conditions: [Added
1-27-2015 by Ord. No. 01-15; amended 8-25-2015 by Ord. No.
20-15]
(a) The solar collectors and accessory equipment setback shall be
50 feet or the accessory building setback requirement of the
applicable zoning district, whichever distance is greater. For
contiguous properties under common ownership, the setback
may be reduced to zero feet along the common property lines.
(b) The height of the solar collectors and any mounts shall not
exceed 12 feet when oriented at maximum tilt. For solar
collectors attached to open-sided carports located within
parking areas, the maximum height shall not exceed 25 feet.
(c) All projects are net-metered projects limited in annual energy
generation capacity to the previous calendar year's energy
demand.
(d) All solar or photovoltaic energy systems shall require major
site plan approval.
(e) When a new driveway or road is required for access to the
solar or photovoltaic systems, the surface shall be suitable to
accommodate maintenance as well as emergency vehicles.
(f) All solar or photovoltaic energy system installations must be
performed by a qualified installer, and prior to operation the
electrical connections must be inspected by the Township or
other appropriate electrical inspection agency, as determined
by the Township. In addition, any interconnection to the public
utility grid must be inspected by the appropriate public utility.
(g) Ground areas beneath solar panels shall be planted with a seed
mixture of grasses that are both native and non-native to the
region, are noninvasive and are best suited to prevent soil
erosion and the spread of weeds or other invasive species and
will promote biodiversity. The ground area shall be mowed as
needed, the frequency of such mowing to be determined in
consultation with the Township’s professionals, the Ocean
County Soil Conservation District and any other agency having
jurisdiction over the installation of the solar panels. [Amended
3-8-2016 by Ord. No. 05-16]
144. Editor's Note: Original § 109-53C(5), Hotel or motel, of the 1972 Code, which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed 7-11-2005 by Ord. No. 29-05.
§ 244-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-58
1:873
(h) Solar panels shall not be included in any calculation of
impervious surface or impervious cover in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-38.1.
(i) With the exception of carport installations, ground areas
beneath solar panels shall be planted with a seed mixture of
native, noninvasive, shade-tolerant grasses in order to prevent
soil erosion and the spread of weeds or other invasive species
and to promote biodiversity and a natural habitat; the ground
area shall be mowed on a regular basis.
D. Area, yard and building requirements for the RC Recreational
Commercial Zone are as follows: [Amended 5-27-2003 by Ord. No.
12-03]
(1) Requirements.
Type of Lot
Requirements Interior Corner
Lot requirements:
Lot area (square feet) 65,340 65,340
Lot width (feet) 200 200
Lot frontage (feet) 200 200*
Lot depth (feet) 200 200
Front yard setback (feet) 100 100*
Rear yard setback (feet) 40 —
Side yard setback, each side
(feet)
30 30
Accessory building
requirements:
Front yard setback (feet) Not permitted in front yard
Rear yard setback (feet) 30 30
Side yard setback, each side
(feet)
30 30
Maximum building height
(feet)
15 15
Maximum building coverage
(combined coverage of all
principal and accessory
buildings)
25% 25%
Maximum impervious coverage 60% 60%
Parking area setbacks:
Setback from rights-of-way
(feet)
20 20
§ 244-58 JACKSON CODE § 244-58
1:874
§ 244-59. CR-2 Commercial Recreation Zone 2. [Added 11-9-2010
by Ord. No. 34-10]
Type of Lot
Requirements Interior Corner
Setback from property line
(feet):
Residential use 20 20
Nonresidential use 10 10
NOTES:
* Each street.
(2) The maximum height for all buildings and structures shall be 35
feet, provided: [Amended 4-22-2002 by Ord. No. 24-02]
(a) The maximum height may be increased by one foot for each 10
feet of increased distance from the required setback from any
public street to a maximum of 125 feet; and
(b) For amusements only, the maximum height in Subsection D(2)
above may be exceeded upon a certification by a licensed and
qualified individual(s) that the structure meets all current
safety standards.
(3) All principal buildings in the RC Zone shall be connected to an
approved and operating public water supply system and sanitary
sewer system prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
[Added 7-11-2005 by Ord. No. 29-05]
A. Permitted principal uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) Public or private golf courses. All existing golf courses are subject
to the restrictions and conditions of the resolutions of approval.
(2) Public or private campgrounds.
(3) Horse farms and trails.
(4) Passive recreational parks and facilities.
B. Permitted accessory uses, buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) Fences and walls, subject to the provisions of § 244-190.
(2) Off-street loading, subject to the provisions of § 244-196.
(3) Off-street parking, subject to the provisions of § 244-197.
(4) Satellite dish antennas, subject to the provisions of § 244-165.
(5) Signs, subject to the provisions of § 244-207.
§ 244-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-59
1:875
(6) Swimming pools, subject to the provisions of § 244-216A, except
that no additional parking spaces shall be required if the pool is not
open to the public.
(7) Other customary accessory uses, buildings and structures which
are clearly incidental to the principal use(s) and buildings.
C. Conditional uses, subject to the provisions of Article VIII of this chapter,
are as follows:
(1) Public utilities (§ 244-128).
(2) Solar energy facilities. In addition to the conditional use
requirements set forth at § 244-133.1, solar energy facilities in the
CR-2 Zone shall be subject to the following conditions: [Added
1-27-2015 by Ord. No. 01-15; amended 8-25-2015 by Ord. No.
20-15]
(a) The solar collectors and accessory equipment setback shall be
50 feet or the accessory building setback requirement of the
applicable zoning district, whichever distance is greater. For
contiguous properties under common ownership, the setback
may be reduced to zero feet along the common property lines.
(b) The height of the solar collectors and any mounts shall not
exceed 12 feet when oriented at maximum tilt. For solar
collectors attached to open-sided carports located within
parking areas, the maximum height shall not exceed 25 feet.
(c) All projects are net-metered projects limited in annual energy
generation capacity to the previous calendar year's energy
demand.
(d) All solar or photovoltaic energy systems shall require major
site plan approval.
(e) When a new driveway or road is required for access to the
solar or photovoltaic systems, the surface shall be suitable to
accommodate maintenance as well as emergency vehicles.
(f) All solar or photovoltaic energy system installations must be
performed by a qualified installer, and prior to operation the
electrical connections must be inspected by the Township or
other appropriate electrical inspection agency, as determined
by the Township. In addition, any interconnection to the public
utility grid must be inspected by the appropriate public utility.
(g) Ground areas beneath solar panels shall be planted with a seed
mixture of grasses that are both native and non-native to the
region, are noninvasive and are best suited to prevent soil
erosion and the spread of weeds or other invasive species and
will promote biodiversity. The ground area shall be mowed as
needed, the frequency of such mowing to be determined in
§ 244-59 JACKSON CODE § 244-59
1:876
consultation with the Township’s professionals, the Ocean
County Soil Conservation District and any other agency having
jurisdiction over the installation of the solar panels. [Amended
3-8-2016 by Ord. No. 05-16]
(h) Solar panels shall not be included in any calculation of
impervious surface or impervious cover in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-38.1.
(i) With the exception of carport installations, ground areas
beneath solar panels shall be planted with a seed mixture of
native, noninvasive, shade-tolerant grasses in order to prevent
soil erosion and the spread of weeds or other invasive species
and to promote biodiversity and a natural habitat; the ground
area shall be mowed on a regular basis.
D. Area, yard and building requirements for the CR-2 Commercial
Recreation Zone 2 are as follows:
(1) Requirements.
Type of Lot
Requirements Interior Corner
Lot area (acres) 3 3.5
Lot width (feet) 250 250
Lot frontage (feet) 250 250 (each)
Lot depth (feet) 300 300
Principal building requirements:
Front yard setback (feet) 100 100 (each)
Rear yard setback (feet) 75 —
Side yard setback (feet) 50 50
Accessory building requirements:
Front yard setback (feet) Not permitted in front yard
Rear yard setback (feet) 50 50
Side yard setback 50 50
Maximum building height (feet) 15 15
Maximum building coverage 25% 25%
Maximum lot coverage 50% 50%
Parking area setbacks:
Setback from right-of-way
(feet)
100 100
Setback from property line:
Residential use (feet) 50 50
§ 244-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-59
1:877
§ 244-60. ROS Recreation — Open Space Zone. [Added 8-12-2008 by
Ord. No. 31-08]
Type of Lot
Requirements Interior Corner
Nonresidential use (feet) 30 30145
A. Intent. The intent of the ROS Recreation — Open Space Zone is to
provide for and preserve in their present condition certain parcels in
the Township of Jackson which are already dedicated and/or used for
public or quasi-public and private open space recreational purposes.
B. Permitted principal uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) Recreational and preservation parks, playgrounds and related
facilities.
(2) Public or private campgrounds, recreational buildings, clubs,
activities of a quasi-public, social, fraternal or recreational
character, such as swim or tennis clubs, or fraternal organizations.
(3) Government essential services and associated accessory structures
and uses as may be required, and approved by the Planning Board
where appropriate.
C. Permitted accessory uses as follows:
(1) Off-street parking, subject to the provisions of § 244-197.
(2) Bicycle parking.
(3) Fences and walls, subject to the provisions of § 244-190.
(4) Other customary accessory uses, buildings and structures, which
are clearly incidental to the principal use(s) and building(s).
D. Permitted signs.
(1) One identification ground sign per street frontage shall be
permitted subject to the following size, height, and setback
requirements.
(a) Maximum area: 20 square feet.
(b) Maximum height: six feet.
(c) Minimum front yard setback: 20 feet.
(d) Minimum side yard setback: 20 feet.
E. Conditional uses shall be as follows: (Reserved)
145. Editor's Note: Original § 109-54, O/R Office/Research Zone, of the 1972 Code, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed 12-23-2002 by Ord. No. 50-02.
§ 244-59 JACKSON CODE § 244-60
1:878
§ 244-61. AR Agricultural Retention Zone. [Added 11-9-2010 by
Ord. No. 35-10]
F. Area, yard and building requirements for the ROS Zoning District are as
follows:
Requirements ROS District
Minimum lot requirements:
Lot area (acres) 15
Lot width (feet) 400
Lot frontage (feet) 400
Lot depth (feet) 450
Principal building or use
requirements:
Front yard setback (feet) 100
Rear yard setback (feet) 100
Side yard setback (feet) 75
Maximum building height 35
Accessory building or use
requirements:
Front yard setback (feet) Not permitted in front yard
Rear yard setback (feet) 100
Side yard setback (feet) 75
Maximum building height (feet) 15
Minimum open space (vacant land) 60%
Maximum building coverage (all
structures)
20%
Maximum impervious coverage 10%
Maximum coverage all uses
(buildings, parking, roads, swimming
pools, tennis courts, ball fields,
playgrounds, etc.)
40%
A. Intent and purpose. The governing body of the Township of Jackson,
recognizing the value in the retention and preservation of agricultural
farmlands, provides for and encourages the continued preservation,
conservation, and protection of existing farmlands in continuance of
that goal. The Agricultural Retention Zone identifies those lands which
are therefore affected and are therefore subject to the following.
B. Permitted uses.
§ 244-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-61
1:879
(1) All farm and agricultural uses, including agricultural nurseries,
stables, dairies, greenhouses, cranberry bogs, and aquaculture
farms.
(2) Single-family homes, subject to the R-5 standards.
(3) Farms for the purposes of breeding and training horses.
(4) Farms for the purposes of raising livestock.
(5) Farms for the purposes of the production of produce, flowers or
livestock feed.
(6) Farms for the purposes of the production of trees and shrubs.
(7) Lands preserved for the purposes of farming.
C. Conditional uses, subject to the provisions of Article VIII of this chapter,
are as follows:
(1) Farmers' market, subject to the provisions of § 244-119.
D. Area, yard and building requirements for the AR Zoning District are as
follows:
Type of Lot
Requirements Interior Corner
Lot requirements:
Lot area:
Acres 6 7
Square feet 261,360 304,920
Lot width (feet) 300 300
Lot frontage (feet) 300 300
Lot depth (feet) 400 400
Principal building requirements:
Front yard setback (feet) 100 100
Rear yard setback (feet) 50
Side yard setback (feet) 50 50
Accessory building requirements:
Front yard setback (feet) Not permitted in front yard
Rear yard setback (feet) 30 30
Side yard setback (feet) 30 30
Maximum building height (feet) 15 15
Maximum building coverage 25% 25%
Maximum lot coverage 60% 60%
§ 244-61 JACKSON CODE § 244-61
1:880
§ 244-62. LM Commercial Office/Light Industrial Zone.
Type of Lot
Requirements Interior Corner
Parking area setbacks:
Setback from right-of-way (feet) 100 100
Setback from property line:
Residential use (feet) 50 50
Nonresidential use (feet) 20 20
(1) The maximum height of all buildings and structures shall be 35
feet, provided that:
(a) The maximum height may be increased by one foot for each 10
feet of increased distance from all required setbacks to a
maximum of 50 feet.
A. Permitted principal uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) Bank and financial institution.
(2) Convention or conference center.
(3) Exhibition hall.
(4) Federal, state, county and municipal buildings and grounds;
excluding, however, public schools, parks, playgrounds or other
public recreational uses or areas.
(5) Nurseries and greenhouses.
(6) Indoor commercial health/recreational facility.
(7) Contractor's office, showroom, garage, warehouse and shop;
provided, however, that all materials and equipment are stored
within a completely enclosed building.
(8) Light manufacturing, as defined in § 244-6.
(9) Mailing, reproduction, commercial art and photography and
stenographic services.
(10) Medical or dental laboratory.
(11) An office building with 5,000 square feet or more of gross floor area
may utilize a portion of the first floor, not to exceed 25% of the
gross floor area of the office building, for types of retail trade which
are ancillary to the office use and/or service office workers. Such
retail use must be located on the first floor of the office building and
shall not be permitted in a separate building on the site. The types
of retail uses permitted include:
§ 244-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-62
1:881
(a) Restaurants and luncheonettes, but not including drive-in
restaurants or restaurants which depend largely on takeout
service for off-premises consumption.
(b) Delicatessens, bakeries and confectionery stores, but not
including self-service food markets (supermarkets) or meat
and poultry markets.
(c) Personal service establishments, such as barbershops, beauty
shops, tailoring and dressmaking shops and dry-cleaning
shops, but not including self-service laundries, dancing and
music schools, day nurseries or radio, television or appliance
repair shops.
(d) Drugstores, stationery supplies, tobacco and periodical stores
and specialty shops, but not including department stores,
junior department stores, hardware stores, plumbing supply
shops or appliance stores.
(e) Other retail uses which are normally and/or continually utilized
by offices and office workers during normal working hours and
do not primarily service the non-office worker and/or evening
shopper.
(12) Offices for administrative, business, educational or executive
services.
(13) Offices of an industrial medical or scientific research laboratory,
provided that there are no inherent hazards associated with such
research use, and further provided that no nuisance may occur
from fire or explosion, toxic or corrosive fumes, gas, smoke, odors,
obnoxious dust or vapor, offensive noise or vibrations, glare flashes
or objectionable effluent and electrical interference which may
adversely affect or impair the normal use and peaceful enjoyment
of any property, structure or dwelling located in the same or any
other zoning district. The likelihood of groundwater contamination
or depletion, air pollution and the pollution of waste disposal shall
be considered.
(14) Offices of a public utility not involving the retail sale of goods.
(15) Printing, lithography, publishing or photocopying establishment.
(16) Research and engineering activities involving technical
investigation or study for product development and similar
activities.
(17)Warehousing or storage of goods and products, provided that:
(a) No goods are sold retail from the premises;
(b) All items are stored within a completely enclosed building; and
§ 244-62 JACKSON CODE § 244-62
1:882
(c) The warehousing or storage of hazardous chemicals shall be
prohibited.
(18) Wholesaling or distributing establishments, except for used
automobiles.
(19) Combinations of two or more of the above permitted uses in one
principal building.
(20)Raising of horses and other livestock.
(21) Animal care facilities.
(22) Essential services.
(23) Mini warehousing and self-storage. [Added 12-23-2002 by Ord.
No. 50-02]
(24) Mailing, reproduction, commercial art and photography and
stenographic services. [Added 5-27-2003 by Ord. No. 12-03]
(25) Medical or dental clinic or laboratory. [Added 5-27-2003 by Ord.
No. 12-03]
(26) Offices for members of a recognized profession, as defined in
§ 244-6. [Added 5-27-2003 by Ord. No. 12-03]
(27) Office/research park, provided that same is located on a tract of
land a minimum of 20 acres in area and is composed of uses and
buildings permitted in this section. An area of less than 20 acres
may be added to an office, research park, provided that said area is
contiguous thereto and is in compliance with the provisions of this
chapter. [Added 5-27-2003 by Ord. No. 12-03]
B. Permitted accessory uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) Bulk storage, subject to the provisions of § 244-152.
(2) One dwelling unit in conjunction with any permitted use in the LM
Zone used exclusively for the housing of caretakers, guards or
other custodial employees.
(3) Fences and walls, subject to the provisions of § 244-190.
(4) Nurseries and greenhouses.
(5) Off-street loading, subject to the provisions of § 244-196.
(6) Off-street parking, subject to the provisions of § 244-197.
(7) Private garage space necessary to store or repair any vehicle
associated with a permitted principal use on the premises.
§ 244-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-62
1:883
(8) Restaurant, cafeteria or luncheonette for the exclusive use of
employees, permitted only as an accessory use and within the same
principal building as a permitted use.
(9) Satellite dish antenna, subject to the provisions of § 244-165.
(10) Signs, subject to the provisions of § 244-207.
(11) Other customary accessory uses, buildings or structures, which are
clearly incidental to the principal use(s) and building(s).
C. Conditional uses, subject to the provisions of Article VIII of this chapter,
are as follows:
(1) Automobile repair shop (motor vehicle repair garage) (§ 244-109).
(2) Automobile service station (gas station or motor vehicle service
station) (§ 244-111).
(3) Hotel or motel (§ 244-124).
(4) Public utilities (§ 244-128).
D. Area, yard and building requirements for the LM Zone are as follows:
[Amended 5-27-2003 by Ord. No. 12-03]
Requirements Interior and Corner Lots
Lot requirements:
Lot area (acres) 3.0
Lot width (feet) 300
Lot frontage (feet) 150
Lot depth (feet) 300
Principal building requirements:
Front yard setback (feet) 100
Rear yard setback (feet) 50
Side yard setback:
Each side (feet) 30
Total (feet) 75
Maximum building height (feet) 50
Accessory building requirements:
Front yard setback (feet) Not permitted in front yard
Rear yard setback (feet) 50
Side yard setback (feet) 30
Maximum building height (feet) 25
§ 244-62 JACKSON CODE § 244-62
1:884
Requirements Interior and Corner Lots
Maximum building coverage (combined
coverages of all principal and
accessory buildings)
40%
Maximum impervious coverage 75%
Type of Lot
Requirements Interior Corner
Parking area setbacks:
Setback from ROW (feet) 20 20
Setback from property line (feet):
Residential use 20 20
Nonresidential use 10 10
E. Other provisions and requirements.
(1) Each use located in the LM Zone shall provide truck loading and
unloading facilities on the same lot and in other than the required
front yard so as to permit the transfer of goods in other than a
public street.
(2) No required off-street loading areas shall be located in any
required front setback.
(3) Where the LM Zone abuts a residential zone, whether along a
property line or across a street, there shall be provided a onehundred-
foot buffer screening strip as set forth in § 244-193.
(4) Each use permitted in the LM Zone shall be served by a public
sewage disposal system or by a private disposal system which
meets the approval of the state and Township Boards of Health and
the Jackson Township Municipal Utilities Authority. Any private
disposal system shall be so designed as will, in the opinion of the
Township Engineer, enable the system to be efficiently connected
to the prospective public disposal system, when constructed.
(5) All industrial activities or processes shall take place within a
completely enclosed building. Incidental storage out of doors shall
be shielded from any street or adjacent residential zone by fencing,
landscaping or other appropriate measure.
(6) Industrial parks containing such permitted uses as set forth herein
shall have a total area of not less than 20 acres. All streets within
industrial parks shall be private, and there shall be adequate
provisions for repair and maintenance so as to relieve the Township
of Jackson from any responsibility for the upkeep of such streets.
(7) No use shall be conducted in such a way as to discharge any
treated or untreated industrial waste, except as shall be approved
§ 244-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-62
1:885
§ 244-62.1. MUNC/LM Mixed Use Neighborhood Center/Light
Industrial. [Added 5-9-2017 by Ord. No. 06-17]
§ 244-63. I Industrial Zone.
by the Health Officer, Jackson Township Municipal Utilities
Authority and any applicable state agency having jurisdiction in
such matters.
A. Permitted principal uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) All principal uses permitted in the LM Commercial Office/Light
Industrial Zone; and
(2) Mixed Use Neighborhood Centers in accordance with the
provisions of § 244-239 of this chapter.
B. Permitted accessory uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) All accessory uses of buildings and structures permitted in the LM
Office Commercial/Light Industrial Zone.
C. Conditional uses, subject to the provisions of Article VIII of this chapter,
as follows:
(1) All conditional uses in the LM Office Commercial/Light Industrial
Zone.
D. Area, yard and building requirements for the MUNC/LM Zoning District
are as follows:
(1) Same as in the LM Commercial Office/Light Industrial Zone.
A. Permitted principal uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) Contractor's office, showroom, garage, warehouse and shop;
provided, however, that all materials and equipment are stored
within a completely enclosed building.
(2) Light manufacturing, as defined in § 244-6.
(3) Mailing, reproduction, commercial art and photography and
stenographic services.
(4) Medical and dental laboratory.
(5) Printing, lithography, publishing or photocopying establishment.
(6) Warehousing or storage of goods and products, provided that:
(a) No goods are sold retail from the premises;
(b) All items are stored within a completely enclosed building; and
§ 244-62 JACKSON CODE § 244-63
1:886
(c) The warehousing or storage of hazardous chemicals shall be
prohibited.
(7) Research and engineering activities involving technical
investigation or study for product development and similar
activities.
(8) Wholesaling or distributing establishment, except for used
automobiles.
(9) Contractor's or craftsman's shop or equipment storage area,
including general repair shop, except automobile dismantling or
cannibalizing.
(10) Fabrication of metal products, comprising any of the following:
(a) Baby carriages, bicycles and other vehicles.
(b) Metal wire or foil (tin, aluminum, gold, etc.).
(c) Metal furniture.
(d) Musical instruments.
(e) Sheet metal products.
(f) Toys.
(11) Fabrication of paper products, comprising any of the following:
(a) Bags.
(b) Bookbinding.
(c) Boxes and packaging materials.
(d) Office supplies.
(e) Toys.
(12) Fabrication of wood products, comprising any of the following:
(a) Boats.
(b) Boxes.
(c) Cabinets and woodworking.
(d) Furniture.
(e) Toys.
(13) Food and associated industries, such as bakeries, bottling of food
and beverages, food and cereal mixing and milling, food
processing, food sundry manufacturing, ice cream manufacturing
and manufacturing of spirituous liquor.
§ 244-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-63
1:887
(14) Manufacturing of light machinery, comprising any of the following:
(a) Small machines or small machine parts.
(b) Cash registers.
(c) Sewing machines.
(d) Typewriters, calculators and other office machines.
(15) Research and testing laboratories, such as aerodynamic, biological,
chemical, dental, electronic, pharmaceutical and general.
(16) Wholesale building material supply yards, yards of contractors in
the construction and building trades and similar operations
requiring bulk storage of materials and equipment, such as
building construction supplies and the equipment, vehicles and
supplies of heavy equipment contractors.
(17) Other permissible industry comprising any of the following:
(a) Brush and broom manufacturing.
(b) Plastic products manufacturing.
(c) Electric light and power and other utility company
installations.
(d) Electronic products manufacturing.
(e) Farm machinery sales and service.
(f) Glass and glass products manufacturing.
(g) Jewelry manufacturing, including gem polishing.
(h) Laundering and cleaning establishments.
(i) Leather goods manufacturing, except curing, tanning and
finishing of hides.
(j) Motion-picture exchange.
(k) Photo finishing.
(l) Pottery and ceramic products manufacturing.
(m) Printing plants.
(n) Sporting goods manufacturing.
(o) Thread and yarn manufacturing.
(18)Raising of horses and other livestock.
(19) Offices of an industrial, medical or scientific research laboratory,
provided that there are no inherent hazards associated with such
§ 244-63 JACKSON CODE § 244-63
1:888
research uses, and further provided that no nuisance may occur
from fire or explosion, toxic or corrosive fumes, gas, smoke, odors,
obnoxious dust or vapor, offensive noise vibrations, glare, flashes
or objectionable effluent and electrical interference which may
adversely affect or impair the normal use and peaceful enjoyment
of any property, structure or dwelling located in the same or any
other zoning district. The likelihood of groundwater pollution and
the problem of waste disposal shall be considered. [Added
5-27-2003 by Ord. No. 12-03]
B. Permitted accessory uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) All accessory uses, buildings and structures permitted in the LM
Commercial Office/Light Industrial Zone.
C. Conditional uses, subject to the provisions of Article VIII of this chapter,
are as follows:
(1) Automobile repair shop (motor vehicle repair garage) (§ 244-109).
(2) Automobile service station (gas station or motor vehicle service
station) (§ 244-111).
(3) Public utilities (§ 244-128).
(4) Recycling activity centers (§ 244-130).
(5) Truck terminals (§ 244-131).
(6) Adult entertainment uses, subject to § 244-177. [Added
12-23-2002 by Ord. No. 50-02]
D. Area, yard and building requirements for the I Zone are as follows:
Requirements Interior or Corner Lot
Lot requirements:
Lot area (acres) 2.0
Lot width (feet) 200
Lot frontage (feet) 125
Lot depth (feet) 200
Principal building requirements:
Front yard setback (feet) 100
Rear yard setback (feet) 50
Side yard setback:
Each side (feet) 30
Total (feet) 75
Maximum building height (feet) 50
Accessory building requirements:
§ 244-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-63
1:889
Requirements Interior or Corner Lot
Front yard setback (feet) Not permitted in front yard
Rear yard setback (feet) 50
Side yard setback (feet) 30
Maximum building height (feet) 25
Maximum building coverage
(combined coverages of all principal
and accessory buildings)
40%
Maximum impervious coverage 75%
E. Other provisions and requirements.
(1) Each use located in the I Zone shall provide truck loading and
unloading facilities on the same lot and in other than the required
front yard so as to permit the transfer of goods in other than a
public street.
(2) No required off-street loading areas shall be located in any
required front setback.
(3) Where the I Zone abuts a residential zone, whether along a
property line or across a street, there shall be provided a onehundred-
foot buffer screening strip as set forth in § 244-193.
(4) Each use permitted in the I Zone shall be served by a public sewage
disposal system or by a private disposal system which meets the
approval of the State and Township Boards of Health and the
Jackson Township Municipal Utilities Authority. Any private
disposal system shall be so designed as will, in the opinion of the
Township Engineer, enable the system to be efficiently connected
to the prospective public disposal system when constructed.
(5) All industrial activities or processes shall take place within a
completely enclosed building. Incidental storage out-of-doors shall
be shielded from any street or adjacent residential zone by fencing,
landscaping or other appropriate measure.
(6) Industrial parks containing such permitted uses as set forth herein
shall have a total area of not less than 20 acres. All streets within
industrial parks shall be private, and there shall be adequate
provisions for repair and maintenance so as to relieve the Township
of Jackson from any responsibility for the upkeep of such streets.
(7) No use shall be conducted in such a way as to discharge any
treated or untreated industrial waste, except as shall be approved
by the Health Officer, Jackson Township Municipal Utilities
Authority and any applicable state agency having jurisdiction in
such matters.
§ 244-63 JACKSON CODE § 244-63
1:890
ARTICLE VII
Pinelands Area Requirements
§ 244-64. Applicability; conformance.
§ 244-65. Definitions.
A. The provisions of this article shall apply only to the Pinelands Area
portion of Jackson Township and shall be considered supplemental to
the requirements of the balance of the chapter. Lands within the
Pinelands Area of Jackson Township, as defined herein, shall be subject
to all provisions of this chapter. Where a requirement or definition in
this article conflicts with other provisions of this chapter, the provisions
of this article shall supersede the conflicting provisions of this chapter.
B. No development in the Pinelands Area of Jackson Township shall be
carried out except in conformance with the provisions of this article and
the standards set forth elsewhere in this chapter. No person shall carry
out any development within the Pinelands Area without obtaining
development approval in accordance with the procedures set forth in
this article.
A. The following terms utilized in this article are used as defined in the
New Jersey Pinelands Comprehensive Management Plan, adopted by
the New Jersey Pinelands Commission pursuant to Section 7 of the
Pinelands Protection Act (N.J.S.A. 13:18A-1 et seq.): [Amended
12-30-1996 by Ord. No. 27-96; 3-12-2019 by Ord. No. 07-19]
Accessory structure or use
Agricultural commercial establishment
Agricultural employee housing
Agricultural or horticultural purpose or use
Agricultural products processing facilities
Agricultural service establishment
Animals, threatened or endangered
Camper
Campsite
Certificate of appropriateness
Certificate of filing
Certificate of conformity
Commencement of construction
Commission
Comprehensive management plan
Contiguous lands
Density
§ 244-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-65
1:891
Development
Development, major
Development, minor
Drainage
Electric distribution lines
Electric transmission line
Enlargement
Erosion
Executive Director
Federal Act
First-order stream
Fish and wildlife management
Floodplain
Floor area
Forestry
Forestry management plan
Habitat
Height
Historic District
Historic resource
Hydrophyte
Immediate family
Impermeable surface
Institutional uses
Interested person
Land
Landfill
Landscaping
Leachate collector
Local communications facility
Mobile home
Navigable water
Off-site commercial advertising sign
Parcel
Pinelands
Pinelands Area
Pinelands Protection Act
§ 244-65 JACKSON CODE § 244-65
1:892
Pinelands resource-related use
Plants, threatened or endangered
Preservation area
Protection area
Recommended management practice
Preapplication conference
Public services
Record tree
Recreational facility, intensive
Recreational facility, low-intensive
Resource conservation plan
Resource extraction
Scenic corridors
Seasonal high water table
Sign
Solar energy facility
Structural alteration
Structure
Submerged lands
Utility distribution line
Vegetation
Wetlands and wetlands soils
B. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALTERNATE-DESIGN PILOT PROGRAM TREATMENT SYSTEM — An
individual or community on-site wastewater treatment system that has
the capability of providing a high level of treatment, including a
significant reduction in the level of total nitrogen in the wastewater,
and that has been approved by the Pinelands Commission for
participation in the alternate-design wastewater treatment systems
pilot program pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-10.23(b). Detailed plans and
specifications for each authorized technology are available at the
principal office of the Pinelands Commission.[Added 9-22-2003 by
Ord. No. 28-03; amended 3-12-2019 by Ord. No. 07-19]
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Any application filed with any
permitting agency for any approval, authorization or permit which is a
prerequisite to initiating development in the Pinelands Area, except as
provided in § 244-67.
APPROVAL AGENCY — Any board, body or other authority within the
Township with authority to approve or disapprove subdivisions, site
§ 244-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-65
1:893
§ 244-66. Development permit required.
No person shall carry out any development, as defined in this article,
within the Pinelands Area, Jackson Township, without first obtaining a
plans, construction permits or other applications for development
approval.
DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL — Any approval granted by the
Commission pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-4, Part II, Part III or Part
IV.[Amended 12-30-1996 by Ord. No. 27-96]
DEVELOPMENT, MAJOR — Any division of land into five or more lots;
any construction or expansion of any housing development of five or
more dwelling units; any construction or expansion of any commercial
or industrial use or structure on a site of more than three acres; or any
grading, clearing or disturbance of an area in excess of 5,000 square
feet.
DEVELOPMENT, MINOR — All development other than major
development.
DEVELOPMENT PERMIT — A document signed by the Construction
Code Official, which is required by this article as a condition precedent
to the commencement of development within the Pinelands Area,
Jackson, and which acknowledges that such development complies with
the provisions of this article or variance therefrom duly authorized by a
municipal agency and approved by the Pinelands Commission.
INTERIM RULES AND REGULATIONS — The regulations adopted by
the Pinelands Commission, pursuant to the Pinelands Protection Act,
to govern the review of the applications from the adoption of the
regulations until the Pinelands Comprehensive Management Plan took
effect on January 14, 1981. These regulations were formerly codified as
N.J.A.C. 7:1G-1 et seq.
PINELANDS AREA, JACKSON TOWNSHIP — That area of Jackson
Township designated as part of the Pinelands Area by Section 10(a) of
the New Jersey Pinelands Protection Act (N.J.S.A. 13:18A-1 et seq.).
PINELANDS DEVELOPMENT CREDITS — A use right allocated to
certain lands within the Township pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-5.43 that
can be used to secure a residential density bonus on land within the
Pinelands designated to receive such credits.
PINELANDS DEVELOPMENT REVIEW BOARD — The agency
responsible from February 8, 1979, until June 28, 1979, for the review
of an action on applications for development in the Pinelands Area
which required approvals of other state agencies, except where the
Pinelands Commission acted on applications during that time period.
PUBLIC DEVELOPMENT — Development, including subdivision, by any
Township or other governmental agency.
§ 244-65 JACKSON CODE § 244-66
1:894
development permit certifying compliance with the procedures set forth in
§ 244-23 and this article.
§ 244-67. Exempt development.
A. For the purposes of this article, except as provided in § 244-67C below,
the following developments shall not be subject to Commission
notification and review requirements of this article, and development
permits approved by the Construction Code Official shall take effect
immediately:
(1) The improvement, expansion or reconstruction, within five years of
destruction or demolition, of any single-family dwelling unit or
appurtenance thereto;
(2) The improvement, expansion, construction or reconstruction of any
structure accessory to a single-family dwelling;
(3) The improvement, expansion, construction or reconstruction of any
structure used exclusively for agricultural or horticultural
purposes;
(4) The construction, repair or removal of any sign, except for the
construction or replacement of any off-site commercial advertising
sign;
(5) The repair of existing utility distribution lines; [Amended
12-30-1996 by Ord. No. 27-96]
(6) The clearing of less than 1,500 square feet of land;
(7) The construction of any addition or accessory structure for any
nonresidential use or any multifamily residential structure
provided that: [Amended 3-12-2019 by Ord. No. 07-19]
(a) If the addition or structure will be located on or below an
existing impervious surface, either the existing use is served by
public sewers or the addition or structure will generate no
wastewater flows, and said addition or structure will cover an
area of no more than 4,999 square feet; and
(b) If the addition or structure will not be located on or below an
impervious surface, said addition or structure will generate no
wastewater flows and will cover an area of no more than 1,000
square feet.
(8) The demolition of any structure that is less than 50 years old;
(9) The installation of utility distribution lines, except for sewage lines,
to serve areas which are effectively developed or development
which has received all necessary approvals and permits; [Added
12-30-1996 by Ord. No. 27-96]
§ 244-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-67
1:895
(10) The repair or replacement of any existing on-site wastewater
disposal system; [Added 12-30-1996 by Ord. No. 27-96]
(11) The repaving of existing paved roads and other paved surfaces,
provided no increase in the paved width or area of said roads and
surfaces will occur. [Added 12-30-1996 by Ord. No. 27-96;
amended 3-12-2019 by Ord. No. 07-19]
(12) The clearing of land solely for agricultural or horticultural
purposes. [Added 12-30-1996 by Ord. No. 27-96; amended
3-12-2019 by Ord. No. 07-19]
(13) Fences, provided that no more than 1,500 square feet of land is to
be cleared; [Added 12-30-1996 by Ord. No. 27-96]
(14) Aboveground telephone equipment cabinets; [Added 12-30-1996
by Ord. No. 27-96]
(15) Tree pruning; [Added 12-30-1996 by Ord. No. 27-96]
(16) The following forestry activities: [Added 12-30-1996 by Ord. No.
27-96]
(a) Normal and customary forestry practices on residentially
improved parcels of land that are five acres or less in size;
(b) Tree harvesting, provided that no more than one cord of wood
per five acres of land is harvested in any one year and that no
more than five cords of wood are harvested from the entire
parcel in any one year;
(c) Tree planting, provided that the area to be planted does not
exceed five acres in any one year, no soil disturbance occurs
other than that caused by the planting activity and no trees
other than those authorized by N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.25 are to be
planted; and
(d) Forest stand improvement designed to selectively thin trees
and brush, provided that no clearing or soil disturbance occurs
and that the total land area on the parcel in which the activity
occurs does not exceed five acres in any one year;
(17) Prescribed burning and the clearing and maintaining of fire breaks;
or [Added 12-30-1996 by Ord. No. 27-96]
(18) Normal and customary landscape plantings, unless a landscaping
plan is required pursuant to § 244-28B(20) or 244-77B(15). [Added
12-30-1996 by Ord. No. 27-96]
(19) The installation of an accessory solar energy facility on any existing
structure or impervious surface. [Added 3-12-2019 by Ord. No.
07-19]
§ 244-67 JACKSON CODE § 244-67
1:896
§ 244-68. Development approval procedures.
(20) The installation of a local communications facilities antenna on an
existing communications or other suitable structure, provided such
antenna is not inconsistent with any comprehensive plan for local
communications facilities approved by the Pinelands Commission
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-5.4(c)6. [Added 3-12-2019 by Ord. No.
07-19]
(21) The establishment of a home occupation within an existing
dwelling unit or structure accessory thereto, provided that no
additional development is proposed. [Added 3-12-2019 by Ord.
No. 07-19]
(22) The change of one nonresidential use to another nonresidential
use, provided that the existing and proposed uses are or will be
served by public sewers and no additional development is
proposed. [Added 3-12-2019 by Ord. No. 07-19]
B. The exceptions contained in Subsection A(1) through (8) above shall not
apply to any historic resources designated by the Pinelands
Commission pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.154.
C. Nothing herein shall preclude any local or state agency from reviewing,
in accordance with the provisions of any applicable ordinance or
regulation, any proposed development which does not require an
application to the Pinelands Commission pursuant to this section.
A. Certificate of filing required for completeness. In addition to the
requirements for a complete application of §§ 244-28, 244-30 and
244-31, no application for development approval within the Pinelands
Area, Jackson Township, shall be deemed complete unless a certificate
of filing issued by the Executive Director of the Pinelands Commission
has been received by the approving authority.
B. Application submission and modifications. Written notification shall be
given by the Township, by email or regular mail, to the Pinelands
Commission within seven days after a determination is made by the
Township that an application for development in the Pinelands Area is
complete or if a determination is made by the Township approval
agency that the application has been modified. Said notice shall
contain: [Amended 3-12-2019 by Ord. No. 07-19]
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The legal description and street address, if any, of the parcel that
the applicant proposes to develop.
(3) A brief description of the proposed development, including uses
and intensity of uses proposed.
§ 244-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-68
1:897
(4) The application number of the certificate of filing issued by the
Pinelands Commission and the date on which it was issued.
(5) The date on which the application, or any change thereto, was filed
and any application number or other identifying number assigned
to the application by the approval agency.
(6) The approval agency with which the application or change thereto
was filed.
(7) The content of any change made to the application since it was filed
with the Commission, including a copy of any revised plans or
reports.
(8) The nature of the municipal approval or approvals being sought.
C. Meetings and hearings. Where a meeting, hearing or other formal
proceeding on an application for development approval in the Pinelands
Area is required, the applicant shall provide notice to the Pinelands
Commission by email, regular mail or delivery of the same to the
principal office of the Commission at least five days prior to such
meeting, hearing or other formal proceeding. Such notice shall contain
at least the following information: [Amended 3-12-2019 by Ord. No.
07-19]
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The application number of the certificate of filing issued by the
Pinelands Commission and the date on which it was issued.
(3) The date, time and location of the meeting, hearing or other formal
proceeding.
(4) The name of the approval agency, or representative thereof that
will be conducting the meeting, hearing or other formal
proceeding.
(5) Any written reports or comments received by the approval agency
on the application for development that have not been previously
submitted to the Commission.
(6) The purpose for which the meeting, hearing or other formal
proceeding is to be held.
D. Notice of approvals and denials. The Pinelands Commission shall be
notified of all approvals and denials of development in the Pinelands
Area, whether the approval occurs by action or inaction of any approval
agency or an appeal of any agency's decision. The applicant shall,
within five days of the approval or denial, give notice by email or
regular mail to the Pinelands Commission. Such notice shall contain the
following information: [Amended 3-12-2019 by Ord. No. 07-19]
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
§ 244-68 JACKSON CODE § 244-68
1:898
§ 244-69. Review by Pinelands Commission.
(2) The legal description and street address, if any, of the parcel that
the applicant proposes to develop.
(3) The application number of the certificate of filing issued by the
Pinelands Commission and the date on which it was issued.
(4) The date on which the approval or denial was issued by the
approval agency.
(5) Any written reports or comments received by the approval agency
on the application for development that have not been previously
submitted to the Commission.
(6) Any revisions to the application not previously submitted to the
Commission.
(7) A copy of the resolution, permit or other documentation of the
approval or denial. If the application was approved, a copy of any
preliminary or final plan, plot or similar document that was
approved shall also be submitted.
E. No development involving the use of Pinelands development credits
shall be approved until the developer has provided the Commission and
the approval agency with evidence of his ownership and redemption of
the requisite Pinelands development credits; provided, however, that
the approval agency may grant general development plan, preliminary
subdivision or preliminary site plan approval conditioned upon such
evidence being presented as a prerequisite to final subdivision or site
plan approval. For such a final subdivision or site plan, the developer
shall provide evidence of Pinelands development credit ownership and
redemption to secure the same proportion of lots or residential units as
was approved for Pinelands development credit use in the preliminary
approval or, as appropriate, the general development plan. Notification
of any such development approval shall be made to the Pinelands
Commission pursuant to § 244-68D and to the New Jersey Pinelands
development credit bank in accordance with N.J.A.C. 3:42-3.
Redemption of the requisite Pinelands development credits shall occur
in accordance with N.J.A.C. 3:42-3.6, prior to the memorialization of the
resolution granting final subdivision or site plan approval, or if no such
approval is required, prior to the issuance of any construction permits.
[Amended 12-30-1996 by Ord. No. 27-96; 12-23-2002 by Ord. No.
50-02]
F. Except as provided in § 244-78, the requirements of § 244-68 shall not
apply to the issuance of a preliminary zoning permit or refusal to issue a
preliminary zoning permit for the development of a single-family
dwelling on an existing lot of record. [Added 3-23-1998 by Ord. No.
9-98]
§ 244-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-69
1:899
§ 244-70. Prior approvals.
§ 244-71. Effect of Pinelands Commission decision on Township
approval. [Amended 3-23-1998 by Ord. No. 9-98]
All development applications approved by the approval agency shall be
conditioned upon approval of said application by the Pinelands Commission.
If it is determined pursuant to § 244-69 that the approval will not be
A. Upon receipt by the Pinelands Commission of the notice of approval
pursuant to § 244-68D above, the application for development approval
shall be reviewed in accordance with the provisions of N.J.A.C.
7:50-4.36 through 7:50-4:42. The approval and denial of the Township
shall not be effective, and no development shall be carried out prior to a
determination of whether the development approval will be reviewed by
the Commission. If the applicant is notified that the Commission will
review the application for development, no development shall be
carried out until such review has been completed.
B. Pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.1(b) and until January 14, 1991, approvals
issued by the Pinelands Development Review Board or the Pinelands
Commission under the Interim Rules and Regulations shall serve as the
basis for Pinelands Commission review of local approval under this
section.
C. Although the Pinelands Commission shall be notified of all denials, no
such denial actions are subject to further review and action by the
Pinelands Commission.
D. Except as provided in § 244-78, the requirements of § 244-69 shall not
apply to the issuance of a preliminary zoning permit or a refusal to issue
a preliminary zoning permit for the development of a single-family
dwelling on an existing lot of record. [Added 3-23-1998 by Ord. No.
9-98]
A. Where a prior approval has been granted by the Township, no
subsequent approval of an application for development approval shall
be obtained until one of the following is satisfied:
(1) Notification is received from the Pinelands Commission that the
review of the Township's approval is not required; or
(2) Review of the Township's approval has been completed pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.37 through 7:50-4.42 and a final order regarding the
approval is received by the Township from the Pinelands
Commission.
B. Except as provided in § 244-78, the requirements of § 244-70 shall not
apply to the issuance of a preliminary zoning permit or a refusal to issue
a preliminary zoning permit for the development of a single-family
dwelling on an existing lot of record. [Added 3-23-1998 by Ord. No.
9-98]
§ 244-69 JACKSON CODE § 244-71
1:900
reviewed by the Commission, that condition shall be deemed to have been
met. If the Commission approves the decision of an approval agency subject
to conditions, the approval agency which had previously conditionally
approved the application shall, within 30 days, modify its approval to
include all conditions imposed by the Commission and, if final approval of
the application is required, shall grant final approval only if the application
for approval demonstrates that the conditions specified by the Commission
have been met by the applicant. If the Commission disapproves an
application for development previously approved by an approving authority,
the approval shall be revoked by the approving authority within 30 days,
and the authority shall thereafter deny approval of the application. Except
as provided in § 244-78, the requirements of this section shall not apply
to the issuance of a preliminary zoning permit or a refusal to issue a
preliminary zoning permit for the development of a single-family dwelling
on an existing lot of record.
§ 244-72. Participation of Pinelands Commission in public hearings.
[Amended 12-30-1996 by Ord. No. 27-96]
The Pinelands Commission may participate in a hearing held in the
Township involving the development of lands in the Pinelands Area pursuant
to N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.36.
§ 244-73. Referral of applications.
All applications for development approval shall be referred to the
Environmental Commission for review and comment.
§ 244-74. Public development. [Amended 12-30-1996 by Ord. No.
27-96]
All development proposed by the Township or any agency thereof will
comply with all requirements for public development set forth in N.J.A.C.
7:50-4.51 et seq. and all the standards set forth in Articles III, IV, V, IX, X
and XII of this chapter and §§ 244-70 and 244-71 of this article.
§ 244-75. Amendments.
In amending this article, the Township's Master Plan or any other ordinance
regulating the use of land, the Township shall comply with all the
requirements of N.J.A.C. 7:50-3.45.
§ 244-76. Waiver of strict compliance.
A. The procedures and standards established by this article and the
Pinelands Comprehensive Management Plan and applicable to all
development within the Pinelands Area, Jackson Township, shall be in
effect and enforceable unless a waiver of strict compliance shall have
been obtained from the Pinelands Commission in accordance with the
provisions of N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.61 et seq. [Amended 12-30-1996 by Ord.
No. 27-96]
§ 244-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-76
1:901
§ 244-77. Supplemental information requirements.
B. A duplicate copy of any application for waiver of strict compliance filed
with the Pinelands Commission shall be submitted to the Township
Clerk by the applicant within five days of filing with the Commission.
C. The applicant shall provide a copy of the Executive Director's written
notification of decision on any application for waiver of strict
compliance within 10 days of such decision.
A. Any application for approval of minor development, including minor site
plans, shall include at least the following information, in addition to that
required by § 244-24 or 244-26 for subdivision applications and
§ 244-28 or 244-30 for site plan applications:
(1) The applicant's name and address and his interest in the subject
property;
(2) The owner's name and address, if different from the applicant's,
and the owner's signed consent to the filing of the application;
(3) The legal description, including block and lot designation, and
street address, if any, of the subject property;
(4) A description of all existing uses of the subject property;
(5) A brief written statement generally describing the proposed
development;
(6) A USGS quadrangle map, or copy thereof, and a copy of the
Municipal Tax Map sheet on which are shown the boundaries of the
subject property, the Pinelands Management Area designation and
the zoning designation;
(7) A plat or plan showing the location of all boundaries of the subject
property, the location of all proposed development and existing or
proposed facilities to provide water for the use and consumption of
occupants of all buildings and sanitary facilities which will serve
the proposed development. The following information shall be
included with respect to existing or proposed sanitary facilities:
(a) On-site treatment facilities: the location, size, type and
capacity of any proposed on-site wastewater treatment
facilities; and
(b) Soil borings and percolation tests. If on-site sewage disposal is
proposed, results of soil borings and percolation tests in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 58:11-23 et seq., and the regulations
adopted pursuant thereto, shall be submitted at a suitable
location with a tract map showing location, logs, elevations of
all test holes, indicating where groundwater was encountered,
estimating the seasonal high water table and demonstrating
§ 244-76 JACKSON CODE § 244-77
1:902
that such facility is adequate to meet the water quality
standards contained in § 244-79.
(8) A location map, including the area extending at least 300 feet
beyond each boundary of the subject property, showing ownership
boundary lines, the boundary of the proposed development, owners
of holdings adjoining and adjacent to the subject property, existing
facilities, buildings and structures on the site, all proposed
development, wetlands, streams (including intermittent streams),
rivers, lakes and other water bodies and existing roads;
(9) A soils map, including a county soils survey which conforms to the
guidelines of the United States Department of Agriculture Soil
Conservation Service, showing the location of all proposed
development;
(10) A map showing existing vegetation, identifying predominant
vegetation types in the area and showing proposed landscaping of
the subject property, including the location of the tree line before
and after development and all areas to be disturbed as a result of
the proposed development;
(11) A certificate of filing from the Pinelands Commission, issued
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.34 or, until January 14, 1991, evidence
of prior approval from the Pinelands Development Review Board or
the Pinelands Commission, pursuant to the interim rules and
regulations; and
(12) When prior approval for the development has been granted by the
Township, evidence of Pinelands Commission review, pursuant to
§ 244-69.
(13) In lieu of Subsection A(1) through (12) above, the application
requirements of § 244-78 shall apply to applications for the
development of a single-family dwelling on an existing lot of record.
[Added 3-23-1998 by Ord. No. 9-98]
B. All applications for major site plans and major development, other than
forestry and resource extraction operations, shall provide the following
information, in addition to that required by § 244-26 for subdivision
applications and § 244-30 for site plan applications:
(1) The applicant's name and address, and his interest in the subject
property.
(2) The owner's name and address, if different from the applicant's,
and the owner's signed consent to the filing of the application.
(3) The legal description, including block and lot designation and
street address, if any, of the subject property.
(4) A description of all existing uses of the subject property.
§ 244-77 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-77
1:903
(5) A brief written statement generally describing the proposed
development, the number of total units; and the floor area of all
units to be included in the proposed development. [Amended
12-30-1996 by Ord. No. 27-96]
(6) A written statement addressing each of the standards or guidelines
set forth in Chapter 244, Article VII, and § 244-79, and stating
specifically how the proposed development meets each such
standard or guideline.
(7) A plat or plan showing the location of all boundaries of the subject
property, the location of all proposed development and existing or
proposed facilities to provide water for the use and consumption of
occupants of all buildings and sanitary facilities which will serve
the proposed development. The following information shall be
included with respect to existing or proposed wastewater
treatment facilities:
(a) Sanitary sewer distribution: the location, size and direction of
flow of all existing and proposed sanitary sewer lines and
pumping stations serving the proposed development and all
existing and proposed connections to existing facilities;
(b) On-site treatment facilities: the location, size, type and
capacity of any proposed on-site wastewater treatment
facilities, including, except with respect to discharges into an
individual residential septic system, quantities, composition,
proposed pretreatment and ultimate means of disposal;
(c) Soil borings and percolation tests. If on-site sewage disposal is
proposed, results of soil borings and percolation tests, in
accordance with the requirements of N.J.S.A. 58:11-23 et seq.,
and the regulations adopted pursuant thereto shall be
submitted with a tract map showing the location, logs and
elevations of all test holes, indicating where groundwater was
encountered and estimating the seasonal high water table; and
(d) The proposed hours and days of operation and number of
employees of any nonresidential facility.
(8) A project site base map, at a scale of no less than one inch to 200
feet and including the areas extending at least 300 feet beyond
each boundary of the subject property, showing ownership
boundary lines, the boundary of the proposed development, owners
of holdings, if any, adjoining and adjacent to the subject property,
existing facilities, buildings and structures on the site, all proposed
development, wetlands, streams (including intermittent streams),
rivers, lakes and other water bodies and existing roads.
(9) A soils map, including a county soils survey in conformance with
the guidelines of the United States Department of Agriculture Soil
Conservation Service, at the same size and scale as the project site
§ 244-77 JACKSON CODE § 244-77
1:904
base map, delineating all soil series at an appropriate level of
detail and, in sewered projects, sufficient soil borings to confirm
the accuracy of the soils map.
(10) A slope map, at the same size and scale as the project site base
map, indicating contour elevations at two-foot intervals.
(11) A resource capability map, at the same size and scale as the project
site base map, indicating the cumulative limitations to development
due to the standards and the guidelines contained in this plan. This
map should be prepared prior to any engineering, site layout or
design work.
(12) A proposed development map, at the same size and scale as the
project site base map, showing areas of proposed development; the
location of surveyor's tape or other markers placed on the site
delineating the boundaries of the property; the number of
residential lots and other type of development in each general area;
all proposed lot lines; areas proposed to be retained as open space;
the applicable land use areas boundaries; the location of proposed
facilities such as dams and impoundments, public or private water
systems, storm drainage systems, public or private sewerage
systems, public utilities, soil erosion and sedimentation control
devices, industrial wastewater discharges and solid waste disposal
areas; sources of air pollution; the proposed primary road network;
all areas to be disturbed by construction activities; existing
vegetation, identifying the predominant vegetation types in the
area; all vegetation which is to be removed or disturbed as a result
of the proposed development; and the tree line before and after
development.
(13) A map, at the same size and scale as the project site base map,
showing stormwater drainage patterns and calculations, and the
applicant's proposed stormwater runoff management plan, which
shall contain results of all percolation tests and soil borings
performed in each recharge area, including the estimated seasonal
high water table.
(14) Legal instruments evidencing the applicant's right, title or interest
in any Pinelands development credits, and any existing or proposed
deed restrictions or easements relating to the subject parcel.
(15) A landscaping or revegetation plan which incorporates the
elements set forth in § 244-79B(4). [Amended 12-30-1996 by
Ord. No. 27-96]
(16) All public service infrastructure agreements, or other
documentation, evidencing the availability of electric, gas, water,
sewer and other necessary public service infrastructure.
(17) The cultural resources survey described in § 244-79K.
§ 244-77 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-77
1:905
§ 244-78. Application procedures for development of single-family
dwellings. [Added 3-23-1998 by Ord. No. 9-98]
(18) A list of all permits required for the proposed development from
county, municipal, state and federal agencies.
(19) A certificate of filing from the Pinelands Commission, issued
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.34, or, until January 14, 1991, evidence
of prior approval from the Pinelands Development Review Board or
the Pinelands Commission, pursuant to the Interim Rules and
Regulations.
(20) When prior approval for the development has been granted by an
approving authority, evidence of Pinelands Commission review,
pursuant to § 244-69.
C. An application for approval of forestry operations shall be subject to the
application requirements set forth in § 244-79D.
D. An application for approval of resource extraction operations shall be
subject to the application requirements set forth in § 244-79F.
A. The Zoning Officer is hereby authorized and directed to issue
preliminary zoning permits as a prerequisite to the issuance of a
construction permit or other permits or approvals which are needed to
develop a single-family dwelling on an existing lot of record.
B. Applications for a preliminary zoning permit.
(1) An application for a preliminary zoning permit shall be submitted to
the Zoning Officer and shall include the following:
(a) The applicant's name and address and his interest in the
subject property.
(b) The applicant's signed certification that he is duly authorized
to submit the application, that the materials and information
are accurate and that duly authorized representatives of the
Township of Jackson and Pinelands Commission are authorized
to inspect the property.
(c) The owner's name and address, if different from the
applicant's, and the owner's signed consent to the filing of the
application.
(d) The street address, if any, the Tax Map sheet and block and lot
number of the property.
(e) Proof that taxes for the property have been paid.
(f) Acreage of the property in square feet.
(g) A dated plot plan, with the scale noted, showing:
§ 244-77 JACKSON CODE § 244-78
1:906
[1] The zoning district in which the property is located.
[2] The location and dimensions of all property lines,
easements affecting the property and streets abutting the
property.
[3] The location of all yards and setbacks required pursuant to
§§ 244-81 through 244-94.
[4] The location and use of all existing structures and
improvements on the property and their intended
disposition.
[5] A building envelope within which the single-family
dwelling is to be located.
[6] The location and dimensions of the proposed driveway.
[7] The location and dimensions of any proposed accessory
structures or improvements.
[8] The location and dimensions of the area in which any
sewage disposal system, including the disposal field, is
proposed to be located.
[9] The location of any proposed water supply well.
(h) If proposed, certification that central sewer and/or water
service are available.
(i) If development of the property is proposed in accordance with
the density transfer programs of § 244-82A(10), 244-83A(10),
244-84A(9), 244-85A(6) or 244-88A(2), the street address, if
any, the Tax Map street, block and lot number and acreage in
square feet of the noncontiguous property.
(2) The Zoning Officer is authorized to require such additional
information as may be necessary to determine compliance with
Chapter 244. Such may include, but is not limited to, a soil boring
in the area of any proposed septage system disposal field, a
wetland and wetland buffer map and information to determine
compliance with any permitted use requirement of Chapter 244.
(3) The Zoning Officer is authorized to waive any of the
aforementioned application requirements if the information is not
necessary to determine compliance with Chapter 244.
(4) Within 14 days of receipt of an application, the Zoning Officer shall
determine whether the application is complete and, if necessary,
notify the applicant of any additional information which is
necessary to complete the application.
§ 244-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-78
1:907
C. Permit decisions. Within 14 days of determining an application to be
complete, the Zoning Officer shall issue either a preliminary zoning
permit or a refusal to issue a preliminary zoning permit.
D. Preliminary zoning permit.
(1) A preliminary zoning permit shall be issued if:
(a) The application is consistent with the requirements of Chapter
244 or any necessary variance from those requirements has
been obtained.
(b) No waiver of strict compliance from the requirements of the
Pinelands Comprehensive Management Plan is necessary or
any such waiver has been approved by the Pinelands
Commission.
(c) A duly authorized representative of the Pinelands Commission
approves the Zoning Officer's determination and so signifies by
signing the preliminary zoning permit.
(2) A preliminary zoning permit shall expressly incorporate the plot
plan being approved, shall specify any conditions which the Zoning
Officer determines are necessary to ensure compliance with
Chapter 244 and shall specify the expiration date of the permit.
(3) The Zoning Officer shall provide copies of the application and the
preliminary zoning permit to the Pinelands Commission within five
days of the issuance of the permit.
E. Effect of preliminary zoning permit.
(1) A preliminary zoning permit represents a determination that the
application meets the requirements of Chapter 244 and the
Pinelands Comprehensive Management Plan, N.J.A.C. 7:50-1.1 et
seq.
(2) A preliminary zoning permit shall be valid for two years and shall,
during that period, confer the following rights and privileges:
(a) The approved application shall not be subject to any
substantive revisions of Chapter 244 of the Code of Jackson
Township or the Pinelands Comprehensive Management Plan,
N.J.A.C. 7:50-1.1 et seq.
(b) Any subsequent approvals necessary for the development of
the single-family dwelling on the property may be sought
without the need for a certificate of filing from the Pinelands
Commission.
(3) Any subsequent approvals to be sought, including but not limited to
construction permits, shall be subject to the notice, review and
decision requirements of §§ 244-68D, 244-69, 244-70 and 244-71.
§ 244-78 JACKSON CODE § 244-78
1:908
F. Refusal to issue preliminary zoning permit.
(1) The Zoning Officer shall issue a refusal to issue a preliminary
zoning permit if any of the following are found to apply:
(a) A variance from Chapter 244 of the Code of Jackson Township
is required.
(b) A variance from Chapter 244 of the Code of Jackson Township
is not required but the Zoning Officer determines that the
application does not meet any requirement of Chapter 244 that
reflects a provision of the Pinelands Comprehensive
Management Plan.
(c) A waiver of strict compliance from the Pinelands
Comprehensive Management Plan is required.
(d) The duly authorized representative of the Pinelands
Commission has not attested to the consistency of the
application with the Pinelands Comprehensive Management
Plan, N.J.A.C. 7:50-1.1 et seq.
(2) A refusal to issue a preliminary zoning permit shall expressly
reference the reasons why the refusal was issued. If the refusal is
predicated solely upon the need to obtain a variance from Chapter
244, the refusal shall also indicate that upon the applicant's
submission of evidence of Planning Board or Board of Adjustment
approval of the necessary variance, the Zoning Officer shall
determine whether a preliminary zoning permit may be issued
pursuant to Subsection D above.
(3) When a refusal to issue a preliminary zoning permit is predicated
solely upon the need to obtain a variance from Chapter 244, the
Zoning Officer shall provide a copy of the application and the
refusal to the Pinelands Commission within five days of the
issuance.
(4) When a refusal to issue a preliminary zoning permit is predicated
wholly or in part upon Subsection F(1)(b), (c) or (d) above, the
Zoning Officer shall provide the original application and a copy of
the refusal to the Pinelands Commission within five days of the
issuance. The Pinelands Commission shall thereafter process the
application pursuant to the Pinelands Comprehensive Management
Plan, N.J.A.C. 7:50-1.1 et seq., and §§ 244-68 through 244-71 of the
Code of Jackson Township. In lieu of a preliminary zoning permit, a
certificate of filing from the Pinelands Commission shall thereafter
be required as a prerequisite to the issuance of a construction or
other permit.
G. Zoning Officer vacancy. Should the position of Zoning Officer become
vacant for any reason, the application procedures set forth in § 244-78
§ 244-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-78
1:909
§ 244-79. Design standards and management programs.
The minimum standards and management programs of this section shall
be applicable to all proposed development in the Pinelands Area, Jackson
Township. These standards shall be deemed supplemental to the standards
and requirements applicable to development in the non-Pinelands areas of
the Township. In the case of conflict with other standards of this article, the
design standards and management programs contained in this section shall
supersede all other requirements and standards.
shall be of no force or effect and the procedures of §§ 244-68 through
244-77 shall apply until the position has been filled.
A. Wetlands. Development shall be prohibited in all wetlands and wetlands
transition areas, except as specifically authorized below: [Amended
4-12-1993 by Ord. No. 10-93]
(1) Horticulture of native Pinelands species and berry agriculture shall
be permitted in all wetlands, subject to the requirements of N.J.A.C.
7:50-6.5. Beekeeping shall also be permitted in all wetlands.
(2) Forestry shall be permitted in all wetlands, subject to the
requirements of N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.4 of the Comprehensive
Management Plan.
(3) Fish and wildlife management activities shall be permitted in all
wetlands subject to the minimum standards of this section,
provided that the management activity does not have a significant
adverse impact, as set forth in N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.7, on the wetland in
which the activity is carried out, and provided that the activity
conforms to all state and federal regulations.
(4) Low-intensity recreational uses which do not involve use of a
structure, including hunting, fishing, trapping, hiking, boating and
swimming and other low-intensity recreational uses, provided that
any development associated with those other uses does not result
in a significant adverse impact on the wetland, as set forth in
§ 244-79A(8) below.
(5) Docks, piers, moorings and boat launches for the use of a
landowner shall be permitted in all wetlands, provided that the use
will not result in a significant adverse impact, as set forth in
N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.7 and conforms to all state and federal regulations.
(6) Commercial or public docks, piers, moorings and boat launches
shall be permitted, provided that:
(a) There is a demonstrated need for the facility that cannot be
met by existing facilities;
(b) The development conforms to all state and federal regulations;
and
§ 244-78 JACKSON CODE § 244-79
1:910
(c) The development will not result in a significant adverse impact,
as set forth in N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.7.
(7) Bridges, roads, trails and utility transmission and distribution
facilities and other similar linear facilities shall be permitted in
wetlands, provided that:
(a) There is no feasible alternative route for the facility that does
not involve development in a wetland or, if none, that another
feasible route which results in less significant adverse impacts
on wetlands does not exist;
(b) The need for the proposed linear improvement cannot be met
by existing facilities or modification thereof;
(c) The use represents a need which overrides the importance of
protecting the wetland;
(d) Development of the facility will include all practical measures
to mitigate the adverse impact on the wetland; and
(e) The resources of the Pinelands will not be substantially
impaired as a result of the facility and its development as
determined exclusively based on the existence of special and
unusual circumstances.
(8) No development except for those uses which are specifically
authorized in Subsection A(1) and (2) hereof shall be carried out
within 300 feet of any wetlands unless the applicant has
demonstrated that the proposed development will not result in a
significant adverse impact on the wetland, as set forth in N.J.A.C.
7:50-6.7, except along the main stem of the Toms River and the
Ridgeway Branch within the Pinelands Area where all development
shall maintain the three-hundred-foot buffer. A map entitled
"Jackson Township Toms River Buffer Overlay" and dated May 19,
2005, is hereby adopted to serve as a guide and for explanatory
purposes; however, actual wetlands and buffer delineation require
field verification. [Amended 7-11-2005 by Ord. No. 27-05]
B. Vegetation. Development within the Pinelands Area, Jackson Township,
shall conform to the following standards with respect to vegetation:
[Amended 12-30-1996 by Ord. No. 27-96]
(1) No development shall be carried out by any person unless it is
designed to avoid irreversible adverse impacts on the survival of
any local populations of the threatened or endangered plants of the
Pinelands cited in N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.27.
(2) All clearing and soil disturbance activities shall be limited to that
which is necessary to accommodate an activity, use or structure
which is permitted by this chapter;
§ 244-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-79
1:911
(3) Where practical, all clearing and soil disturbance activities
associated with an activity, use or structure, other than agriculture,
forestry and resource extraction, shall:
(a) Avoid wooded areas, including New Jersey's Record Trees as
published by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection in 1991 and periodically updated; and
(b) Revegetate or landscape areas temporarily cleared or
disturbed during development activities.
(4) In order to conserve water, conserve natural features and reduce
pollution from the use of fertilizers, pesticides and other soil
supplements, all landscaping or revegetation plans prepared
pursuant to § 244-28B(20) or 244-77B(15) shall incorporate the
following elements:
(a) The limits of clearing shall be identified;
(b) Existing vegetation, including New Jersey's Record Trees as
published by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection in 1991 and periodically updated, shall be
incorporated into the landscape design where practical;
(c) Permanent lawn or turf areas shall be limited to those
specifically intended for active human use such as play fields,
golf courses and lawns associated with a residence or other
principal nonresidential use. Existing wooded areas shall not
be cleared and converted to lawns except when directly
associated with and adjacent to a proposed structure; and
(d) Shrubs and trees authorized by N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.25 shall be used
for revegetation or landscaping purposes. Other shrubs and
trees may be used in the following circumstances:
[1] When the parcel to be developed or its environs contain a
predominance of shrubs and tree species not authorized
by N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.25;
[2] For limited ornamental purposes around buildings and
other structures; or
[3] When limited use of other shrubs or tree species is
required for proper screening or buffering.
C. Fish and wildlife. Development within the Pinelands Area, Jackson
Township, shall conform to the following standards with respect to fish
and wildlife:
(1) No development shall be carried out in the Pinelands Area unless it
is designed to avoid irreversible adverse impacts on habitats that
are critical to the survival of any local populations of those
threatened or endangered animal species designated by the
§ 244-79 JACKSON CODE § 244-79
1:912
Department of Environmental Protection, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
23:2A-1 et seq.
(2) All development or other authorized activity shall be carried out in
a manner which avoids disturbance of fish and wildlife habitats that
are essential to the continued nesting, resting, breeding and
feeding of significant populations of fish and wildlife.
D. Forestry. [Amended 12-30-1996 by Ord. No. 27-96]
(1) Permit required. No forestry in the Pinelands Area of the Township
shall be carried out by any person unless a permit for such activity
has been issued by the Township Zoning Officer. Notwithstanding
this requirement, no such permits shall be required for the
following forestry activities:
(a) Normal and customary forestry practices on residentially
improved parcels of land that are five acres or less in size;
(b) Tree harvesting, provided that no more than one cord of wood
per five acres of land is harvested in any one year and that no
more than five cords of wood are harvested from the entire
parcel in any one year;
(c) Tree planting, provided that the area to be planted does not
exceed five acres in any one year, no soil disturbance occurs
other than that caused by the planting activity and no trees
other than those authorized by N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.25 are to be
planted;
(d) Forest stand improvement designed to selectively thin trees
and brush, provided that no clearing or soil disturbance occurs
and that the total land area on the parcel in which the activity
occurs does not exceed five acres in any one year; and
(e) Prescribed burning and the clearing and maintaining of fire
breaks.
(2) Forestry application requirements. The information in Subsection
D(2)(a), (b) or (c) below shall be submitted to the Township Zoning
Officer prior to the issuance of any forestry permit:
(a) For forestry activities on a parcel of land enrolled in the New
Jersey Forest Stewardship Program, a copy of the approved
New Jersey Forest Stewardship Plan. This document shall
serve as evidence of the completion of an application with the
Pinelands Commission as well as evidence that the activities
are consistent with the standards of the Comprehensive
Management Plan. No certificate of filing from the Pinelands
Commission shall be required.
§ 244-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-79
1:913
(b) For forestry activities on a parcel of land approved for
woodland assessment that is not enrolled in the New Jersey
Forest Stewardship Program:
[1] A copy of the woodland management plan, the scaled map
of the parcel and a completed woodland data form,
prepared pursuant to the farmland assessment
requirements of N.J.A.C. 18:15-2.7 through 18:15-2.15;
[2] If not already contained in the woodland management plan
required in Subsection D(2)(b)[1] above, the following
shall be submitted:
[a] The applicant's name, address and interest in the
subject parcel;
[b] The owner's name and address, if different from the
applicant's, and the owner's signed consent to the
filing of the application;
[c] The block and lot designation and street address, if
any, of the subject parcel;
[d] A brief written statement generally describing the
proposed forestry activities; and
[e] The relevant portion of a USGS Quadrangle map, or
copy thereof, and a copy of the relevant portion of the
municipal tax map sheet on which the boundaries of
the subject parcel and the municipal zoning
designation are shown.
[3] A scaled map or statement indicating how the standards
set forth in Subsection D(3)(b), (c), (d), (f), (i) and (j) below
will be met;
[4] A letter from the office of Natural Lands Management
indicating whether any threatened or endangered plants
or animals have been reported on or in the immediate
vicinity of the parcel and a detailed description of the
measures proposed by the applicant to meet the standards
for the protection of such plants and animals set forth in
§§ 244-79B(1) and 244-79C(1);
[5] Unless the Pinelands commission determines that it is
unnecessary, a cultural resource survey documenting
cultural resources on those portions of the parcel where
ground disturbance due to site preparation or road
construction will occur and a detailed description of the
measures proposed by the applicant to treat those cultural
resources in accordance with § 244-79K;
§ 244-79 JACKSON CODE § 244-79
1:914
[6] A statement identifying the type, location and frequency of
any proposed herbicide treatments and how such
treatments will comply with the standards set forth in
Subsection D(3)(h) below;
[7] A statement identifying the specific steps to be taken to
ensure that trees or areas to be harvested are properly
identified so as to ensure that only those trees intended for
harvesting are harvested;
[8] A letter from the New Jersey State Forester indicating that
the proposed forestry activities adhere to the silvicultural
practices contained in the Society of American Foresters
Forestry Handbook, Second Edition, pages 413 through
455;
[9] A letter from the New Jersey State Forester commenting
on the extent to which the proposed forestry activities are
consistent with the guidelines contained in the New Jersey
Forestry and Wetlands Best Management Practices
Manual developed by the Department of Environmental
Protection. If the letter indicates that the proposed
activities are not consistent with the Best Management
Practices Manual, the applicant must submit a written
statement addressing the inconsistencies in terms of their
potential impact on the standards set forth in Subsection
D(3)(i) and (j) below;
[10] A certificate of filing from the Pinelands Commission
issued pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.34; and
[11] When prior approval for the forestry activities has been
granted by the Zoning officer or other Township approval
agency, a letter from the Pinelands Commission indicating
that the prior approval has been reviewed pursuant to
§ 244-69.
(c) For forestry activities on a parcel of land that has not been
approved for woodland assessment and is not enrolled in the
New Jersey Forest Stewardship Program:
[1] The information required in Subsection D(2)(b)[2] through
[11] above; and
[2] A forestry activity plan which includes, as appropriate:
[a] A cover page for the forestry activity plan containing:
[i] The name, mailing address and telephone number
of the owner of the subject parcel;
[ii] The municipality and county in which the subject
parcel is located;
§ 244-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-79
1:915
[iii] The block and lot designation and street address,
if any, of the subject parcel;
[iv] The name and address of the forester who
prepared the plan, if not prepared by the owner of
the subject parcel; and
[v] The date the plan was prepared and the period of
time the plan is intended to cover.
[b] A clear and concise statement of the owner's
objectives for undertaking the proposed forestry
activities, silvicultural prescriptions and management
practices;
[c] A description of each forest stand in which a proposed
activity, prescription or practice will occur. These
stand descriptions shall be keyed to an activity map
and shall include, as appropriate, the following
information:
[i] The number of acres;
[ii] The species composition, including overstory and
understory;
[iii] The general condition and quality;
[iv] The structure, including age classes, diameter
breast height (DBH) classes and crown classes;
[v] The overall site quality;
[vi] The condition and species composition of
advanced regeneration when applicable; and
[vii] The stocking levels, growth rates and volume.
[d] A description of the forestry activities, silvicultural
prescriptions, management activities and practices
proposed during the permit period. These may
include, but are not necessarily limited to, a
description of;
[i] Stand improvement practices;
[ii] Site preparation practices;
[iii] Harvesting practices;
[iv] Regeneration and reforestation practices;
[v] Improvements, including road construction,
stream crossings, landings, loading areas and skid
trails; and
§ 244-79 JACKSON CODE § 244-79
1:916
[vi] Herbicide treatments.
[e] A description, if appropriate, of the forest products to
be harvested, including the following:
[i] Volume: cords, board feet;
[ii] Diameter breast height (DBH) classes and
average diameter;
[iii] Age;
[iv] Heights; and
[v] Number of trees per acre.
[f] A property map of the entire parcel which includes the
following:
[i] The owner's name, address and the date the map
was prepared;
[ii] An arrow designating the north direction;
[iii] A scale which is not smaller than one inch equals
2,000 feet or larger than one inch equals 400 feet;
[iv] The location of all property lines;
[v] A delineation of the physical features such as
roads, streams and structures;
[vi] The identification of soil types (a separate map
may be used for this purpose);
[vii] A map inset showing the location of the parcel in
relation to the local area;
[viii] Clear location of the area and acreage in which
each proposed activity, prescription or practice
will occur. If shown on other than the property
map, the map or maps shall note the scale, which
shall not be smaller than one inch equals 2,000
feet or larger than one inch equals 400 feet, and
shall be appropriately keyed to the property map;
and
[ix] A legend defining the symbols appearing on the
map.
(3) Forestry standards. Forestry operations shall be approved if the
standards set forth below will be met:
(a) All silvicultural practices shall be conducted in accordance
with the standards set forth in the Society of American
§ 244-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-79
1:917
Foresters Forestry Handbook, Second Edition, pages 413
through 455. Submission of an approved New Jersey Forest
Stewardship Plan or the letter required pursuant to Subsection
D(2)(b)[8] above shall serve as evidence that this standard is
met;
(b) Any newly developed access to lands proposed for harvesting
shall avoid wetland areas except as absolutely necessary to
harvest wetlands species or to otherwise gain access to a
harvesting site;
(c) All silvicultural and reforestation practices shall serve to
maintain native forests, except in those areas where nonnative
species are proposed to be harvested;
(d) The following actions shall be required to encourage the
reforestation of Atlantic White Cedar in cedar and hardwood
swamps:
[1] Clear-cutting cedar and managing slash;
[2] Controlling competition by other plant species;
[3] Utilizing fencing and other retardants, where necessary, to
protect cedar from overbrowsing;
[4] Utilizing existing streams as cutting boundaries, where
practical;
[5] Harvesting during dry periods or when the ground is
frozen; and
[6] Utilizing the least intrusive harvesting techniques,
including the use of winches and corduroy roads, where
practical;
(e) All forestry activities and practices shall be designed and
carried out so as to comply with the standards for the
protection of threatened and endangered plants and animals
set forth in §§ 244-79B(1) and 244-79C(1);
(f) All forestry activities and practices shall be designed and
carried out so as to comply with the standards for the land
application of waste set forth in N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.79;
(g) All forestry activities and practices shall be designed and
carried out so as to comply with the standards for the
protection of historic, archaeological and cultural resources
set forth in § 244-79K;
(h) Herbicide treatments shall be permitted, provided that:
§ 244-79 JACKSON CODE § 244-79
1:918
[1] The proposed treatment is identified in the forestry
application submitted to the Zoning Officer pursuant to
Subsection D(2)(b)[6] above;
[2] Control of competitive plant species is clearly necessary;
[3] Control of competitive plant species by other, nonchemical
means is not feasible; and
[4] All chemicals shall be expressly labeled for forestry use
and shall be used in a manner that is consistent with
relevant state and federal requirements;
(i) A vegetated streamside management zone shall be maintained
or established adjacent to streams, ponds, lakes and marshes,
except that no streamside management zone shall be required
when Atlantic White Cedar is proposed to be harvested or
reestablished. The streamside management zone shall be at
least 25 feet in width. Where soils are severely erodible, slopes
exceed 10% or streamside vegetation is not vigorous, the
streamside management zone shall be increased up to a
maximum of 70 feet to buffer the water body from adjacent
forestry activities. Submission of an approved New Jersey
Forest Stewardship Plan or a letter from the State Forester
indicating that the proposed forestry activities are consistent
with the New Jersey Forestry and Wetlands Best Management
Practices Manual shall serve as evidence that this standard is
met;
(j) Stream crossings, access roads, timber harvesting, skid trails,
log decks, portable sawmill sites, site preparation and
reforestation shall be designed and carried out so as to:
minimize changes to surface and groundwater hydrology;
minimize changes to temperature and other existing surface
water quality conditions; prevent unnecessary soil erosion,
siltation and sedimentation; and minimize unnecessary
disturbances to aquatic and forest habitats. Submission of an
approved New Jersey Forest Stewardship Plan or a letter from
the State Forester indicating that the proposed forestry
activities are consistent with the New Jersey Forestry and
Wetlands Best Management Practices Manual shall serve as
evidence that this standard is met; and
(k) A copy of the forestry permit issued by the Township Zoning
Officer shall be conspicuously posted on the parcel which is the
site of the forestry activity.
(4) Forestry permit procedures.
(a) Applications for forestry permits shall be submitted to the
Zoning Officer and shall be accompanied by an application fee
of $25.
§ 244-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-79
1:919
(b) Within 14 days of receipt of an application, the Zoning Officer
shall determine whether the application is complete and, if
necessary, notify the applicant in writing of any additional
information which is necessary to complete the application.
Should the Zoning Officer fail to make such a determination
within 14 days, the application shall be considered to be
complete as of the fifteenth day following its submission.
(c) Within 45 days of determining an application to be complete
pursuant to Subsection D(4)(b) above, or within such further
time as may be consented to by the applicant, the Zoning
Officer shall issue a forestry permit if the activities proposed in
the application comply with the standards in Subsection D(3)
above or disapprove any application which does not meet the
requirements of Subsection D(3) above. Any such notice of
disapproval shall specifically set forth the deficiencies of the
application.
(d) Upon receipt of a notice of disapproval pursuant to Subsection
D(4)(c) above, the applicant shall have 30 days in which to
correct the deficiencies and submit any necessary revisions to
the application to the Zoning Officer for review. The Zoning
Officer shall review the revised application to verify conformity
with the standards in Subsection D(3) above and shall, within
14 days of receipt of the revised application, issue a forestry
permit or disapprove the application pursuant to Subsection
D(4)(c) above.
(e) Failure of the Zoning Officer to act within the time period
prescribed in Subsection D(4)(c) and (d) above shall constitute
approval of the forestry application as submitted. At the
request of the applicant, a certificate as to the failure of the
Zoning Officer to act shall be issued by the municipality and it
shall be sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement or other
evidence of municipal approval required herein.
(f) In reviewing and issuing permits for forestry applications, the
Zoning Officer shall also comply with the Pinelands Area notice
and review procedures set forth in §§ 244-68B through 244-71.
(g) Forestry permits shall be valid for a period of 10 years. Nothing
in this section shall be construed to prohibit any person from
securing additional permits, provided that the requirements of
this chapter and the Pinelands Comprehensive Management
Plan are met.
(5) Administrative fees. Upon the issuance of a forestry permit
pursuant to Subsection D(4)(c) above, the applicant shall be
required to pay of a sum of $250 which shall serve as
reimbursement for any administrative costs incurred by the
municipality during the ten-year permit period. The applicant shall
§ 244-79 JACKSON CODE § 244-79
1:920
not be subject to any additional fees or escrow requirements for the
duration of the forestry permit.
(6) Notification of harvesting. No harvesting shall be commenced until
the applicant has provided the Zoning Officer with 72 hours'
written notice of the intention to begin harvesting operations.
E. Agriculture. Agricultural activities within the Pinelands Area, Jackson
Township, shall conform to the following standards: all agricultural
activities and fish and wildlife management activities, including the
preparation of land and the planting, nurturing and harvesting of crops,
shall be carried out in accordance with recommended management
practices established for the particular agricultural activity by the New
Jersey Department of Agriculture, the Soil Conservation Service and
the New Jersey Agricultural Experimental Station at Rutgers University.
F. Resource extraction.
(1) Except as otherwise authorized in this Code, the extraction or
mining of mineral resources, other than sand, gravel, clay and
ilmenite, is prohibited.
(2) Any application field for approval of resource extraction operations
in the Pinelands shall include at least the following information:
(a) The applicant's name and address and his interest in the
subject property.
(b) The owner's name and address, if different from the
applicant's, and the owner's signed consent to the filing of the
application.
(c) The legal description, including block and lot designation, and
street address, if any, of the subject property.
(d) A description of all existing uses of the subject property.
(e) A brief written statement generally describing the proposed
development.
(f) A USGS quadrangle map, or copy thereof, and a copy of the
Municipal Tax Map sheet on which are shown the boundaries
of the subject property, the Pinelands management area
designation and the zoning designation.
(g) A topographic map, at a scale of one inch equals 200 feet,
showing the proposed dimensions, location and operations on
the subject property.
(h) The location, size and intended use of all buildings.
(i) The location of all points of ingress and egress.
§ 244-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-79
1:921
(j) A location map, including the area extending at least 300 feet
beyond each boundary of the subject property, showing all
streams, wetlands and significant vegetation, forest
associations and wildlife habitats.
(k) The location of all existing and proposed streets and rights-ofway,
including railroad rights-of-way.
(l) A soils map.
(m) A reclamation plan which includes:
[1] Method of stockpiling topsoil and overburden.
[2] Proposed grading and final elevations.
[3] Topsoil material application and preparation.
[4] Type, quantity and age of vegetation to be used.
[5] Fertilizer application, including method and rates.
[6] Planting method and schedules.
[7] Maintenance requirements schedule.
(n) A signed acknowledgment from both the owner and the
applicant that they are responsible for any resource extraction
activities which are contrary to any provision of this chapter or
of the approved resource extraction plan done by any agent,
employee, contractor, subcontractor or any other person
authorized to be on the parcel by either the owner or the
applicant.
(o) A financial surety, guaranteeing performance of the
requirements of N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.68 and 7:50-6.69, in the form of
a letter of credit, certified check, surety bond or other
recognized form of financial surety acceptable to the Pinelands
Commission. The financial surety shall be equal to the cost of
restoration of the area to be excavated during the two-year
duration of any approval which is granted. The financial surety,
which shall name the Commission and the Township as the
obligee, shall be posted by the property owner or his agent
with the Township. [Amended 12-30-1996 by Ord. No.
27-96]
(p) A certificate of filing from the Pinelands Commission issued
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.34 or, until January 14, 1991,
evidence of prior approval from the Pinelands Development
Review Board or the Pinelands Commission, pursuant to the
interim rules and regulations.
§ 244-79 JACKSON CODE § 244-79
1:922
(q) When prior approval for the development has been granted by
an approval agency, evidence of Pinelands Commission review,
pursuant to § 244-69.
(3) Resource extraction operations shall be approved only if the
applicant can demonstrate that the proposed operation complies
with the resource extraction standards contained in N.J.A.C.
7:50-6.61 et seq.
(4) All parcels of land which are used for resource extraction
operations shall be restored in accordance with the restoration
standards contained in N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.61 et seq.
(5) Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to relieve an
applicant from satisfying the requirements of Chapter 185,
Excavations, Mining and Dredging, of the Jackson Township Code.
(6) Resource extraction permits shall be issued for a period of two
years. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit any
person from securing additional permits, provided that the
requirements of this section are met.
G. Water quality. Development within the Pinelands Area, Jackson
Township, shall conform to the following standards with respect to
water quality:
(1) All development permitted under this chapter shall be designed
and carried out so that the quality of surface and groundwater will
be protected and maintained. For the purpose of this section,
agricultural use shall not be considered development.
(2) No development shall be permitted which does not meet the
minimum water quality and potable water standards of the State of
New Jersey or the United States.
(3) Except as specifically authorized in this section, no development
which degrades the surface water or groundwater quality or which
establishes new point sources of pollution shall be permitted.
(4) The following point and nonpoint sources may be developed and
operated in the Pinelands:
(a) Development of new or the expansion of existing commercial,
industrial and wastewater treatment facilities, or the
development of new or the expansion of existing nonpoint
sources, except those specifically regulated in Subsection
G(4)(b) through (e) and (5) below, provided that: [Amended
12-30-1996 by Ord. No. 27-96]
[1] There will be no direct discharge into any surface water
body;
§ 244-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-79
1:923
[2] All discharges from the facility or use are of a quality and
quantity such that groundwater exiting from the parcel of
land or entering a surface body of water, will not exceed
two parts per million nitrate/nitrogen;
[3] All public wastewater treatment facilities are designed to
accept and treat septage; and
[4] All storage facilities, including ponds or lagoons, are lined
to prevent leakage into groundwater.
(b) Development of new wastewater treatment or collection
facilities, which are designed to improve the level of nitrate/
nitrogen attenuation of more than one existing on-site
wastewater treatment system where a public health problem
has been identified, may be exempted from the standards of
§ 244-79G(4)(a)[2] above, provided that:
[1] There will be no direct discharge into any surface water
body;
[2] The facility is designed only to accommodate wastewater
from existing residential, commercial and industrial
development;
[3] Adherence to § 244-79G(4)(a)[2] above cannot be achieved
due to limiting site conditions or that the costs to comply
with the standard will result in excessive user fees; and
[Amended 12-30-1996 by Ord. No. 27-96]
[4] The design level of nitrate/nitrogen attenuation is the
maximum possible within the cost limitations imposed by
such user fee guidelines, but in no case shall groundwater
exiting from the parcel or entering a surface body of water
exceed five parts per million nitrate/nitrogen. [Amended
12-30-1996 by Ord. No. 27-96]
(c) Improvements to existing commercial, industrial and
wastewater treatment facilities which discharge directly into
surface waters, provided that:
[1] There is no practical alternative available that would
adhere to the standards of § 244-79G(4)(a)[1] above;
[2] There is no increase in the existing approved capacity of
the facility; and
[3] All discharges from the facility into surface waters are
such that the nitrate/nitrogen levels of the surface waters
at the discharge point do not exceed two parts per million.
In the event that nitrate/nitrogen levels in the surface
waters immediately upstream of the discharge point
§ 244-79 JACKSON CODE § 244-79
1:924
exceed two parts per million, the discharge shall not
exceed two parts per million nitrate/nitrogen.
(d) Individual on-site septic wastewater treatment systems which
are not intended to reduce the level of nitrate/nitrogen in the
wastewater, provided that: [Amended 2-26-1996 by Ord.
No. 4-96; 12-30-1996 by Ord. No. 27-96]
[1] The proposed development to be served by the system is
otherwise permitted pursuant to Chapter 244, Article VII;
[2] The design of the system and its discharge point and the
size of the entire contiguous parcel on which the system or
systems is located will ensure that groundwater exiting
from the entire contiguous parcel or entering a surface
body of water will not exceed two parts per million nitrate/
nitrogen, calculated pursuant to the Pinelands dilution
model dated December 1993, as amended, subject to the
provisions of Subsection G(4)(d)[3] below. The entire
contiguous parcel may include any contiguous lands to be
dedicated as open space as part of the proposed
development but may not include previously dedicated
road rights-of-way or any contiguous lands that have been
deed restricted pursuant to § 244-82A(10), 244-83A(10),
244-84A(9), 244-85A(6) or 244-107;
[3] Only contiguous lands located within the same zoning
district and Pinelands management area as the proposed
system or systems may be utilized for septic dilution
purposes, except for the development of an individual
single-family dwelling on a lot existing as of January 14,
1981, nonresidential development on a lot of five acres or
less existing as of January 14, 1981, or cluster
development as permitted by N.J.A.C. 7:50-5.19;
[4] The depth to seasonal high water table is at least five feet;
[5] Any potable water well will be drilled and cased to a depth
of at least 100 feet, unless the well penetrates an
impermeable clay aquiclude, in which case the well shall
be cased to at least 50 feet;
[6] The system will be maintained and inspected in
accordance with the requirements of N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.85;
[7] The technology has been approved for use by the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection; and
[8] Flow values for nonresidential development shall be
determined based on the values contained in N.J.A.C.
7:9A-7.4, as amended, except that number of employees
may not be utilized in calculating flow values for office
§ 244-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-79
1:925
uses. In the event that N.J.A.C. 7:9A-7.4 does not provide
flow values for a specific use, but a flow value is assigned
for that use in N.J.A.C. 7:14A-23.3(a), the flow value
specified in N.J.A.C. 7:14A-23.3(a) shall be used in
calculating flow.
(e) Individual on-site septic wastewater treatment systems which
are intended to reduce the level of nitrate/nitrogen in the
wastewater, provided that: [Added 12-30-1996 by Ord. No.
27-96]
[1] The standards set forth in Subsection G(4)(d)[1] and [3]
through [8] above are met;
[2] If the proposed development is nonresidential, it is
located: [Amended 8-12-2014 by Ord. No. 13-14;
3-12-2019 by Ord. No. 07-19]
[a] In a Pinelands Regional Growth Area, Pinelands
Village or Military and Federal Installation Area; or
[b] In the Pinelands Rural Development Area or Forest
Area, subject to the standards of N.J.A.C.
7:50-6.84(a)5iii(2).
[3] The design of the system and its discharge point and the
size of the entire contiguous parcel on which the system or
systems is located will ensure that groundwater exiting
from the entire contiguous parcel or entering a surface
body of water will not exceed two parts per million nitrate/
nitrogen, calculated pursuant to the Pinelands dilution
model dated December 1993, as amended, subject to the
provisions of Subsection G(4)(d)[3] above and the
assumptions and requirements set forth in N.J.A.C.
7:50-6.84(a)5iv. The entire contiguous parcel may include
any contiguous lands to be dedicated as open space as part
of the proposed development but may not include
previously dedicated road rights-of-way or any contiguous
lands that have been deed restricted pursuant to
§ 244-82A(10), 244-83A(10), 244-84A(9), 244-85A(6) or
244-107.
(f) Alternate-design pilot program treatment systems, provided
that: [Added 9-22-2003 by Ord. No. 28-03]
[1] The proposed development to be served by the system is
residential and is otherwise permitted pursuant to the
provisions of Chapter 244, Article VII;
[2] The design of the system and its discharge point, and the
size of the entire contiguous parcel on which the system or
systems is located will ensure that groundwater exiting
§ 244-79 JACKSON CODE § 244-79
1:926
from the entire contiguous parcel or entering a surface
body of water will not exceed two parts per million nitrate/
nitrogen, calculated pursuant to the Pinelands dilution
model dated December 1993, as amended, subject to the
provisions of Subsection G(4)(f)[3] below. The entire
contiguous parcel may include any contiguous lands to
be dedicated as open space as part of the proposed
development but may not include previously dedicated
road rights-of-way or any contiguous lands that have been
deed restricted pursuant to § 244-82A(10), 244-83A(10),
244-84A(9), 244-85A(6) or 244-107;
[3] Only contiguous lands located within the same zoning
district and Pinelands management area as the proposed
system or systems may be utilized for septic dilution
purposes, except for the development of an individual
single-family dwelling on a lot existing as of January 14,
1981; nonresidential development on a lot of five acres or
less existing as of January 14, 1981, or cluster
development as permitted by N.J.A.C. 7:50-5.19;
[4] The depth to seasonal high water table is at least five feet;
[5] Any potable water well will be drilled and cased to a depth
of at least 100 feet, unless the wall penetrates an
impermeable clay aquiclude, in which case the well shall
be cased to at least 50 feet;
[6] No more than 10 alternate-design pilot program treatment
systems utilizing the same technology shall be installed in
the development of any parcel if those systems are each
serving one single-family dwelling;
[7] Each system shall be equipped with automatic dialing
capability to the manufacturer, or its agent, in the event of
a mechanical malfunction;
[8] Each system shall be designed and constructed so that
samples of effluent leaving the alternate-design pilot
program septic system can be readily taken to confirm the
performance of the technology;
[9] The manufacturer or its agent shall provide to each owner
an operation and maintenance manual approved pursuant
to N.J.A.C. 7:50-10.22(a)2iv;
[10] Each system shall be covered by a five-year warranty and a
minimum five-year maintenance contract consistent with
those approved pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-10.22(a)2v that
cannot be cancelled and is renewable and which includes a
provision requiring that the manufacturer or its agent
inspect the system at least once a year and undertake any
§ 244-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-79
1:927
maintenance or repairs determined to be necessary during
any such inspection or as a result of observations made at
any other time; and [Amended 3-12-2019 by Ord. No.
07-19]
[11] The property owner shall record with the deed to the
property a notice consistent with that approved pursuant
to N.J.A.C. 7:50-10.22(a)2vi that identifies the technology,
acknowledges the owner's responsibility to operate and
maintain it in accordance with the manual required in
Subsection G(4)(f)[9] above, and grants access, with
reasonable notice, to the local board of health, the
Commission and its agents for inspection and monitoring
purposes. The recorded deed shall run with the property
and shall ensure that the maintenance requirements are
binding on any owner of the property during the life of the
property during the time period the monitoring
requirements apply pursuant to the pilot program or any
subsequent regulations adopted by the Commission that
apply to said system.146 [Amended 3-12-2019 by Ord.
No. 07-19]
(5) All proposed development shall meet the following surface water
runoff criteria: [Amended 12-30-1996 by Ord. No. 27-96]
(a) The total runoff generated from any net increase in impervious
surfaces by a ten-year storm of a twenty-four-hour duration
shall be retained and infiltrated on-site. Runoff volumes shall
be calculated in accordance with the United States Soil
Conservation Service Technical Release No. 55 or the SCS
National Engineering Handbook, Section 4;
(b) The rates of runoff generated from the parcel by a two-year,
ten-year and one-hundred-year storm, each of a twenty-fourhour
duration, shall not increase as a result of the proposed
development. Runoff rates shall be calculated in accordance
with the United States Soil Conservation Service Technical
Release No. 55 or the SCS National Engineering Handbook,
Section 4;
(c) Surface water runoff shall not be directed in such a way as to
increase the volume and rate of discharge into any surface
water body from that which existed prior to development of the
parcel;
(d) Excessively and somewhat excessively drained soils, as defined
by the Soil Conservation Service, should be avoided for
recharge of runoff wherever practical;
146. Editor's Note: Former Subsection G(4)(f)[12], regarding system installation, which
immediately followed, was repealed 3-12-2019 by Ord. No. 07-19.
§ 244-79 JACKSON CODE § 244-79
1:928
(e) A minimum separation of two feet between the elevation of the
lowest point of the bottom of the infiltration or detention
facility and the seasonal high water table is met, or a lesser
separation when it is demonstrated that the separation, either
due to soil conditions or when considered in combination with
other stormwater management techniques, is adequate to
protect groundwater quality; and
(f) A four-year maintenance guarantee is provided for the entire
stormwater management system by the applicant. In addition,
the applicant shall fund or otherwise guarantee an inspection
and maintenance program for a period of no less than 10 years.
The program shall identify the entity charged with
responsibility for annual inspections and the completion of any
necessary maintenance and the method to finance said
program.
(6) The owners of commercial petroleum storage tanks shall comply
with the requirements of Chapter 102 of the Laws of 1986.147
(7) Prohibited chemicals and materials.
(a) Use of septic tank cleaners and waste oil is prohibited in the
Pinelands Area to the extent that such use will result in direct
or indirect introduction of such substances in the groundwater
or any land.
(b) All storage facilities for deicing chemicals shall be lined to
prevent leaking into the soils and shall be covered with an
impermeable surface which shields the facility from
precipitation.
(c) No person shall apply any herbicide to any road or public utility
right-of-way within the Pinelands Area unless necessary to
protect an adjacent agricultural activity.148
(8) Water shall not be exported from the Pinelands, except as
otherwise provided in N.J.S.A. 58:1A-7.1.
H. Air quality.
(1) All development shall adhere to the relevant air quality standards
of N.J.A.C. 7:27 et seq. Adherence to the standards of this section
shall be determined by means of an air quality simulation model
approved by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:27-18.3. [Amended 12-30-1996
by Ord. No. 27-96]
147. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 58:10A-21 et seq.
148. Editor's Note: Original § 109-71G(7)(d) of the 1972 Code, pertaining to the discharge and
storage of hazardous waste, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed
12-30-1996 by Ord. No. 27-96.
§ 244-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-79
1:929
(2) Applications for the following developments shall ensure that all
state ambient air quality standards in N.J.A.C. 7:27 et seq. for
carbon monoxide shall not be exceeded at places of maximum
concentration and at sensitive receptors:
(a) Residential development of 50 or more units and any other
development involving more than 100 parking spaces located
in PED-1, RGC-1, RGC-2, PM-1 or JB MDL RGC-3 Zone; and
[Amended 2-26-1996 by Ord. No. 4-96; 8-12-2014 by Ord.
No. 13-14]
(b) Residential development of 100 or more units, and any other
development involving more than 300 parking spaces located
in any zone within the Pinelands.
I. Fire management. All proposed development within the Pinelands Area,
Jackson Township, shall conform to the requirements of this subsection
in order to protect life and property from forest fires.
(1) The following vegetation classifications shall be used in
determining the fire hazard of a parcel of land:
Hazard Vegetation Type
Low Atlantic white cedar hardwood swamps
Moderate Non-pine-barrens forest prescribed burned
areas
High Pine barrens forest including mature forms of
pine, pine-oak or oak-pine
Extreme Immature or dwarf forms of pine-oak or oakpine;
all classes of pine-scrub oak and pinelowland
(2) No application for development approval shall be granted in
moderate, high and extreme fire hazard areas unless the applicant
demonstrates the following:
(a) All proposed development or units or sections thereof of 25
dwelling units or more will have two accessways of a width and
surface composition sufficient to accommodate and support
fire-fighting equipment.
(b) All dead-end roads will terminate in a manner which provides
safe and efficient entry and exit for fire equipment.
(c) The rights-of-way of all roads will be maintained so that they
provide an effective fire break.
(d) A fire hazard fuel break is provided around structures
proposed for human use by the selective removal or thinning of
trees, bushes, shrubs and ground cover as follows:
§ 244-79 JACKSON CODE § 244-79
1:930
[1] In moderate fire hazard areas, a fuel break of 30 feet
measured outward from the structure, in which shrubs,
understory trees and bushes and ground cover are to be
selectively removed, mowed or pruned on an annual basis
and in which all dead plant material is removed.
[2] In high fire hazard areas, a fuel break of 75 feet measured
outward from the structure, in which shrubs, understory
trees and bushes and ground cover are to be selectively
removed, mowed or pruned and maintained on an annual
basis and in which all dead plant material is removed.
[3] In extreme high-hazard areas, a fuel break of 100 feet
measured outward from the structure, in which shrubs,
understory trees and bushes and ground cover are to be
selectively removed, mowed or pruned and maintained on
an annual basis; no pine tree (Pinus species) is closer than
25 feet to another pine tree; and all dead plant material is
removed.
(e) All structures will meet the following specifications:
[1] Roofs and exteriors will be constructed of fire-resistant
materials, such as asphalt rag felt roofing, tile, slate,
asbestos cement shingles, sheet iron, aluminum or brick.
Fire-retardant treated wood shingles or shake-type roofs
are prohibited in high or extreme fire hazard areas.
[2] All projections, such as balconies, decks and roof gables
shall be constructed of fire-resistant materials or materials
treated with fire-retardant chemicals.
[3] Any openings in the roof, attic and floor shall be screened.
[4] Chimneys and stovepipes which are designated to burn
solid or liquid fuels shall be equipped with screens over
the outlets.
[5] Flat roofs are prohibited in areas where vegetation is
higher than the roof.
(f) All residential developments of 100 dwelling units or more in
high or extreme fire hazard areas will have a two-hundred-foot
perimeter fuel break between all structures and the forest in
which shrubs, understory trees and bushes and ground cover
are selectively removed, mowed or pruned on an annual basis;
all dead plant material is removed; roads, rights-of-way,
wetlands and waste disposal sites shall be used as fire breaks
to the maximum extent practical; and there is a specific
program for maintenance.
§ 244-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-79
1:931
J. Recreation. All proposed development within the Pinelands Area,
Jackson Township, shall conform to the following requirements:
(1) No power vessel in excess of 10 horsepower shall operate on
waters within the Pinelands Area, Jackson Township.
(2) No motor vehicles, other than fire, police or emergency vehicles or
those vehicles used for the administration or maintenance of any
public land, shall be operated upon publicly owned land within the
Pinelands Area, Jackson Township. Other motor vehicles may
operate on public lands for recreational purposes, on public
highways and areas on land designated prior to August 8, 1980, for
such use by the State of New Jersey until designated as
inappropriate for such use by the Pinelands Commission.
(3) Route maps for organized off-road vehicle events shall be filed with
an approved plan by the Executive Director.
(4) All recreation areas and facilities shall be designed in accordance
with the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
publication, Administration Guidelines: Barrier-Free Design
Standards for Parks and Recreational Facilities.
(5) Improved bicycling facilities are provided only in conjunction with
paved roads.
K. Historical, archaeological and cultural preservation. The provisions of
this subsection shall provide a program for the protection of historic,
archaeological and cultural resources within the Pinelands Area,
Jackson Township.
(1) The Planning Board shall exercise all the powers and perform all
the duties set forth in N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.153(a), including
recommendations to the Township Committee for designation of
historic resources, in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.,
which are determined to be significant, pursuant to § 244-79K(5)(c)
below.
(2) Authority to issue certificate of appropriateness.
(a) The Planning Board shall issue all certificates of
appropriateness, except as specified in § 244-79K(2)(b) below.
(b) The Board of Adjustment shall issue certificates of
appropriateness for those applications for development which
it is otherwise empowered to review.
(3) Certificates of appropriateness shall be required for the following:
(a) Construction, encroachment upon, alteration, remodeling,
removal, disturbance or demolition of any resource designated
by the Township Committee or the Pinelands Commission,
§ 244-79 JACKSON CODE § 244-79
1:932
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.154, or any action which renders
such a site inaccessible; and
(b) Development not otherwise exempted from review, pursuant to
§ 244-67A of this Code, where a significant resource has been
identified, pursuant to § 244-79K(5) below.
(4) Applications for certificates of appropriateness shall include the
information specified in N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.156(b).
(5) Cultural resource survey.
(a) A cultural resource survey shall accompany all applications for
development in the PV, PVC-1 and PVC-2 Zones and all
applications for major development in order to determine
whether any significant historic resources exist on the parcel.
Guidelines for this survey are contained in Appendix B of the
"Cultural Resource Management Plan," dated April 1991, as
amended. In general, the survey shall include: [Amended
12-30-1996 by Ord. No. 27-96]
[1] A statement as to the presence of any properties listed on
the National and State Registers of Historic Places on the
site or within the area of the projects' potential
environmental impacts;
[2] A thorough search of state, local and any other pertinent
inventories to identify sites of potential significance;
[3] A review of the literature and consultation with
professional and avocational archaeologists
knowledgeable about the area;
[4] Thorough pedestrian and natural resources surveys;
[5] Archaeological testing as necessary to provide reasonable
evidence of the presence or absence of historic resources
of significance;
[6] Adequate recording of the information gained and
methodologies and sources used; and
[7] A list of personnel involved and qualifications of the
person(s) performing the survey.
(b) This requirement for a survey may be waived by the local
approval agency if:
[1] There is insufficient evidence of significant cultural
activity on the project site or, in the case of archaeological
resources, within the vicinity;
[2] The evidence of cultural activity on the site lacks the
potential for importance because further recording of the
§ 244-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-79
1:933
available data will not contribute to a more comprehensive
understanding of Pinelands culture; or
[3] The evidence of cultural activity lacks any potential for
significance, pursuant to the standards of § 244-79K(5)(c)
below.
(c) A resource shall be deemed to be significant if it possesses
integrity of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship,
feeling and association which reflects its significance in
American history, architecture, archaeology or culture under
one or more of the following criteria:
[1] The presence of structures, sites or areas associated with
events of significance to the cultural, political, economic or
social history of the nation, state, local community or the
Pinelands;
[2] The presence of structures, sites or areas associated with
the lives or persons or institutions of significance to the
cultural, political, economic or social history of the nation,
state, local community or the Pinelands;
[3] The presence of structures that represent the work of a
master or that possess high artistic values or that embody
the distinctive characteristics of a type, period or method
of construction or that represent a distinguishable entity
of significance to the architectural, cultural, political,
economic or social history of the nation, state, local
community or the Pinelands, although its components may
lack individual distinction; or
[4] The presence of a site or area which has yielded or is likely
to yield significant information regarding the history or
archaeological history of the Pinelands.
(6) The standards governing the issuance of certificates of
appropriateness in N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.156(c) shall be followed by the
Planning Board and Board of Adjustment.
(7) The effect of the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness is as
follows:
(a) All subsequent development approvals shall be issued or
denied in a manner consistent with the certificate of
appropriateness, except as provided in § 244-79K(7)(b) below.
(b) A certificate of appropriateness issued as a result of the
cultural resource survey requirement set forth in § 244-79K(5)
above shall be effective for two years. If the resource is not
designated by the Pinelands Commission pursuant to N.J.A.C.
7:50-6.154 or by the governing body pursuant to N.J.S.A.
§ 244-79 JACKSON CODE § 244-79
1:934
40:55D-1 et seq. within that two-year period, the historic
resource standards of this section shall no longer apply to
the resource in question until such time as the Pinelands
Commission designates the resource pursuant to N.J.A.C.
7:50-6.154. [Amended 12-30-1996 by Ord. No. 27-96]
(8) The following information will be required to document resources
which are not found to be significant, but which are otherwise
found to present graphic evidence of a cultural activity:
(a) A narrative description of the resource and its cultural
environment;
(b) Photographic documentation to record the exterior
appearance of buildings, structures and engineering
resources;
(c) A site plan depicting, in correct scale, the location of all
buildings, structures and engineering resources; and
(d) A New Jersey State inventory form, as published by the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, for buildings,
and a narrative description of any process or technology, if
necessary to elaborate upon the photographic record.
(9) If archaeological data are discovered on a site at any time after
construction has been commenced, the developer shall
immediately cease construction, notify the Planning Board and the
Pinelands Commission and take all reasonable steps to protect the
archaeological data in accordance with the Guidelines for the
Recovery of Scientific, Prehistoric, Historic and Archaeological
Data: Procedures for Notification, Reporting and Data Recovery
(36 CFR 66).
L. Scenic. All proposed development within the Pinelands Area of the
Township shall conform to the requirements of this subsection to
ensure that development will take advantage of and enhance the visual
character of the Pinelands.
(1) Scenic corridors:
(a) Areas considered corridors.
[1] Except for those roads which provide for internal
circulation within residentially developed areas, all public
paved roads in the PA Preservation Area Zone, FA Forest
Area Zone, RD Rural Development Area Zone, RD-1 Rural
Development Area Zone and RD-9 Rural Development
Area Zone shall be considered scenic corridors.
[Amended 2-26-1996 by Ord. No. 4-96; 7-14-1997 by
Ord. No. 10-97]
§ 244-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-79
1:935
[2] The Toms River shall be considered a special scenic
corridor, and development shall comply with Subsection
L(1)(b)[4] hereof.
(b) Special requirements for scenic corridors.
[1] Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, all
buildings shall be set back at least 200 feet from the scenic
corridor, except for agricultural product sales
establishments, which shall be set back a minimum of 75
feet.
[2] If compliance with the two-hundred-foot setback is
constrained by environmental or other physical
considerations, such as wetlands or active agricultural
operations, the building shall be set back as close to 200
feet as practical, and the site shall be landscaped in
accordance with the provisions of § 244-79B, Vegetation,
of the Jackson Township Code, so as to provide screening
from the corridor.
[3] If an applicant for development approval demonstrates
that existing development patterns of the corridor are
such that buildings are set back less than 200 feet within
1,000 feet of the site proposed for development, then a
setback shall be set for the proposed development which is
consistent with the established development pattern,
provided that the site is landscaped in accordance with the
provisions of § 244-79B, Vegetation, so as to provide
screening between the building and the corridor.
[4] All structures within 1,000 feet of the center line of a
special scenic corridor shall be designed to avoid visual
impacts as viewed from the corridor.
(2) Signs.
(a) Signs in the Pinelands Area.
[1] No sign, other than warning or safety signs, which is
designed or intended to attract attention by sudden,
intermittent or rhythmic movement or physical or lighting
change shall be permitted in the Pinelands Area of the
Township.
[2] No sign, other than warning or safety signs, which
changes physical position by any movement or rotation or
which gives the visual impression of such movement or
rotation shall be permitted in the Pinelands Area of the
Township.
§ 244-79 JACKSON CODE § 244-79
1:936
[3] No outdoor, off-site commercial advertising sign shall be
permitted in the Pinelands Area, Jackson Township, except
that: [Amended 12-30-1996 by Ord. No. 27-96]
[a] Existing lawful off-site commercial advertising signs,
in existence as of January 14, 1981, shall be permitted
in the PED-1, RGC-1, RGC-2, PM-1 and JB MDL RGC-3
Zones. Such signs shall also be permitted in the PVC-1
and PVC-2 Zones, provided that the signs are located
on a United States highway within 1,000 feet of a
Pinelands Regional Growth Area or Pinelands Town;
and [Amended 8-12-2014 by Ord. No. 13-14]
[b] Signs advertising agricultural commercial
establishments shall be permitted, provided that:
[i] No more than two signs shall be placed in any one
direction along each road directly approaching
the establishment; and
[ii] No sign along a four-lane state or federal highway
shall exceed 50 square feet in area, and no sign
along any other road shall exceed 32 square feet
in area.
[4] Any existing sign which does not conform to Subsection
L(2)(a)[1] and [2] above shall be removed immediately. Any
existing sign which does not conform to Subsection
L(2)(a)[3] above shall be removed no later than December
5, 1996. [Amended 12-30-1996 by Ord. No. 27-96]
[5] To the maximum extent practical, the character and
composition of construction materials for all signs shall be
harmonious with the scenic values of the Pinelands.
(b) Signs in the PA Preservation Area Zone.
[1] No sign shall be constructed, repaired or maintained
except in accordance with the provisions of
§ 244-79L(2)(a) above and this subsection.
[2] The following signs are permitted in the PA Preservation
Area Zone:
[a] Official public safety and information signs displaying
road names, numbers and safety directions.
[b] On-site signs advertising the sale or rental of the
premises, provided that the area on one side of any
such sign shall not exceed 12 square feet and that no
more than one sign is located on any parcel of land
held in common ownership.
§ 244-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-79
1:937
[c] On-site identification signs for schools, churches,
hospitals or similar public service institutions,
provided that the size of any such sign shall not
exceed 12 square feet and that no more than one sign
is placed on any single property.
[d] Trespassing signs or signs indicating the private
nature of a road, driveway or premises and signs
prohibiting or otherwise controlling fishing or
hunting, provided that the size of such signs does not
exceed 12 square feet.
[e] On-site professional, home occupation or name signs
indicating the profession and/or activity and/or name
of the occupant of the dwelling, provided that the size
of any such sign shall not exceed 12 square feet and
that no more than one sign is permitted for any
individual parcel of land.
[f] On-site business or advertising signs, provided that no
more than two signs are located on any one premises
or on the premises leased or utilized by any one
business establishment and that the total of such signs
shall not exceed 20 square feet per side, with the
maximum height to the top of the sign not to exceed
15 feet from ground level.
[g] Temporary signs advertising political parties or
candidates for election, provided that the size of any
such sign does not exceed four square feet.
[h] Temporary on-and-off signs advertising civil, social or
political gatherings and activities, provided that the
size of such signs does not exceed four square feet.
(3) Motor vehicle screening and storage. No more than 10
automobiles, trucks or other motor vehicles, whether or not they
are in operating condition, shall be stored on any lot, unless such
motor vehicles are adequately screened from adjacent residential
uses and scenic corridors. All vehicles not in operating condition
shall be stored only if the gasoline tanks of such vehicles are
drained. This subsection shall not apply to vehicles which are in
operating condition and which are maintained for agricultural
purposes.
(4) Location of utilities.
(a) New utility distribution lines and telephone lines to locations
not presently served by utilities shall be placed underground,
except for those lines which are located on or adjacent to
active agricultural operations.
§ 244-79 JACKSON CODE § 244-79
1:938
§ 244-80. Enumeration of zones; Zoning Map. [Amended 2-26-1996
by Ord. No. 4-96; 7-14-1997 by Ord. No. 10-97]
(b) Aboveground generating facilities, switching complexes,
pumping stations and substations shall be screened with
vegetation from adjacent uses.
(c) All electric transmission lines shall be located on existing
towers or underground to the maximum extent practicable.
M. Energy conservation. All development shall be carried out in a manner
which promotes energy conservation and maximizes activities and
passive solar energy, in accordance with any applicable statutes. Such
measures may include orientation of buildings, landscaping to permit
solar access and the use of energy-conserving building materials.
N. Waste management. No hazardous or toxic substances, including
hazardous wastes, shall be stored, transferred, processed, discharged,
disposed or otherwise used in the Pinelands area. The land application
of waste or waste-derived materials is prohibited in the Pinelands Area,
except as expressly authorized in N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.79. Waste
management facilities shall only be permitted in the Pinelands area in
accordance with the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 7:50-6. [Amended
12-30-1996 by Ord. No. 27-96]
A. List of zones. In order to regulate and limit the type and location of uses
and the density and intensity with which lands are to be utilized in the
Pinelands Area, Jackson Township, the following zones are hereby
created: [Amended 11-8-2004 by Ord. No. 40-04; 3-27-2006 by
Ord. No. 07-06; 8-12-2014 by Ord. No. 13-14]
PA Preservation Area Zone
FA-1 Forest Zone
FA-2 Forest Zone
FA-6 Forest Zone
RD Rural Development Zone
RD-1 Rural Development Area Zone
RD-9 Rural Development Area Zone
MI Military Installation Zone
PV Pinelands Village Zone
RG-2 Regional Growth Zone
RG-3 Regional Growth Zone
PED Pinelands Environmental Development District
PVC-1 Pinelands Village Commercial Zone
PVC-2 Pinelands Village Commercial Zone
RGC-1 Regional Growth Commercial Zone
§ 244-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-80
1:939
§ 244-81. PA Preservation Area Zone.
RGC-2 Regional Growth Commercial Zone
PM-1 Pinelands Manufacturing Zone
JB MDL
RGC-3
Joint Base-McGuire-Fort Dix-Lakehurst Compatible
Development Zone
B. Official Zoning Map. The boundaries of all zones established in this
chapter are shown upon the map accompanying this chapter, which is
hereby made a part hereof and entitled "Zoning Map, Jackson
Township, Ocean County, New Jersey," prepared by John Maczuga, P.P.,
A.I.C.P., Township Planner, Map No. J-54C, bearing a last revision date
of April 21, 1997.149
A. Permitted uses in the Preservation Area Zone shall be limited to the
following:
(1) Detached single-family dwellings on lots of 3.2 acres or one-acre
lots in accordance with § 244-98. [Amended 4-12-1993 by Ord.
No. 10-93]
(2) Agricultural employee housing as an element of and accessory to
an active agricultural operation.
(3) Berry agriculture and horticulture of native plants and other
agricultural activities compatible with the existing soil and water
conditions that support traditional Pinelands berry agriculture.
(4) Forestry.
(5) Beekeeping.
(6) Fish and wildlife management.
(7) Low-intensity recreational uses, provided that:
(a) The parcel proposed for low-intensity recreational use has an
area of at least 50 acres.
(b) The recreational use does not involve the use of motorized
vehicles, except for necessary transportation.
(c) Access to bodies of water is limited to no more than 15 linear
feet of frontage per 1,000 feet of water body frontage.
(d) The parcel will contain no more than one campsite per two
acres, provided that the campsites may be clustered at a net
density not exceeding six campsites per acre.
(e) Clearing of vegetation, including ground cover and soil
disturbance, does not exceed 5% of the parcel.
149. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the office of the Township Clerk.
§ 244-80 JACKSON CODE § 244-81
1:940
(f) No more than 1% of the parcel will be covered with
impermeable surfaces.
(8) Expansion of intensive recreational uses, provided that: [Amended
12-30-1996 by Ord. No. 27-96]
(a) The intensive recreational use was in existence on February 7,
1979, and the capacity of the use will not exceed two times the
capacity of the use on February 7, 1979;
(b) The use is necessary to achieve recreational use of a particular
element of the existing Pinelands environment; and
(c) The use is environmentally and aesthetically compatible with
the character of the Preservation Area District and the
characteristics of the particular basin in which the use is to be
located, taking into consideration the proportion of cleared
and developed land, ambient water quality, ecologically
sensitive areas and unique resources, and will not unduly
burden public services.
(9) Public service infrastructure which is necessary to serve only the
needs of the PA Preservation Area Zone uses. Centralized
wastewater treatment and collection facilities shall be permitted to
service the Preservation Area Zone only in accordance with
§ 244-79G(4)(b). [Amended 12-30-1996 by Ord. No. 27-96]
(10) Pinelands development credits, as provided in § 244-102.
B. Accessory uses in the PA Zone shall be restricted to the following:
(1) Signs, subject to the provisions of § 244-79L.
(2) Other customary accessory uses and buildings, provided that such
uses are incidental to the principal use and do not include any
activity commonly conducted as a business. Any such building or
use shall be located on the same lot as the principal building.
C. Area, yard and building requirements are as follows:
(1) Minimum lot area: 3.2 acres. Notwithstanding the minimum lot
area set forth above in § 244-81A, no such minimum lot area for a
nonresidential use within the PA Zone shall be less than that
needed to meet the water quality standards of § 244-79G(4)(d),
whether or not the lot may be served by a centralized sewer
treatment or collection system.
(2) Minimum lot width: 250 feet.
(3) Minimum lot depth: 400 feet.
(4) Minimum front yard setback: 200 feet.
(5) Minimum rear yard setback: 50 feet.
§ 244-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-81
1:941
§ 244-82. FA-1 Forest Zone.
(6) Minimum side yard setback: 25 feet.
(7) Minimum accessory use setback: 20 feet.
A. The following uses shall be permitted in the FA-1 Forest Zone:
(1) Detached single-family dwellings on lots of 3.2 acres, in accordance
with § 244-98A. [Amended 4-12-1993 by Ord. No. 10-93]
(2) Single-family dwelling units at a maximum density of one unit per
70 acres: [Amended 11-8-2004 by Ord. No. 40-04]
(a) Single lots for which no subdivision is required shall meet the
following area, yard and building requirements:
[1] Minimum lot area: 70 acres.
[2] Minimum lot width: 250 feet.
[3] Minimum lot depth: 500 feet.
[4] Minimum lot frontage: 200 feet.
[5] Minimum front yard setback: 200 feet.
[6] Minimum rear yard setback: 150 feet.
[7] Minimum side yard setback: 25 feet each side.
[8] Minimum accessory use setback: 20 feet, not permitted in
front yard.
[9] Minimum clearing per developed lot: 20,000 square feet.
(b) When two or more lots are proposed in the FA-1 Zone,
mandatory clustering shall be required. All residential units
shall be located on 3.2 acre lots. The house lot shall be referred
to in this section as the "developed area" and the balance of the
required acreage (66.8 acres per lot) shall be referred to as the
"conservation area."
[1] Clustered developments shall be designed to protect
environmental attributes of the site, to maintain the
conservation area in an undisturbed state, to promote the
establishment of greenways on adjacent sites and to
maximize the contiguity of protected lands as a means of
providing habitat for threatened and endangered plant
and animal species. The developed area should be located
and designed to promote efficient use of the existing
infrastructure (roads, utilities, etc.) and coordinate with
development on adjacent parcels. The design shall be
§ 244-81 JACKSON CODE § 244-82
1:942
subject to the review and approval of the Planning Board
and the Pinelands Commission.
[2] For clustered lots the following standards apply:
[a] Minimum lot width: 250 feet.
[b] Minimum lot depth: 500 feet.
[c] Minimum lot frontage: 200 feet.
[d] Minimum front yard setback: 200 feet.
[e] Minimum rear yard setback: 50 feet.
[f] Minimum side yard setback: 25 feet one side/50 feet
combined.
[g] Minimum accessory structure setback: 20 feet, not
permitted in front yard.
[h] Maximum clearing per developed lot: 20,000 square
feet.
[3] The conservation area shall be permanently deed
restricted as open space with no further development
permitted through the imposition of a conservation
easement to be approved by the Planning Board and its
professionals.
(3) Agriculture.
(4) Agricultural employee housing as an element of and necessary to
an active agricultural operation.
(5) Forestry.
(6) Low-intensity recreational uses, provided that:
(a) The parcel proposed for low-intensity recreational use has an
area of at least 50 acres.
(b) The recreational use does not involve the use of motorized
vehicles, except for necessary transportation.
(c) Access to bodies of water is limited to no more than 15 linear
feet of frontage per 1,000 feet of water body frontage.
(d) Clearing of vegetation, including ground cover and soil
disturbance, does not exceed 5% of the parcel and that no
more than 1% of the parcel will be covered with impermeable
surfaces.
(7) Expansion of intensive recreational uses, provided that: [Amended
12-30-1996 by Ord. No. 27-96]
§ 244-82 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-82
1:943
(a) The intensive recreational use was in existence on February 7,
1979, and the capacity of the use will not exceed two times the
capacity of the use on February 7, 1979;
(b) The use is necessary to achieve recreational use of a particular
element of the existing Pinelands environment; and
(c) The use is environmentally and aesthetically compatible with
the character of the Pinelands Forest Area and the
characteristics of the particular basin in which the use is to be
located, taking into consideration the proportion of cleared
and developed land, ambient water quality, ecologically
sensitive areas and unique resources, and will not unduly
burden public services.
(8) Public service infrastructure intended to primarily serve the needs
of the Pinelands. Centralized wastewater treatment and collection
facilities shall be permitted to service the zone only in accordance
with § 244-79G(4)(b). [Amended 12-30-1996 by Ord. No. 27-96]
(9) Detached single-family dwellings on one-acre lots, in accordance
with § 244-98B. [Amended 4-12-1993 by Ord. No. 10-93]
(10) Single-family dwelling units on one-acre lots existing as of January
14, 1981, shall be permitted, provided that all of the following
standards and criteria are met: [Amended 4-12-1993 by Ord.
No. 10-93]
(a) The owner of the lot proposed for development acquires
sufficient vacant contiguous or noncontiguous land which,
when combined with the acreage of the lot proposed for
development, equals at least 70 acres if all acquired
noncontiguous lands are located in the FA-1 Zone and at least
33 acres if all acquired noncontiguous lands are located in the
FA-2 Zone;
(b) All lands acquired pursuant to Subsection A(10)(a) above,
which may or may not be developable, are located within the
FA-1 or FA-2 Zone;
(c) All noncontiguous lands acquired pursuant to Subsection
A(10)(a) and (b) above are permanently dedicated as open
space through recordation of a deed to the property with no
further development permitted except agriculture, forestry
and low-intensity recreational uses. Any such deed restrictions
shall be in a form to be approved by the Township Solicitor and
the Pinelands Commission;
(d) Tax assessments for the acquired noncontiguous lands are
combined and assigned to the land to be developed; and
§ 244-82 JACKSON CODE § 244-82
1:944
(e) The lot proposed for development otherwise meets the
minimum standards of this article.
B. Accessory uses in the FA-1 Zone shall be restricted to the following:
(1) Signs, subject to the provisions of § 244-79L.
(2) Other customary accessory uses and buildings, provided that such
uses are incidental to the principal use and do not include any
activity commonly conducted as business. Any such building or use
shall be located on the same lot as the principal building.
C. Nonresidential area, yard and building requirements shall be as
follows:
(1) Minimum lot size: three acres, except as otherwise specified
herein. Notwithstanding the minimum lot area set forth above in
§ 244-82A, no such minimum lot area for a nonresidential use
within the FA-1 Zone shall be less than that needed to meet the
water quality standards of § 244-79G(4)(d), whether or not the lot
may be served by a centralized sewer treatment or collection
system.
(2) Minimum lot width: 250 feet.
(3) Minimum lot depth: 400 feet.
(4) Minimum front yard setback: 200 feet, except as provided in
§ 244-79L.
(5) Minimum rear yard setback: 50 feet.
(6) Minimum side yard setback: 25 feet.
(7) Minimum accessory use setback: 20 feet.
D. Conditional uses shall be as follows:
(1) Institutional uses, provided that:
(a) The use does not require or will not generate subsidiary or
satellite development in the Forest Area Zones.
(b) The application has demonstrated that adequate public service
infrastructure will be available to service the use.
(c) The use is primarily designed to serve the needs of the Forest
Area Zone in which the use is to be located.
(2) Pinelands resource-related industrial or manufacturing uses,
excluding resource extraction and uses that rely on sand or gravel
as raw products, provided that: [Amended 12-30-1996 by Ord.
No. 27-96]
§ 244-82 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-82
1:945
§ 244-83. FA-2 Forest Zone.
(a) The parcel proposed for development has an area of at least
five acres.
(b) The principal raw material for the proposed use is found or
produced in the Pinelands.
(c) The use does not require or will not generate subsidiary or
satellite development in the FA-1, FA-2 and FA-3 Zones.
(3) Campgrounds, not to exceed one campsite per gross acre, provided
that the campsites may be clustered at a net density not to exceed
10 campsites per acre. [Amended 12-30-1996 by Ord. No.
27-96]
(4) Agricultural commercial establishments, excluding supermarkets,
restaurants and convenience stores, provided that:
(a) The principal goods or products available for sale were
produced in the Pinelands.
(b) The sales area of the establishment does not exceed 5,000
square feet.
(5) Roadside retail sales and service establishments, provided that:
(a) The parcel proposed for development has roadway frontage of
at least 50 feet.
(b) No portion of any structure proposed for development will be
more than 300 feet, measured along a line parallel to the
roadway, from the closest part of a roadside retail sales and
service establishment structure that was in existence on
February 7, 1979.
(c) The proposed use will not unduly burden public services,
including but not limited to water, sewer and roads.
(6) Fish and wildlife management.
(7) Continuation of existing resource extraction operations in
accordance with the standards of N.J.A.C. 7:50-6, Part VI.
[Amended 12-30-1996 by Ord. No. 27-96]
A. The following uses shall be permitted in the FA-2 Forest Zone:
(1) Detached single-family dwellings on lots of 3.2 acres, in accordance
with § 244-98A. [Amended 4-12-1993 by Ord. No. 10-93]
(2) Detached single-family dwelling units at a maximum density of one
unit per 32 acres. [Amended 11-8-2004 by Ord. No. 40-04]
§ 244-82 JACKSON CODE § 244-83
1:946
(a) Single lots for which no subdivision is required shall meet the
following area, yard and building requirements:
[1] Minimum lot area: 32 acres.
[2] Minimum lot width: 250 feet.
[3] Minimum lot depth: 500 feet.
[4] Minimum lot frontage: 200 feet.
[5] Minimum front yard setback: 200 feet, except as provided
in § 244-79L.
[6] Minimum rear yard setback: 100 feet.
[7] Minimum side yard setback: 25 feet each side.
[8] Minimum accessory structure setback: 20 feet, not
permitted in front yard.
[9] Maximum clearing for each developed lot: 20,000 square
feet.
(b) When two or more lots are proposed in the FA-2 Zone,
mandatory clustering shall be required. All residential units
shall be located on 3.2 acre lots. The house lot shall be referred
to in this section as the "developed area" and the balance of the
required acreage (28.8 acres) shall be referred to as the
"conservation area."
[1] Clustered developments shall be designed to protect the
particular environmental attributes of the site, to maintain
the conservation area in an undisturbed state, to promote
the establishment of greenways on adjacent sites and to
maximize the contiguity of protected lands as a means of
providing habitat for threatened and endangered plant
and animal species. The developed area shall be located
and designed to promote efficient use of the existing
infrastructure (roads, utilities, etc.) and coordinate with
development on adjacent parcels. The design shall be
subject to the review and approval of the Planning Board
and the Pinelands Commission.
[2] For clustered lots the following standards apply:
[a] Minimum lot width: 250 feet.
[b] Minimum lot depth: 500 feet.
[c] Minimum lot frontage: 200 feet.
[d] Minimum front yard setback: 200 feet.
[e] Minimum rear yard setback: 50 feet.
§ 244-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-83
1:947
[f] Minimum side yard setback: 25 feet each side.
[g] Minimum accessory structure setback: 20 feet, not
permitted in front yard.
[h] Maximum clearing per developed lot: 20,000 square
feet.
[3] The conservation area shall be permanently deed
restricted as open space with no further development
permitted through imposition of a conservation easement
to be approved by the Planning Board and its
professionals.
(3) Agriculture.
(4) Agricultural employee housing as an element of and necessary to
an active agricultural operation.
(5) Forestry.
(6) Low-intensity recreational uses, provided that:
(a) The parcel proposed for low-intensity recreational use has an
area of at least 50 acres.
(b) The recreational use does not involve the use of motorized
vehicles, except for necessary transportation.
(c) Access to bodies of water is limited to no more than 15 linear
feet of frontage per 1,000 feet of water body frontage.
(d) Clearing of vegetation, including ground cover and soil
disturbance, does not exceed 5% of the parcel and that no
more than 1% of the parcel will be covered with impermeable
surfaces.
(7) Expansion of intensive recreational uses, provided that: [Amended
12-30-1996 by Ord. No. 27-96]
(a) The intensive recreational use was in existence on February 7,
1979, and the capacity of the use will not exceed two times the
capacity of the use on February 7, 1979;
(b) The use is necessary to achieve recreational use of a particular
element of the existing Pinelands environment; and
(c) The use is environmentally and aesthetically compatible with
the character of the Pinelands Forest Area and the
characteristics of the particular basin in which the use is to be
located, taking into consideration the proportion of cleared
and developed land, ambient water quality, ecologically
sensitive areas and unique resources, and will not unduly
burden public services.
§ 244-83 JACKSON CODE § 244-83
1:948
(8) Public service infrastructure intended to primarily serve the needs
of the Pinelands. Centralized wastewater treatment and collection
facilities shall be permitted to service the FA-2 Zone only in
accordance with § 244-79G(4)(b). [Amended 12-30-1996 by Ord.
No. 27-96]
(9) Single-family dwellings on one-acre lots, in accordance with
§ 244-98B. [Amended 4-12-1993 by Ord. No. 10-93]
(10) Single-family dwelling units on one-acre lots existing as of January
14, 1981, shall be permitted, provided that all of the following
standards and criteria are met: [Amended 4-12-1993 by Ord.
No. 10-93]
(a) The owner of the lot proposed for development acquires
sufficient vacant contiguous or noncontiguous land which,
when combined with the acreage of the lot proposed for
development, equals at least 32 acres if all acquired
noncontiguous lands are located in the FA-2 Zone and at least
69 acres if all acquired noncontiguous lands are located in the
FA-1 Zone;
(b) All lands acquired pursuant to Subsection A(10)(a) above,
which may or may not be developable, are located within the
FA-2 or FA-1 Zone;
(c) All noncontiguous lands acquired pursuant to Subsection
A(10)(a) and (b) above are permanently dedicated as open
space through recordation of a deed to the property with no
further development permitted except agriculture, forestry
and low-intensity recreational uses. Any such deed restrictions
shall be in a form to be approved by the Township Solicitor and
the Pinelands Commission;
(d) Tax assessments for the acquired noncontiguous lands are
combined and assigned to the land to be developed; and
(e) The lot proposed for development otherwise meets the
minimum standards of this article.
B. Permitted accessory uses shall be the same as permitted in the FA-1
Zone.
C. Nonresidential area, yard and building requirements.
(1) Nonresidential area, yard and building requirements shall be the
same as for the FA-1 Zone.
(2) Notwithstanding the minimum lot area set forth above in
§ 244-83A, no such minimum lot area for a nonresidential use
within the FA-2 Zone shall be less than that needed to meet the
water quality standards of § 244-79G(4)(d), whether or not the lot
§ 244-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-83
1:949
§ 244-84. FA-6 Forest Zone. [Amended 4-12-1993 by Ord. No. 10-93;
12-30-1996 by Ord. No. 27-96; 11-8-2004 by Ord. No. 40-04]
The FA-6 Zone is a transitional forest zone.
may be served by a centralized sewer treatment or collection
system.
D. Conditional uses shall be the same as for the FA-1 Zone.
A. The following uses shall be permitted in the PA-6 Forest Zone:
(1) Detached single-family dwelling units at a maximum density of one
unit per six acres.
(a) Single lots for which no subdivision is required shall meet the
following area, yard and building standards:
[1] Minimum lot area: six acres, except as provided in
§ 244-84A(10) below.
[2] Minimum lot width: 250 feet.
[3] Minimum lot depth: 500 feet.
[4] Minimum lot frontage: 200 feet.
[5] Minimum front yard setback: 200 feet.
[6] Minimum rear yard setback: 50 feet.
[7] Minimum side yard setback: 25 feet each side.
[8] Minimum accessory structure setback: 20 feet, not
permitted in front yard.
[9] Maximum clearing per developed lot: 20,000 square feet.
(b) When two or more lots are proposed in the FA-6 Zone,
mandatory clustering shall be required. All residential units
shall be located on one acre lots. The house lot(s) shall be
referred to in this section as the "developed area" and the
balance of the required acreage (5 acres per lot) shall be
referred to as the "conservation area."
[1] Clustered developments shall be designed to protect the
particular environmental attributes of the site, to maintain
the conservation area in an undisturbed state, to promote
the establishment of greenways on adjacent sites and to
maximize the contiguity of protected lands as a means of
providing habitat for threatened and endangered plant
and animal species. The developed area shall be located
and designed to promote efficient use of the existing
infrastructure (roads, utilities, etc.) and coordinate with
§ 244-83 JACKSON CODE § 244-84
1:950
development on adjacent parcels. The design shall be
subject to the review and approval of the Planning Board
and the Pinelands Commission.
[2] For clustered lots the following standards apply:
[a] Minimum lot width: 150 feet.
[b] Minimum lot depth: 250 feet.
[c] Minimum lot frontage: 150 feet.
[d] Minimum front yard setback: 60 feet.
[e] Minimum rear yard setback: 50 feet.
[f] Minimum side yard setback: 10 feet one side/30 feet
combined.
[g] Minimum accessory structure setback: 20 feet, not
permitted in front yard.
[h] Maximum clearing per developed lot: 20,000 square
feet.
[3] The conservation area shall be permanently deed
restricted as open space with no further development
permitted through the imposition of a conservation
easement to be approved by the Planning Board and its
professionals.
(2) Agriculture.
(3) Agricultural employee housing as an element of and necessary to
an active agricultural operation.
(4) Forestry.
(5) Low intensity recreation uses provided that:
(a) The parcel proposed for low-intensity recreational use has an
area of at least 50 acres.
(b) The recreational use does not involve the use of motorized
vehicles except for necessary transportation.
(c) Access to bodies of water is limited to no more than 15 linear
feet of frontage per 1,000 linear feet of water body frontage.
(d) Clearing of vegetation including ground cover and soil
disturbance does not exceed 5% of the parcel and that no more
than 1% of the parcel may be covered by impermeable
surfaces.
(6) Expansion of intensive recreational uses, provided that:
§ 244-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-84
1:951
(a) The intensive recreational use was in existence on February 7,
1979, and the capacity of the use will not exceed two times the
capacity of the use on February 7, 1979.
(b) The use is necessary to achieve the recreational use of a
particular element of the existing Pinelands environment.
(c) The use is environmentally and aesthetically compatible with
the character of the Pinelands Forest area and the
characteristics of the particular river basin in which the use is
to be located, taking into consideration the proportion of
cleared and developed land, ambient water quality,
ecologically sensitive areas and unique resources and will not
unduly burden public services.
(7) Public service infrastructure intended to primarily service the
needs of the Pinelands. Centralized wastewater treatment and
collection facilities shall be permitted to service the FA-6 Zone only
in accordance with § 244-79G(4)(b).
(8) Detached single-family dwellings on one-acre lots in accordance
with § 244-98B.
(9) Single-family dwelling units on one-acre lots existing as of January
14, 1981, shall be permitted provided that all of the following
standards and criteria are met:
(a) The owner of the lot proposed for development acquires
sufficient vacant contiguous or noncontiguous land which,
when combined with the acreage of the lot proposed for
development, equals at least the following:
[1] Six acres if all acquired noncontiguous lands are located in
the FA-6 Zone;
[2] Twenty-eight acres if all acquired noncontiguous lands are
located in the FA-2 Zone; or
[3] Fifty-nine acres if all acquired noncontiguous lands are
located in the FA-1 Zone.
(b) All lands acquired pursuant to Subsection A(9)(a) above, which
may or may not be developable, are located within the FA-1,
FA-2 or FA-6 Zone.
(c) All noncontiguous lands acquired pursuant to Subsection
A(9)(a) and (b) above are permanently dedicated as open space
through recordation of a deed to the property with no further
development permitted except agriculture, forestry and lowintensity
recreation uses. Any such deed restrictions shall be in
the form to be approved by the Township Solicitor and the
Pinelands Commission.
§ 244-84 JACKSON CODE § 244-84
1:952
§ 244-85. RD Rural Development Zone.
(d) Tax assessments for the acquired noncontiguous lands are
combined and assigned to the land to be developed.
(e) The lot proposed for development otherwise meets the
standards of this article.
(10) Single-family dwelling units that were already constructed or
under construction prior to the adoption of this section shall be
permitted to rehabilitate and construct building additions
consistent with regulations of the previous zoning designation
(FA-3 or PV).
B. Accessory uses in the FA-6 Zone shall be restricted to the following:
same as permitted in the FA-1 Zone.
C. Nonresidential area, yard and building requirements.
(1) Nonresidential area, yard and building requirements shall be the
same as permitted in the FA-1 Zone.
(2) Notwithstanding the minimum lot area set forth in § 244-84A, no
such minimum lot area for a nonresidential use within the FA-6
Zone shall be less than that needed to meet the water quality
standards of § 244-79G(4)(d), whether or not the lot may be served
by a centralized sewer treatment or collection system.
D. Conditional uses are the same as permitted in the FA-1 Zone.
A. The following uses shall be permitted in the RD Rural Development
Zone:
(1) Detached single-family dwelling units at a maximum density of one
unit per 3.8 acres. [Amended 11-8-2004 by Ord. No. 40-04]
(a) Single lots, for which no subdivision is required must meet the
following area yard and building standards:
[1] Minimum lot size: 3.8 acres.
[2] Minimum lot width: 250 feet.
[3] Minimum lot depth: 400 feet.
[4] Minimum lot frontage: 250 feet.
[5] Minimum front yard setback: 80 feet unless the provisions
of § 244-79L apply, in which case the minimum setback is
200 feet.
[6] Minimum rear yard setback: 50 feet.
[7] Minimum side yard setback: 25 feet one side/50 feet
combined.
§ 244-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-85
1:953
[8] Minimum accessory structure setback: 20 feet, not
permitted in front yard.
(b) When two or more lots are proposed in the RD Zone,
mandatory clustering shall be required. All residential units
shall be located on one-acre lots. The house lot (one acre) shall
be referred to in this section as the "developed area" and the
balance of the required acreage (2.8 acres) shall be referred to
as the "conservation area."
[1] Clustered developments should be designed to protect the
particular environmental attributes of the site, to maintain
the conservation area in an undisturbed state, to promote
the establishment of greenways on adjacent sites and to
maximize the contiguity of protected lands as a means of
providing habitat for threatened and endangered plant
and animal species. The developed area should be located
and designed to promote efficient use of the existing
infrastructure (roads, utilities, etc.) and coordinate with
development on adjacent parcels. The design shall be
subject to the review and approval of the Planning Board
and the Pinelands Commission.
[2] For clustered lots the following standards apply:
[a] Minimum lot width: 150 feet.
[b] Minimum lot depth: 250 feet.
[c] Minimum lot frontage: 150 feet.
[d] Minimum front yard setback: 60 feet.
[e] Minimum rear yard setback: 50 feet.
[f] Minimum side yard setback: 10 feet one side/30 feet
combined.
[g] Minimum accessory structure setback: 20 feet, not
permitted in front yard.
[h] Maximum clearing per developed lot: 20,000 square
feet.
[3] The conservation area shall be permanently deed
restricted as open space with no further development
permitted through the imposition of a conservation
easement to be approved by the Planning Board and its
professionals.
[4] Recreation uses consistent with the requirements of
§ 244-200 may be permitted on the deed-restricted lands
insofar as they are consistent with the types of
§ 244-85 JACKSON CODE § 244-85
1:954
recreational amenities typical of residential
neighborhoods.
(2) Agriculture.
(3) Agricultural employee housing as an element of and accessory to
an active agricultural operation.
(4) Forestry.
(5) Public service infrastructure, except that centralized wastewater
treatment and collection facilities shall be permitted in the zone
only in accordance with § 244-79G(4)(b). [Amended 12-30-1996
by Ord. No. 27-96]
(6) Single-family dwelling units on one-acre lots existing as of January
14, 1981, shall be permitted, provided that all of the following
standards and criteria are met: [Added 4-12-1993 by Ord. No.
10-93]
(a) The owner of the lot proposed for development acquires
sufficient vacant contiguous or noncontiguous land which,
when combined with the acreage of the lot proposed for
development, equals at least 3.8 acres;
(b) All lands acquired pursuant to Subsection A(6)(a) above, which
may or may not be developable, are located within the RD
Zone;
(c) All noncontiguous lands acquired pursuant to Subsection
A(6)(a) and (b) above are permanently dedicated as open space
through recordation of a deed to the property with no further
development permitted except agriculture, forestry and lowintensity
recreational uses. Any such deed restrictions shall be
in a form to be approved by the Township Solicitor and the
Pinelands Commission;
(d) Tax assessments for the acquired noncontiguous lands are
combined and assigned to the land to be developed; and
(e) The lot proposed for development otherwise meets the
minimum standards of § 244-79 of this chapter.
(7) Recreational facilities, intensive and low-intensive. [Added
2-26-1996 by Ord. No. 4-96]
B. Accessory uses in the RD Zone shall be restricted to the following:
[Amended 11-8-2004 by Ord. No. 40-04]
(1) Agricultural commercial establishments, provided that the
products sold were grown by the owner on the premises.
(2) Signs, subject to the provisions of § 244-79L.
§ 244-85 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-85
1:955
§ 244-86. MI Military Installation Zone. [Amended 12-30-1996 by
Ord. No. 27-96]
(3) Private garage space for the storage of motor vehicles.
(4) Other customary accessory uses and buildings such as sheds and
decks provided that such uses are incidental to the principal use
and do not include any activity commonly conducted as a business.
C. Conditional uses are as follows:
(1) Resource extraction in accordance with § 244-79F.150
(2) Institutional uses.
A. Any use associated with the function of the Federal installation may be
permitted in the MI Zone, provided that:
(1) Where feasible, development shall be located in that portion of the
installation within the Pinelands Protection Area;
(2) The use shall not require any development, including public service
infrastructure in the Preservation Area District or the FA-1, FA-2 or
FA-3 Zone;
(3) No hazardous waste facility, landfill or incinerator shall be
permitted, except as expressly authorized in N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.75 or
7:50-6.78; and
(4) All development undertaken by the federal government
substantially meets the standards of § 244-79 or an
intergovernmental agreement entered into pursuant to N.J.A.C.
7:50-4, Part IV.
B. Any other public purpose use undertaken by or on behalf of another
level of government may be permitted in the MI Zone, provided that:
(1) The use is sanctioned by the installation;
(2) The use is located within a substantially developed area which is
served by a centralized sewer treatment and collection system;
(3) No hazardous waste facility, landfill or incinerator shall be
permitted, except as expressly authorized in N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.75 or
7:50-6.78; and
(4) All development meets the standards of § 244-79 or an
intergovernmental agreement entered into pursuant to N.J.A.C.
7:50-4, Part IV.
150. Editor's Note: Original § 109-77C(2) of the 1972 Code, pertaining to single-family
dwellings, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 4-12-1993 by Ord.
No. 10-93.
§ 244-85 JACKSON CODE § 244-87
1:956
§ 244-87. PV Pinelands Village Zone.
A. The following uses shall be permitted in the PV Pinelands Village Zone:
(1) Agriculture.
(2) Detached single-family dwellings.
(3) Churches and similar places of worship, parish houses and
convents, subject to the conditions specified in § 244-115.
(4) Public and quasi-public schools and institutions of higher learning
which are not conducted as a business, subject to such uses being
located on a lot with a minimum lot area of two acres and subject to
the lot, use and structures adhering to all other requirements set
forth for the PV Pinelands Village Zone.
(5) Municipal parks, playgrounds and other municipal buildings and
uses deemed appropriate and necessary by the Township
Committee.
(6) Other public buildings of a governmental or cultural nature.151
(7) Clubhouse or community recreation buildings associated with an
age-restricted development consisting of at least 100 residential
units. [Added 3-27-2006 by Ord. No. 07-06]
B. The following accessory uses shall be permitted:
(1) Agricultural commercial establishments, provided that the
products sold were grown by the owner on the premises.
(2) Accessory dwellings designed for the permanent housing of
domestic or farm employees, provided that the total number of
dwelling units on the lot shall not exceed one for each 100,000
square feet of lot area and that each such accessory dwelling unit
shall contain not less than 600 square feet of gross floor area.
(3) Signs, subject to the provisions of § 244-79L.
(4) Private garage space for the storage of motor vehicles.
(5) Other customary accessory uses and buildings, provided that such
uses are incidental to the principal use and do not include any
activity commonly conducted as a business. Any such building or
use shall be located on the same lot as the principal building.
C. Area, yard and building requirements shall be as follows: [Amended
9-22-2003 by Ord. No. 28-03]
151. Editor's Note: Original § 109-79A(7) of the 1972 Code, pertaining to single-family
residences, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 9-22-2003 by Ord.
No. 28-03.
§ 244-87 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-87
1:957
§ 244-88. RD-1 Rural Development Zone. [Amended 2-26-1996 by
Ord. No. 4-96; 7-14-1997 by Ord. No. 10-97]
(1) If a proposed dwelling is to be served by a standard septic system,
the following standards shall apply:
(a) Minimum lot area: 3.2 acres.
(b) Minimum lot width: 250 feet.
(c) Minimum lot depth: 400 feet.
(d) Minimum front yard setback: 80 feet.
(e) Minimum side yard setback: 25 feet.
(f) Minimum rear yard setback: 50 feet.
(g) Minimum accessory structure setback: 20 feet, not permitted
in front yard. [Added 11-8-2004 by Ord. No. 40-04]
(2) If a proposed dwelling is to be served by an alternate-design pilot
program treatment system, in accordance with § 244-79G(4)(f), or
a public sanitary sewer system with adequate capacity to
accommodate the additional flows, the following standards shall
apply:
(a) Minimum lot area: one acre.
(b) Minimum lot width: 125 feet (130 feet for corner lots).
(c) Minimum lot depth: 250 feet.
(d) Minimum front yard setback: 60 feet.
(e) Minimum side yard setback: 10 feet; combined, 30 feet.
(f) Minimum rear yard setback: 50 feet.
(g) Minimum accessory structure setback: 10 feet, not permitted
in front yard. [Amended 11-8-2004 by Ord. No. 40-04]
D. The following conditional use shall be permitted: [Added 5-6-2002 by
Ord. No. 25-02]
(1) Resource extraction uses under § 244-79F.
A. The following uses and accessory uses shall be permitted in the RD-1
Rural Development Zone:
(1) Same as permitted in the PV Pinelands Village Zone pursuant to
§ 244-87A and B.
§ 244-87 JACKSON CODE § 244-88
1:958
§ 244-89. RD-9 Rural Development Zone. [Added 7-14-1997 by Ord.
No. 10-97]
(2) Public service infrastructure, except that centralized wastewater
treatment and collection facilities shall be permitted to service the
RD-1 Zone only in accordance with § 244-79G(4)(b).
B. Area, yard and building requirements shall be as follows:
(1) Minimum lot area: 3.2 acres. Notwithstanding this requirement, no
such minimum lot area for a nonresidential use in the RD-1 Zone
shall be less than that needed to meet the water quality standards
of § 244-79G(4)(b), whether or not the lot may be served by a
centralized wastewater treatment or collection system.
(2) Minimum lot width: 250 feet.
(3) Minimum lot depth: 400 feet.
(4) Minimum front yard setback: 80 feet.
(5) Minimum side yard setback: 25 feet.
(6) Minimum rear yard setback: 50 feet.
(7) Minimum accessory structure setback: 20 feet, not permitted in
front yard. [Amended 11-8-2004 by Ord. No. 40-04]
(8) If a proposed dwelling is to be served by an alternate design system
in accordance with § 244-79G(4)(f), the following area, yard and
building requirements shall apply: [Amended 11-8-2004 by Ord.
No. 40-04]
(a) Minimum lot area: one acre.
(b) Minimum lot width: 125 feet (130 feet corner lots).
(c) Minimum lot depth: 250 feet.
(d) Minimum front yard setback: 60 feet.
(e) Minimum side yard setback: 10 feet; combined, 30 feet.
(f) Minimum rear yard setback: 50 feet.
(g) Minimum accessory structure setback: 10 feet, not permitted
in front yard. [Amended 11-8-2004 by Ord. No. 40-04]
C. Conditional uses are as follows:
(1) Resource extraction in accordance with § 244-79F.
A. The following uses shall be permitted in the RD-9 Rural Development
Zone:
§ 244-88 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-89
1:959
(1) Detached single-family dwelling units at a maximum density of one
unit per nine acres. [Amended 11-8-2004 by Ord. No. 40-04]
(a) Single lots for which no subdivision is required shall meet the
following area, yard and building standards:
[1] Minimum lot size: nine acres.
[2] Minimum lot width: 250 feet.
[3] Minimum lot depth: 400 feet.
[4] Minimum front yard setback: 200 feet.
[5] Minimum rear yard setback: 50 feet.
[6] Minimum side yard setback: 25 feet each side.
[7] Minimum accessory structure setback: 20 feet, not
permitted in front yard.
[8] Maximum clearing per developed lot: 20,000 square feet.
(b) When two or more lots are proposed in the RD-9 Zone,
mandatory clustering shall be required. All residential units
shall be located on one-acre lots. The house lot (one acre) shall
be referred to in this section as the "developed area" and the
balance of the required acreage (eight acres per lot) shall be
referred to as the "conservation area."
[1] Clustered developments shall be designed to protect the
particular environmental attributes of the site, to maintain
the conservation area in an undisturbed state, to promote
the establishment of greenways on adjacent sites and to
maximize the contiguity of protected lands as a means to
providing habitat for threatened and endangered plant
and animal species. The developed area shall be located
and designed to promote efficient use of the existing
infrastructure (roads, utilities, etc.) and coordinate with
development on adjacent parcels. The design shall be
subject to the review and approval of the Planning Board
and the Pinelands Commission.
[2] For clustered lots the following standards apply:
[a] Minimum lot width: 150 feet.
[b] Minimum lot depth: 250 feet.
[c] Minimum lot frontage: 150 feet.
[d] Minimum front yard setback: 60 feet.
[e] Minimum rear yard setback: 50 feet.
§ 244-89 JACKSON CODE § 244-89
1:960
[f] Minimum side yard setback: 10 feet one side/30 feet
combined.
[g] Minimum accessory structure setback: 20 feet, not
permitted in front yard.
[h] Maximum clearing per developed lot: 20,000 square
feet.
[3] The conservation area shall be permanently deedrestricted
as open space with no further development
permitted through the imposition of a conservation
easement to be approved by the Planning Board and its
professionals.
[4] Recreation uses consistent with the requirements of
§ 244-200 may be permitted on the deed-restricted lands
insofar as they are consistent with the types of
recreational amenities typical of residential
neighborhoods.
(2) Single-family dwelling units on one-acre lots existing as of January
14, 1981, shall be permitted, provided that all of the following
standards and criteria are met:
(a) The owner of the lot proposed for development acquires
sufficient vacant contiguous or noncontiguous land which,
when combined with the acreage of the lot proposed for
development, equals at least nine acres.
(b) All lands acquired pursuant to Subsection A(2)(a) above, which
may or may not be developable, are located within the RD-9
Zone.
(c) All noncontiguous lands acquired pursuant to Subsection
A(2)(a) and (b) above are permanently dedicated as open space
through recordation of a deed to the property with no further
development permitted except agriculture, forestry and lowintensity
recreational uses. Any such deed restrictions shall be
in a form to be approved by the Township Solicitor and the
Pinelands Commission.
(d) Tax assessments for the acquired noncontiguous lands are
combined and assigned to the land to be developed.
(e) The lot proposed for development otherwise meets the
minimum standards of § 244-79, Design standards and
management programs, of this chapter.
(3) Agriculture. [Added 11-8-2004 by Ord. No. 40-04]
§ 244-89 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-89
1:961
§ 244-90. RG-2 Regional Growth Zone.
(4) Agricultural employee housing as an element of and accessory to
an active agricultural operation. [Added 11-8-2004 by Ord. No.
40-04]
(5) Forestry. [Added 11-8-2004 by Ord. No. 40-04]
(6) Public service infrastructure, except that centralized wastewater
treatment and collection facilities shall be permitted in the zone
only in accordance with § 244-79G(4)(b). [Added 11-8-2004 by
Ord. No. 40-04]
(7) Recreation facilities, intensive and low intensive. [Added
11-8-2004 by Ord. No. 40-04]
B. Accessory uses in the RD-9 Zone shall be restricted to the following:
[Amended 11-8-2004 by Ord. No. 40-04]
(1) Agricultural commercial establishments, provided that the
products sold were grown by the owner on the premises.
(2) Signs subject to the provisions of § 244-79L.
(3) Private garage space for the storage of motor vehicles.
(4) Other customary accessory uses and buildings such as sheds and
decks, provided that such uses are incidental to the principal use
and do not include any activity commonly conducted as a business.
C. Conditional uses are as follows:
(1) Resource extraction in accordance with § 244-79F.
(2) Institutional uses.
A. The following uses shall be permitted in the RG-2 Zone:
(1) Same as permitted in the PV Pinelands Village Zone.
B. The following accessory uses shall be permitted in the RG-2 Zone:
(1) Same as permitted in the PV Pinelands Village Zone.
C. Area, yard and building requirements shall be as follows: [Amended
2-26-1996 by Ord. No. 4-96; 9-22-2003 by Ord. No. 28-03]
(1) If a proposed dwelling is to be served by a standard septic system,
the following standards shall apply:
(a) Minimum lot area: 3.2 acres.
(b) Minimum lot width: 250 feet.
(c) Minimum lot frontage: 200 feet.
§ 244-89 JACKSON CODE § 244-90
1:962
(d) Minimum lot depth: 400 feet.
(e) Minimum front yard setback: 80 feet.
(f) Minimum rear yard setback: 50 feet.
(g) Minimum side yard setback: 25 feet.
(h) Minimum accessory structure setback: 20 feet, not permitted
in front yard. [Amended 11-8-2004 by Ord. No. 40-04]
(2) If a proposed dwelling is to be served by an alternate-design pilot
program treatment system in accordance with § 244-79G(4)(f), the
following standards shall apply:
(a) Minimum lot area: one acre.
(b) Minimum lot width: 125 feet (130 feet for corner lots).
(c) Minimum lot depth: 250 feet.
(d) Minimum front yard setback: 60 feet.
(e) Minimum side yard setback: 10 feet; combined, 30 feet.
(f) Minimum rear yard setback: 50 feet.
(g) Minimum accessory structure setback: 10 feet, not permitted
in front yard.152 [Amended 11-8-2004 by Ord. No. 40-04]
(3) For all developments of five dwelling units or more, Pinelands
development credits shall be acquired and redeemed for 30% of the
proposed units in accordance with § 244-102 et seq. [Added
11-21-2017 by Ord. No. 22-17]
D. Conditional uses. [Added 11-21-2017 by Ord. No. 22-17]
(1) Detached, single-family developments on lots less than one acre
subject to the following conditions:
(a) Maximum density: 3.0 dwelling units per acre.
(b) Minimum lot area: 10,000 square feet.
(c) Minimum lot width: 100 feet.
(d) Minimum lot frontage: 80 feet.
(e) Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.
(f) Minimum front yard setback: 25 feet.
(g) Minimum side yard setback: 10 feet.
152. Editor's Note: Original § 109-81D, Conditional uses, of the 1972 Code, as amended, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 11-9-2010 by Ord. No. 29-10.
§ 244-90 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-90
1:963
(h) Minimum rear yard setback: 25 feet.
(i) Minimum accessory structure setback: 10 feet, not permitted
in front yard.
(j) Maximum building height: 2 1/2 stories and 35 feet.
(k) The proposed lots are to be serviced by a public sanitary sewer
system.
(l) Compliance with the requirement of an affordable housing setaside
as set forth in the Fair Housing Act, N.J.S.A.
52:27D-329.9.
[1] The units required for the affordable housing set-aside
may be constructed as attached dwellings with a maximum
of four dwelling units per building; such structures shall
be subject to the bulk regulations set forth in this section.
(m) Submission of a traffic impact assessment for all preliminary
major subdivisions regardless of the number of lots created.
(n) Acquisition and redemption of Pinelands development credits
for 30% of the proposed units in accordance with § 244-102 et
seq. Redemption of Pinelands development credits shall not be
required for affordable housing units provided to meet the
requirements of the Fair Housing Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.9,
provided such affordable units do not exceed 20% of the total
number of proposed units.
(2) Detached single-family developments are subject to the following
standards only if the restrictions of the buffer overlay zone in
accordance with § 244-101 will prevent achievement of the
maximum residential density permitted:
(a) Maximum Density: 3.0 dwelling units per acre.
(b) Minimum lot area: 9,000 square feet.
(c) Minimum lot width: 75 feet.
(d) Minimum lot frontage: 75 feet.
(e) Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.
(f) Minimum front yard setback: 30 feet.
(g) Minimum side yard setback: 10 feet.
(h) Minimum rear yard setback: 30 feet.
(i) Minimum accessory structure setback: 10 feet, not permitted
in front yard.
(j) Maximum building height: 2 1/2 stories and 35 feet.
§ 244-90 JACKSON CODE § 244-90
1:964
§ 244-91. RG-3 Regional Growth Zone.
(k) The proposed lots are to be serviced by a public sanitary sewer
system.
(l) Compliance with the requirement of an affordable housing setaside
as set forth in the Fair Housing Act, N.J.S.A.
52:27D-329.9.
[1] The units required for the affordable housing set-aside
may be constructed as attached dwellings with a maximum
of four dwelling units per building; such structures shall
be subject to the bulk regulations set forth in this section.
(m) Submission of a traffic impact assessment for all preliminary
major subdivisions regardless of the number of lots created.
(n) Acquisition and redemption of Pinelands development credits
for 30% of the proposed units in accordance with § 244-102 et
seq. Redemption of Pinelands development credits shall not be
required for affordable housing units provided to meet the
requirements of the Fair Housing Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.9,
provided such affordable units do not exceed 20% of the total
number of proposed units.
A. The following uses shall be permitted in the RG-3 Zone:
(1) Same as permitted in the PV Pinelands Village Zone.
B. The following accessory uses shall be permitted in the RG-3 Zone:
(1) Same as permitted in the PV Pinelands Village Zone.
C. Area, yard and building requirements shall be as follows: [Amended
9-22-2003 by Ord. No. 28-03]
(1) If a proposed dwelling is to be served by a standard septic system,
the following standards shall apply:
(a) Minimum lot area: 3.2 acres.
(b) Minimum lot width: 250 feet.
(c) Minimum lot frontage: 200 feet.
(d) Minimum lot depth: 400 feet.
(e) Minimum front yard setback: 80 feet.
(f) Minimum rear yard setback: 50 feet.
(g) Minimum side yard setback: 25 feet.
(h) Minimum accessory structure setback: 20 feet, not permitted
in front yard. [Amended 11-8-2004 by Ord. No. 40-04]
§ 244-90 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-91
1:965
(2) If a proposed dwelling is to be served by an alternate-design pilot
program treatment system in accordance with § 244-79G(4)(f), the
following standards shall apply:
(a) Minimum lot area: one acre.
(b) Minimum lot width: 125 feet (130 feet for corner lots).
(c) Minimum lot depth: 250 feet.
(d) Minimum front yard setback: 60 feet.
(e) Minimum side yard setback: 10 feet; combined, 30 feet.
(f) Minimum rear yard setback: 50 feet.
(g) Minimum accessory building setback: 10 feet.
(h) Minimum accessory structure setback: 20 feet, not permitted
in front yard.153 [Amended 11-8-2004 by Ord. No. 40-04]
(3) For all developments of five dwelling units or more, Pinelands
development credits shall be acquired and redeemed for 30% of the
proposed units in accordance with § 244-102 et seq. [Added
11-21-2017 by Ord. No. 22-17]
D. Conditional uses. [Added 11-21-2017 by Ord. No. 22-17]
(1) Detached, single-family developments on lots less than one acre
subject to the following conditions:
(a) Maximum density: 4.5 dwelling units per acre.
(b) Minimum lot area: 7,500 square feet.
(c) Minimum lot width: 75 feet.
(d) Minimum lot frontage: 60 feet.
(e) Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.
(f) Minimum front yard setback: 30 feet.
(g) Minimum side yard setback: 8 feet one side; 20 feet combined.
(h) Minimum rear yard setback: 25 feet.
(i) Minimum accessory structure setback: five feet, not permitted
in front yard.
(j) Maximum building height: 2 1/2 stories and 35 feet.
153. Editor's Note: Original § 109-82D, Conditional uses, of the 1972 Code, as amended, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 11-9-2010 by Ord. No. 29-10.
§ 244-91 JACKSON CODE § 244-91
1:966
§ 244-92. PED Pinelands Environmental Development District.
[Added 3-27-2006 by Ord. No. 07-06154]
(k) The proposed lots are to be serviced by a public sanitary sewer
system.
(l) Compliance with the requirement of an affordable housing setaside
as set forth in the Fair Housing Act, N.J.S.A.
52:27D-329.9.
[1] The units required for the affordable housing set-aside
may be constructed as attached dwellings with a maximum
of four dwelling units per building; such structures shall
be subject to the bulk regulations set forth in this section.
(m) Submission of a traffic impact assessment for all preliminary
major subdivisions regardless of the number of lots created.
(n) Acquisition and redemption of Pinelands development credits
for 30% of the proposed units in accordance with § 244-102 et
seq. Redemption of Pinelands development credits shall not be
required for affordable housing units provided to meet the
requirements of the Fair Housing Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.9,
provided such affordable units do not exceed 20% of the total
number of proposed units.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Pinelands Environmental Development
District is to implement a new zoning district within the rural
development management area of the Pinelands Area that will permit
low-density residential development with a development option for a
planned retirement community that requires the development to be
located away from environmentally sensitive lands. Specifically, the
development will be directed away from areas identified as habitat for
threatened and/or endangered species toward designated development
"receiving areas." The PED will allow for coordinated development on
contiguous lands within the Toms River Corridor in Jackson and
Manchester Townships. The Pinelands Environmental Development
District is comprised of a PED-9 Zone and a PED-1 Zone. The PED-9
Zone permits single-family detached housing units on lots of nine acres
and the PED-1 Zone permits single-family detached housing units on
lots 3.2 acres. Both the PED-9 and PED-1 require cluster development
on one-acre lots. The Pinelands Environmental Development District
permits development at a higher density for planned retirement
communities, provided that all development is clustered within the
PED-1 Zone and that the designated sending areas (PED-9) are deed
restricted in accordance with Pinelands Commission regulations for
intermunicipal transfers.
154. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed original § 109-83, RG-4 Regional Growth Zone,
of the 1972 Code, as amended.
§ 244-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-92
1:967
B. Maximum density. The maximum number of dwelling units within a
planned retirement community within the PED district shall not exceed
a total of 600 single-family detached dwelling units. The maximum
number of units that may be generated from Block 62, Lots 30, 31 and
32 in Manchester is 330, as specified in the settlement agreement
between Manchester Development Group, LLC, and Manchester
Township. The maximum number of single-family detached agerestricted
dwelling units that may be generated from Block 54, Lots 26
and 28 in Jackson Township is 250. In order to effectuate the
development transfer, an intermunicipal agreement between Jackson
and Manchester shall be executed and the applicant shall submit a
general development plan in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-45.1 and
applicable municipal ordinances.
C. Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted in the PED.
District:
(1) Single-family detached housing in accordance with the standards
set forth below:
(a) PED-9. One single-family dwelling unit per nine acres (0.111
du/acre). All development shall be clustered on lots a minimum
of one acre in size in accordance with the standards set forth in
§ 244-89A(1)(a)[2] through [4]. Clustered developments shall
be designed to protect the particular environmental attributes
of the site, to maintain the conservation area in an undisturbed
state, to promote the establishment of greenways on adjacent
sites and to maximize the contiguity of protected lands as a
means to providing habitat for threatened and endangered
plant and animal species. The developed area shall be located
and designed to promote efficient use of the existing
infrastructure (roads, utilities, etc.) and coordinate with
development on adjacent parcels. The design shall be subject
to review and approval of the Planning Board and the
Pinelands Commission. Permitted development may be
transferred to a PED-1 Zoning District with the use of the PED
planned retirement community option in accordance with
Subsection C(2) below.
(b) PED-1. One single-family dwelling unit per 3.2 acres (0.313 du/
acre). All development shall be clustered on lots a minimum of
one acre in size in accordance with the standards set forth in
Subsection C(1)(a) above.
(2) PED planned retirement community development option. The PED
planned retirement community development option allows for the
transfer of units from Jackson Township to Manchester Township.
The planned retirement community option shall be permitted
within the PED-1 and PED-9 Zones, provided that the plan
conforms to the conditions set forth in Manchester Township's
§ 244-92 JACKSON CODE § 244-92
1:968
§ 244-93. PVC-1 Pinelands Village Commercial Zone.
Land Use and Development Regulations Section 35-34.22(c)(2) and
(3) are met.
(3) Agriculture.
(4) Places of worship, such as churches, synagogues, parish houses,
convents and the like, subject to the conditions set forth in
§ 244-115.
(5) Municipal parks and playgrounds and other municipal uses deemed
appropriate and necessary by the Township Committee.
(6) Other public buildings of a governmental or cultural nature.
D. Accessory uses. Accessory uses shall be the same as those permitted in
the PV Zone.
A. The following uses shall be permitted in the PVC-1 Pinelands Village
Commercial Zone:
(1) Stores selling, at retail, groceries, meats, baked goods and other
such food items, provided that such items are not produced on the
premises.
(2) Drug and pharmaceutical stores.
(3) Hardware, paint, household supplies and electrical appliance
stores.
(4) Package liquor stores.
(5) Stationery, tobacco and newspaper stores.
(6) Luncheonettes, restaurants, stores and places for the same and
consumption of soft drinks, ice cream and beverages and drive-in
diners, open-air restaurants and places providing entertainment.
(7) Barbershops and beauty shops.
(8) Shoe repair shops.
(9) Tailor shops, dry-cleaning services and self-service laundries shall
be permitted, provided that public sewerage facilities are available.
(10) Professional and business offices, banks and fiduciary institutions.
(11) Parking lots for passenger vehicles, but not for the storage of
vehicles for sale or hire.
B. The following accessory uses shall be permitted in the PVC-1 Pinelands
Village Commercial Zone:
§ 244-92 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-93
1:969
§ 244-94. PVC-2 Pinelands Village Commercial Zone.
(1) Off-street parking, subject to the provisions of § 244-197 of this
chapter.
(2) Signs, subject to the provisions of § 244-79L.
C. Area, yard and building requirements shall be as follows:
(1) Minimum lot area: 20,000 square feet, provided that no
nonresidential use shall be located on a parcel of less than one acre
unless served by a centralized wastewater treatment plant.
[Amended 4-12-1993 by Ord. No. 10-93]
(2) Minimum lot width: 100 feet; 120 feet for corner lots.
(3) Minimum front setback: 60 feet.
(4) Minimum rear setback: 30 feet.
(5) Minimum side setback: combined 30 feet; one side, not less than 10
feet.
(6) Maximum building height: 35 feet.
(7) Parking area setback. [Added 5-27-2003 by Ord. No. 12-03]
(a) Parking area setback from ROW: 20 feet.
(b) Parking area setback from property line: 20 feet to adjacent
residential; 10 feet to adjacent nonresidential.
D. Conditional uses shall be as follows:
(1) Public utility installations.
A. The following uses shall be permitted in the PVC-2 Pinelands Village
Commercial Zone:
(1) Stores selling, at retail, groceries, meats, baked goods and other
such food items, provided that such items are not produced on the
premises.
(2) Drug and pharmaceutical stores.
(3) Hardware, paint, household supplies and electrical appliance
stores.
(4) Package liquor stores.
(5) Stationery, tobacco and newspaper stores.
(6) Barbershops and beauty shops.
(7) Shoe repair shops.
§ 244-93 JACKSON CODE § 244-94
1:970
(8) Tailor shops, dry-cleaning services and self-service laundries shall
be permitted, provided that public sewerage facilities are available.
(9) Professional and business offices, banks and fiduciary institutions.
(10) Parking lots for passenger vehicles, but not for the storage of
vehicles for sale or hire.
(11) Business or commercial offices.
(12) Bars or cocktail lounges.
(13) Dry goods and department stores.
(14) Furniture stores.
(15) Bakeries where products are sold at retail only.
(16) Funeral homes.
(17) Restaurants, including the consumption of alcoholic beverages, but
excluding drive-in or open-air restaurants.
(18) Shops of a plumber, electrician, carpenter, printer or painter.
(19) Services and repair businesses limited to radios, television and
small home appliances.
(20) Jewelry stores, florists, sporting goods and camera shops.
(21) Municipal parks, playgrounds and other municipal buildings and
uses deemed appropriate and necessary by the Township
Committee.
(22) Other public buildings of a governmental or cultural nature.
B. The following accessory uses shall be permitted in the PVC-2 Pinelands
Village Commercial Zone:
(1) Off-street parking, subject to the provisions of § 244-197 of this
chapter.
(2) Signs, subject to the provisions of § 244-79L.
C. Area, yard and building requirements shall be as follows:
(1) Minimum lot area: 20,000 square feet, provided that no
nonresidential use shall be located on a parcel of less than one acre
unless served by a centralized wastewater treatment plant.
[Amended 4-12-1993 by Ord. No. 10-93]
(2) Minimum lot width: 100 feet; 120 feet for corner lots.
(3) Minimum front setback: 60 feet.
(4) Minimum rear setback: 30 feet.
§ 244-94 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-94
1:971
§ 244-95. RGC-1 Regional Growth Commercial Zone.
§ 244-96. RGC-2 Regional Growth Commercial Zone.
(5) Minimum side setback: combined, 30 feet; one side, not less than
10 feet.
(6) Maximum building height: 35 feet.
(7) Parking area setback. [Added 5-27-2003 by Ord. No. 12-03]
(a) Parking area setback from ROW: 20 feet.
(b) Parking area setback from property line: 20 feet to adjacent
residential; 10 feet to adjacent nonresidential.
D. Conditional uses shall be as follows:
(1) Public utility installations.
(2) Automobile service stations, excluding, however, body shops and
major auto repair shops.
A. The following uses shall be permitted in the RGC-1 Regional Growth
Commercial Zone:
(1) Same as permitted in the PVC-1 Pinelands Village Commercial
Zone.
B. The following accessory uses shall be permitted in the RGC-1 Regional
Growth Commercial Zone:
(1) Same as permitted in the PVC-1 Pinelands Village Commercial
Zone.
C. Area, yard and building requirements shall be as follows:
(1) Same as required in the PVC-1 Pinelands Village Commercial Zone.
D. Conditional uses shall be as follows:
(1) Same as permitted in the PVC-1 Pinelands Village Commercial
Zone.
A. The following uses shall be permitted in the RGC-2 Regional Growth
Commercial Zone:
(1) Same as permitted in the PVC-2 Pinelands Village Commercial
Zone.
B. The following accessory uses shall be permitted in the RGC-2 Regional
Growth Commercial Zone:
(1) Same as permitted in the PVC-2 Pinelands Village Commercial
Zone.
§ 244-94 JACKSON CODE § 244-96
1:972
§ 244-96.1. JB MDL RGC-3 Joint Base-McGuire-Fort Dix-Lakehurst
Compatible Commercial Development Zone. [Added 8-12-2014 by
Ord. No. 13-14]
C. Area, yard and building requirements shall be as follows:
(1) Same as required in the PVC-2 Pinelands Village Commercial Zone.
D. Conditional uses shall be as follows:
(1) Same as permitted in the PVC-2 Pinelands Village Commercial
Zone.
A. The following uses shall be permitted within the JB MDL RGC-3 Zone:
(1) Municipal buildings and associated uses.
(2) Other public uses deemed necessary by the Township Council of
the Township of Jackson.
(3) High technology and research facilities associated with
nonhazardous research and development.
(4) Industrial research and manufacturing flex-space facilities
associated with the nonhazardous temporary or long-term needs of
the JB MDL.
(5) General, professional, and commercial office facilities.
(6) Food processing and associated industries.
(7) Research and testing laboratories.
(8) The warehousing or storage of goods and products.
(9) Fabrication of metal, paper, and wood products.
(10) Other permissible industry, including but not limited to electric
light and power and other utility company installations; farm
machinery sales and service; laundering and cleaning
establishments; motion-picture exchange; photofinishing; printing
plants; pharmaceutical products; and the manufacturing of light
machinery, brushes, brooms, plastic products, electronic products,
glass, glass products, jewelry (including gem polishing), pottery,
ceramic products, sporting goods, thread, yarn, and leather goods
manufacturing, except the curing, tanning and finishing of hides.
(11) Permitted uses in accordance with § 244-94, Pinelands Village
Commercial Zone.
(12) Single-family residential uses, as follows:
(a) In accordance with the cultural housing standards of § 244-98;
(b) In accordance with the substandard lot standards of § 244-99;
§ 244-96 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-96.1
1:973
(c) On lots existing as of the date of adoption of this section,
provided that:
[1] The residential dwelling shall have direct access to an
existing, improved public road;
[2] The residential dwelling shall be located no further than
200 feet from a principal residential structure in existence
as of the date of adoption of this section; and
[3] The applicant purchases and redeems (0.25) of a Pinelands
development credit for each residential dwelling; or
(d) Single-family residential uses, in existence as of the date of
adoption of this section, are to be considered conforming in
use, lot area, lot frontage, lot width, and lot depth and may be
expanded in size only, and construct accessory structures, in
accordance with the following yard and building requirements:
[1] Minimum front yard setback: 60 feet.
[2] Minimum side yard setback: 10 feet; combined, 30 feet.
[3] Minimum rear yard setback: 50 feet.
[4] Minimum accessory structure setback: 10 feet for
structures under 100 square feet, 25 feet for structures
over 100 square feet; not permitted in a front yard.
B. The following accessory uses shall be permitted within the JB MDL
RGC-3 Zone for nonresidential development:
(1) As set forth in § 244-97B.
C. Conditional uses within the JB MDL RGC-3 Zone shall be as follows:
(1) Hotel or motel, subject to the provisions of § 244-124.
(2) Public utilities, subject to the provisions of § 244-128.
(3) Veterinary clinics, hospitals or animal care facilities, subject to the
provisions of § 244-132.
(4) Mini storage facilities, subject to the provisions of § 244-126.
(5) Any industrial use similar to and not inconsistent with the uses
listed in Subsection A above may be permitted, provided that:
(a) At no time shall any use permitted in this article cause or result
in dissemination of dust, smoke, smog, observable gas, fumes
or odors or other atmospheric pollution, noise, glare or
vibration beyond the boundaries of the JB MDL RGC-3 Zone.
(6) Industrial parks containing any of the uses as set forth in
Subsection A or C above, provided that:
§ 244-96.1 JACKSON CODE § 244-96.1
1:974
(a) Said proposed use shall have a total area of at least 20 acres;
and
(b) The performance standards contained in § 244-160 are met.
(7) Cemeteries and mausoleums, subject to the provisions of
§ 244-113.
(8) Commercial recreation activities, subject to the provisions of
§ 244-116.
(9) Solar energy facilities, subject to the provisions of § 244-133.1.
D. Area, yard and building requirements shall be as follows, for all
nonresidential development:
(1) As set forth in § 244-97C (PM-1 Pinelands Manufacturing Zone),
except for the following:
(a) Section 244-97C(7), Maximum lot coverage, of all developable
uplands, excluding wetlands, wetlands buffers, and riparian
zones and buffers, is 75%.
(2) Maximum floor area ration (FAR) for development on the permitted
75% described above [Subsection D(1)] is 1.3.
E. Requirements for the use of Pinelands development credits.
(1) For the permitted and conditional uses listed in Subsections A(2)
through (11) and C(1) through (6) above, 0.25 of a Pinelands
development credit shall be purchased and redeemed for every
6,500 square feet of floor area, or portion thereof.
(2) For the conditional uses listed in Subsections C(7) through (9)
above, 0.25 of a Pinelands development credit shall be purchased
and redeemed for every acre, or portion thereof, of land on the
parcel.
(3) If the number of Pinelands development credits required to be
purchased and redeemed pursuant to Subsection E(1) or (2) above
is not evenly divisible by 0.25, it shall be increased to the next
highest increment of 0.25.
F. No use, density, or lot coverage, variance or other approval shall be
granted:
(1) For a residential use within the JB MDL RGC-3 Zone not permitted
pursuant to A(12) above, unless Pinelands development credits are
purchased and redeemed for 100% of the authorized units, at 0.25
per unit; or
(2) For a nonresidential use within the JB MDL RGC-3 Zone similar to
those listed in Subsection A or C(1) through C(6) above, unless onequarter
of one Pinelands development credit (i.e., one right) is
§ 244-96.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-96.1
1:975
§ 244-97. PM-1 Pinelands Manufacturing Zone.
purchased and redeemed for every 6,500 square feet of floor area,
or portion thereof.
(3) For a land-extensive nonresidential use within the JB MDL RGC-3
Zone similar to those listed in Subsection C(7) through C(9) above,
unless one-quarter of one Pinelands development credit (i.e., one
right) is purchased and redeemed for every acre, or portion
thereof, of land on the parcel.
A. The following uses shall be permitted in the PM-1 Pinelands
Manufacturing Zone:
(1) General office facilities.
(2) Professional and commercial office facilities.
(3) Food processing and associated industries comprising any of the
following:
(a) Bakeries.
(b) Canning or bottling of food, beverages or dairy products.
(c) Food and cereal mixing and milling.
(d) Food processing, sundry food manufacturing and
manufacturing of spirituous liquor.
(4) Research and testing laboratories comprising any of the following:
biological, chemical, dental, electronic, pharmaceutical and
general, provided that there is no commercial production of goods
for sale or otherwise.
(5) The warehousing or storage of goods and products, provided that
no goods are sold from the premises, and provided further that all
items to be stored are within an enclosed building.
(6) Manufacturing of light machinery, comprising any of the following:
(a) Small machines or small machine parts.
(b) Cash registers.
(c) Sewing machines.
(d) Typewriters, calculators and other office machines.
(7) Fabrication of metal products, comprising any of the following:
(a) Baby carriages, bicycles and other vehicles.
(b) Metal wire or foil (tin, aluminum, gold, etc.).
§ 244-96.1 JACKSON CODE § 244-97
1:976
(c) Metal furniture.
(d) Musical instruments.
(e) Sheet metal products.
(f) Toys.
(8) Fabrication of paper products, comprising any of the following:
(a) Bags.
(b) Bookbinding.
(c) Boxes and packaging materials.
(d) Office supplies.
(e) Toys.
(9) Fabrication of wood products, comprising any of the following:
(a) Boats.
(b) Boxes.
(c) Cabinets and woodworking.
(d) Furniture.
(e) Toys.
(10) Other permissible industry comprising any of the following:
(a) Brush and broom manufacturing.
(b) Plastic products manufacturing.
(c) Electric light and power and other utility company
installations.
(d) Electronic products manufacturing.
(e) Farm machinery sales and service.
(f) Glass and glass products manufacturing.
(g) Jewelry manufacturing including gem polishing.
(h) Laundering and cleaning establishments.
(i) Leather goods manufacturing except curing, tanning and
finishing of hides.
(j) Motion-picture exchange.
(k) Pharmaceutical products.
§ 244-97 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-97
1:977
(l) Photofinishing.
(m) Pottery and ceramic products manufacturing.
(n) Printing plants.
(o) Sporting goods manufacturing.
(p) Thread and yarn manufacturing.
(11) In addition to the above-listed uses, any office or industrial use
similar to and not inconsistent with the above may be permitted,
provided that at no time shall any use permitted in this article
cause or result in:
(a) Dissemination of dust, smoke, smog, observable gas, fumes or
odors or other atmospheric pollution, noise, glare or vibration
beyond the boundaries of the industrial zone.
(b) Hazard of fire or explosion or other physical hazard to any
adjacent building or to any plant growth on any land adjacent
to the site of the use.
(12) Industrial parks containing any of the uses as set forth above,
provided that said proposed use shall have a total area of at least
20 acres. In addition thereto, any use not specifically excluded,
provided that the performance standards contained in § 244-160
are met.
(13) Municipal buildings and other public uses deemed necessary by the
Township Committee of the Township of Jackson.
B. The following accessory uses shall be permitted in the PM-1 Pinelands
Manufacturing Zone:
(1) Private garage space necessary to store or repair any vehicles
associated with a permitted principal use on the premises.
(2) Dwelling units in conjunction with any industrial use, solely for the
housing of caretakers, guards or other custodial employees.
(3) Off-street parking space for employees and/or visitors, subject to
the provisions of § 244-197 of this chapter.
(4) Signs, subject to the provisions of § 244-79L.
(5) Banks, post offices, restaurants and office buildings, which uses
shall be permitted accessory uses only in instances where the
primary use is as set forth in § 244-97A above.
(6) Accessory uses customarily associated with the industrial, research
or office uses permitted in § 244-97A above, such as employee
cafeterias and employee recreational facilities.
C. Area, yard and building requirements shall be as follows:
§ 244-97 JACKSON CODE § 244-97
1:978
(1) Minimum lot area: two acres.
(2) Minimum lot frontage: 200 feet.
(3) Minimum front setback: 100 feet from any major street; 60 feet
from all other streets.
(4) Minimum rear setback: 50 feet.
(5) Minimum side setback: combined, 60 feet; one side, not less than
25 feet.
(6) Maximum building height: 50 feet.
(7) Maximum lot coverage: 50%.
(8) Parking area setback. [Added 5-27-2003 by Ord. No. 12-03]
(a) Parking area setback from ROW: 20 feet.
(b) Parking area setback from property line: 20 feet to adjacent
residential; 10 feet to adjacent nonresidential.
D. Conditional uses shall be as follows:
(1) Hotel or motel (§ 244-124).
(2) Resource extraction in accordance with § 244-79F.
(3) Public utilities (§ 244-128).
(4) Recycling activity center (§ 244-130).
(5) Truck terminals (§ 244-131).
(6) Veterinary clinics, hospitals or animal care facilities (§ 244-132).
E. Other provisions and requirements.
(1) Each use located in the PM-1 Zone shall provide truck loading and
unloading facilities on the same lot and in other than the required
front yard so as to permit the transfer of goods in other than a
public street.
(2) No required off-street loading areas shall be located in any
required front setback.
(3) Where the PM-1 Zone abuts a residential zone, whether along a
property line or across a street, there shall be provided a onehundred-
foot buffer screening strip, as set forth in § 244-193.
(4) Each use permitted in the PM-1 Zone shall be served by a public
sewage disposal system or by a private disposal system which
meets the approval of the State and Township Boards of Health and
the Jackson Township Municipal Utilities Authority. Any private
disposal system shall be so designed as will, in the opinion of the
§ 244-97 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-97
1:979
Township Engineer, enable the system to be efficiently connected
to the prospective public disposal system when constructed.
(5) Uses established in this zone shall set aside a minimum of 20% of
the area of the tract devoted to such use for seeding and
landscaping and shall use this area for no other purpose.
(6) All industrial activities or processes shall take place within a
completely enclosed building. Incidental storage out of doors shall
be shielded from any street or adjacent residential zone by fencing,
landscaping or other appropriate measure.
(7) All new streets, whether intended for public dedication or to
remain as private streets, shall provide curbing and shall be
designed to provide a forty-foot paved surface within a sixty-sixfoot
right-of-way. Such streets shall be constructed in accordance
with specifications prepared by the Township Engineer for
industrial-type streets.
(8) Industrial parks containing such permitted uses as set forth herein
shall have a total area of not less than 20 acres. All streets within
industrial parks shall be private, and there shall be adequate
provisions for repair and maintenance so as to relieve the Township
of Jackson from any responsibility for the upkeep of such streets.
(9) No use shall be conducted in such a way as to discharge any
treated or untreated industrial waste, except as shall be approved
by the Health Officer, Jackson Township. Municipal Utilities
Authority and any applicable state agency having jurisdiction in
such matters.
(10) Provision and use of water. All water requirements shall be stated
in the application. Water shall be supplied from wells only after an
approved or accepted geologic study of furnished by the applicant
and certification by a professional geologist that the underground
water supply and levels will not be appreciably altered in such a
way as to endanger the water level and supply for other properties.
F. Prohibited uses.
(1) In no event shall the above provisions of the PM-1 Zone be
interpreted to permit any of the following uses:
Abattoir
Acetylene gas manufacture and/or storage
Acid manufacture (hydrochloric, nitric, picric, sulfuric, sulfanous,
carbolic)
Ammonia, bleaching powder or chlorine manufacture
Arsenal
Blast furnace
§ 244-97 JACKSON CODE § 244-97
1:980
§ 244-98. Cultural housing. [Amended 4-12-1993 by Ord. No. 10-93]
Celluloid manufacture
Cement, lime, gypsum, plaster of paris manufacture
Coal distillation
Coke ovens
Creosote treatment or manufacture
Dead animal and offal reduction
Distillation of bones, coal, petroleum, refuse, grain or wood,
except in the manufacture of gas
Distillation of tar
Explosives, fireworks and gunpowder manufacture or storage
Fat rendering
Forge plant
Incineration, reduction, storage or dumping of slaughterhouse
refuse, rancid fats, garbage, dead animals or offal
Oil cloth or linoleum manufacture
Ore reduction
Petroleum or kerosene refining, distillation or derivation of by
products and/or storage
Potash works
Power forge (riveting, hammering, punching, chipping, drawing,
rolling or tumbling of iron, steel, brass or copper, except as a
necessary incident of manufacture of which these processes form
a minor part and which are carried on without objectionable
noise outside the plant)
Rolling mill steel furnace, blooming or rolling mill
Rubber treatment or reclaiming plant
Stockyards
(2) Residential dwelling units, other than those utilized in conjunction
with a farm operation existing at the time of the passage of this
chapter, or as permitted by § 244-97B(2) above, shall be strictly
prohibited in the PM-1 Zone.
(3) Retail businesses of any type, with the exception of those providing
a direct service to a permitted use as set forth in § 244-97A above,
such as banks, luncheonettes or post offices.
A. Residential dwellings on lots of 3.2 acres are permitted within the PA,
FA-1 or FA-2 Zone, provided that: [Amended 12-30-1996 by Ord. No.
27-96]
§ 244-97 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-98
1:981
§ 244-99. Substandard lots. [Amended 2-26-1996 by Ord. No. 4-96;
12-30-1996 by Ord. No. 27-96; 4-12-1993 by Ord. No. 10-93;
7-14-1997 by Ord. No. 10-97]
(1) The dwelling unit will be the principal residence of the property
owner or a member of the immediate family of the property owner;
(2) The individual whose principal residence the dwelling unit will be
has not developed a dwelling unit under this section within the
previous five years;
(3) The parcel of land on which the dwelling is to be located has been
in the continuous ownership since February 7, 1979, of the person
whose principal residence the dwelling unit will be, a member of
that person's immediate family or a partnership or corporation in
which members of that person's immediate family collectively own
more than a majority interest in such partnership or corporation;
and
(4) The person whose principal residence the dwelling unit will be has
resided in the Pinelands for at least five years and that person or
one or more members of that person's immediate family has
resided in the Pinelands for a total of at least 20 different years.
B. Residential dwellings on one-acre lots may be permitted within the PA,
FA-1, FA-2 or FA-3 Zone, provided that:
(1) The applicant satisfies all of the requirements set forth in
Subsection A above;
(2) The lot to be developed existed as of February 8, 1979, or was
created as a result of an approval granted by the Pinelands
Development Review Board or by the Pinelands Commission
pursuant to the Interim Rules and Regulations prior to January 14,
1981;
(3) The applicant qualifies for and receives from the Township a
variance from the three-and-two-tenths-acre lot size requirement
set forth in Subsection A above;
(4) The applicant purchases and redeems 0.25 Pinelands development
credits; and
(5) Any Pinelands development credits allocated to the lot to be
developed are reduced pursuant to § 244-102C(3) of this chapter.
A. Notwithstanding the density limitations or any other provisions of this
article, the owner of a parcel of land of an acre or more in the FA-1, FA-2
and FA-3 Zones or the RD and RD-9 Rural Development Zones shall be
entitled to develop one detached single-family dwelling on the parcel,
provided that:
§ 244-98 JACKSON CODE § 244-99
1:982
§ 244-100. General regulations.
The following general regulations apply only to the development of lands
in the Pinelands Area, Jackson Township, and are in addition to those
regulations cited in Articles X and XII of this chapter.
(1) The dwelling unit will be the principal residence of the property
owner or a member of the immediately family of the property
owner;
(2) The parcel has been in the continuous ownership since February 7,
1979, of the person whose principal residence the dwelling unit will
be, a member of that person's immediate family or a partnership or
corporation in which members of that person's immediately family
collectively own more than a majority interest in such partnership
or corporation;
(3) The parcel was not in common ownership with any contiguous land
on or after February 8, 1979, that contains substantial
improvements; and
(4) The parcel includes all vacant contiguous lands in common
ownership on or after February 8, 1979.
A. Notwithstanding the use restrictions contained in this article, any use
existing on January 14, 1981, that is currently nonconforming or any
use which was constructed based upon an approval granted pursuant to
the Pinelands Comprehensive Management Plan that is currently
nonconforming, other than intensive recreational facilities and those
uses which are expressly limited in § 244-79, may be expanded or
altered, provided that: [Amended 12-30-1996 by Ord. No. 27-96]
(1) The use was not abandoned or terminated subsequent to January
14, 1981;
(2) The expansion or alteration of the use is in accordance with all of
the minimum standards of § 244-79; and
(3) The area of expansion does not exceed 50% of the floor area, the
area of the use or the capacity of the use, whichever is applicable,
on January 14, 1981, or which was approved pursuant to N.J.A.C.
7:50-4, Part V.
B. Height limitations.
(1) No structure, including radio and television transmission and other
communication facilities which are not accessory to an otherwise
permitted use, shall exceed a height of 35 feet, except as provided
in § 244-100B(2) below. [Amended 12-30-1996 by Ord. No.
27-96]
(2) The height limitation in § 244-100B(1) above shall not apply to any
of the following structures, provided that such structures are
§ 244-99 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-100
1:983
§ 244-101. Toms River Corridor Buffer Overlay. [Added 1-1-2005 by
Ord. No. 47-04; amended 7-11-2005 by Ord. No. 27-05]
compatible with uses in the immediate vicinity and conform to the
objectives of § 244-156 of this chapter:
(a) Silos, barns and other agricultural structures.
(b) Church spires.
(c) Cupolas.
(d) Domes.
(e) Monuments.
(f) Water towers.
(g) Fire observation towers.
(h) Electric transmission facilities and supporting structures.
(i) Windmills.
(j) Chimneys.
(k) Smokestacks.
(l) Derricks.
(m) Conveyers.
(n) Flag poles.
(o) Masts.
(p) Aerials.
(q) Solar energy facilities.
(r) Similar structures required to be placed above the roof level
and not intended for human occupancy.
(s) Antennas which do not exceed a height of 200 feet and which
are accessory to an otherwise permitted use. [Added
12-30-1996 by Ord. No. 27-96]
(3) The height limitation in § 244-100B(1) above shall not apply to the
antenna and any supporting structure of a local communication
facility of greater than 35 feet, provided that the standards set
forth in N.J.A.C. 7:50-5.4(c) are met. [Added 12-30-1996 by Ord.
No. 27-96]
C. In the Pinelands Area, no more than one principal use shall be located
on one lot, except for forestry, agriculture, horticulture, fish and wildlife
management and recreational development on agricultural lands.
§ 244-100 JACKSON CODE § 244-101
1:984
A. Purpose and intent. It is the purpose and intent of this section to ensure
that a balance between human settlement and conservation of wildlife
habitat may be maintained over the long term. The requirements set
forth in this section are intended to complement existing and future
tools for preservation and protection of critical natural resources. As a
result of the study conducted by the Toms River Corridor Taskforce,155
it has been determined that there are inadequate mechanisms in place
for the protection of upland habitats of threatened and endangered
species. Therefore, an expanded buffer requirement along the main
stem of the Toms River and the Ridgeway Branch is being established
as a means of providing additional protection to vital wildlife habitat
and ensuring that threatened and endangered species have an
opportunity to thrive in Jackson Township.
B. Applicability. Along the main stem of the Toms River and the Ridgeway
Branch within the Pinelands National Reserve in Jackson Township, the
minimum wetlands buffer requirement of 300 feet shall be applied, and
in addition an uplands buffer 300 feet in width shall also be applied to
ensure protection for known upland species by creating a wider
undisturbed corridor. The total buffer width is 600 feet from the
wetlands boundary associated with the Toms River and Ridgeway
Branch. A map entitled "Jackson Township Toms River Buffer Overlay"
(dated December 6, 2004, and revised May 19, 2005) is intended to
serve as a guide and for explanatory purposes, but for each property
the actual location of the wetlands and buffer delineations will require
field verification and approval. Lots that fall wholly or partly within the
buffer overlay must comply with the regulations of the underlying
zoning designation and all other applicable regulations, as well as the
regulations set forth in this section.
C. Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted within the buffer
overlay:
(1) Low intensity recreational uses, which do not involve use of a
structure.
(2) Forestry, fish and wildlife management.
(3) Existing active agriculture (as of the effective date of this section)
within the buffer overlay may continue and is permitted limited
expansion pursuant to § 244-101E(6) below.
(4) Existing dwellings or commercial structures (as of the effective
date of this section) within the buffer overlay may continue to exist
and are permitted limited expansion pursuant to § 244-101E(4)
below.
155. Editor's Note: The Toms River Corridor Taskforce consisted of members of the Pinelands
Commission and the Pinelands Commission staff, representatives of Jackson Township and
Manchester Township, NJ DEP's Division of Watershed Management, NJ DEP's Endangered
and Nongame Species Program, Ocean County Planning Department, Navy Lakehurst
Engineering Station, NJ DEP Green Acres Program, Pinelands Preservation Alliance, NJ
Conservation Foundation and NJ Audubon Society, as well as technical contributors.
§ 244-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-101
1:985
(5) Existing resource extraction activities and mining operations (as of
the effective date of this section) may continue in accordance with
a valid mining permit issued pursuant to § 244-79F(6) and are
permitted limited expansion pursuant to § 244-101E(5) below.
(6) Horticulture of native Pinelands species and berry agriculture.
(7) Beekeeping.
(8) Bridges, roads, trails, utility transmission and distribution facilities
and other similar linear facilities in accordance with § 244-79A(7).
D. Prohibited uses. No development shall be permitted within the buffer
overlay, except as specifically authorized in § 244-101C above and
§ 244-101E below. This prohibition includes, but is not limited to:
(1) Intensive recreation facilities.
(2) Buildings, structures, and impervious surface.
(3) Stormwater management facilities.
(4) Clearing.
(5) New agricultural activities except as permitted in § 244-79A(1) and
(2).
(6) New resource extraction activities or mining operations.
E. Exceptions. Notwithstanding the use restrictions contained in
§ 244-101C and D above, lots that meet one of the following conditions
may be granted relief from strict adherence to the buffer overlay
requirement. The relief mechanism has been designed to ensure that
each property owner may attain a minimum threshold of economic and
functional use of the property. When an applicant proposes
development within the buffer overlay in a manner that is not consistent
with the requirements set forth in this section or where the application
requires a site plan, subdivision, or variances, the applicant must seek
approval from the municipal board with jurisdiction.
(1) On lots in the FA-1, FA-2, FA-6, PV, RD, RD-1, RD-9 Zoning Districts
in which the entire lot is effectively consumed by the buffer overlay
such that no building can be constructed that would meet the bulk
requirements of the zone, the applicant may prepare and submit a
plan that proposes the construction of one single-family house with
a garage within the buffer overlay. The applicant shall obtain a
Pinelands preliminary zoning permit from the local Zoning Officer
in accordance with § 244-78, prior to obtaining building permits.
The Zoning Officer will confirm that the proposal meets the
requirements set forth in § 244-101F below in addition to all other
applicable requirements. If the proposal does not comply, the
applicant shall apply to the Zoning Board for a variance. Building
permits for construction within the buffer overlay shall not be
§ 244-101 JACKSON CODE § 244-101
1:986
issued until the footprint of disturbance has been located on a plot
plan and approved by the Zoning Officer through issuance of a
preliminary zoning permit. The criteria that shall be considered by
the Zoning Officer, Zoning Board, Planning Board, as the case may
be, are listed in § 244-101F below.
(2) On lots in the PM-1, PVC-2 and JB MDL RGC-3 Zoning Districts in
which the entire lot is effectively consumed by the buffer overlay
such that no building can be constructed that would meet the bulk
requirements of the zone, the applicant may prepare and submit a
concept plan that allows for the construction of a nonresidential
building, not to exceed 3,000 square feet of nonresidential floor
area. The applicant shall obtain a certificate of filing from the
Pinelands Commission prior to submitting the proposal and request
for variance relief to the municipal board with jurisdiction. The
proposal and request for variance relief will be reviewed by the
municipal Planning Board at the time of site plan review. The
criteria that shall be considered by the Zoning Officer, Zoning
Board, and Planning Board are listed in § 244-101F below. In the JB
MDL RGC-3 Zoning District, the applicant shall be required to
purchase and redeem one-quarter of one Pinelands development
credit (i.e., one right) prior to issuance of any zoning or building
permits. [Amended 8-12-2014 by Ord. No. 13-14]
(3) Lots in the RG-2 Zoning District. [Amended 11-21-2017 by Ord.
No. 22-17156
(a) On lots in the RG-2 Zoning District that are not to be served by
public sewer and where the entire property is effectively
consumed by the buffer matrix such that no building can be
constructed that would meet the bulk requirements of the
zone, the applicant may prepare and submit a plan that allows
for the construction of one reasonably sized single-family
house on a minimum of one acre with an alternate-design
septic system [in accordance with § 244-90C(2)]. The proposal
and buffer waiver request will be reviewed by the Municipal
Planning Board and subject to approval by the Pinelands
Commission. Permits for construction within the buffer will not
be issued until a waiver has been obtained and the footprint of
disturbance has been located on a plot plan and approved by
the Planning Board. The criteria that shall be considered by the
Planning Board and Pinelands Commission are listed in
§ 244-101F below.
(b) On lots in the RG-2 Zoning District that are to be served by a
public sewer system, in which the entire property is effectively
consumed by the buffer matrix such that no building can be
constructed that would meet the bulk requirements of the
156. Editor's Note: Former Subsection E(3), Lots in the RG-2 Zoning District, was repealed
8-12-2014 by Ord. No. 13-14.
§ 244-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-101
1:987
zones, the applicant may prepare and submit a plan that allows
for the construction of one single-family house that complies
with the standards set forth for lots served by public sewer
in § 244-90D(2).The criteria that shall be considered by the
Planning Board and Pinelands Commission are listed in
§ 244-101F below.
(4) Existing occupied structures, whether residential or commercial in
nature, located within the buffer overlay may continue to exist as
preexisting nonconforming conditions.
(a) In the event that property is destroyed or altered by fire, flood,
wind or other unavoidable events, the owner may reconstruct a
dwelling or business of equal size in the same location.
(b) Preexisting nonconforming residential buildings shall be
permitted to expand in the buffer overlay within the 20,000
square feet of permitted cleared area and in conformance with
the requirements of the zone, subject to the following:
[1] Submission of a plot plan identifying the proposed building
addition and the limits of clearing.
[2] Establishing that the expansion is situated in such a way
that it will have least possible impact on the buffer overlay.
[3] The applicant shall obtain a Pinelands preliminary zoning
permit from the local Zoning Officer in accordance with
§ 244-78 prior to obtaining building permits. The Zoning
Officer will confirm that the proposal meets the
requirements set forth in § 244-101F below in addition to
all other applicable requirements. If the proposal does not
comply, the applicant shall apply to the Zoning Board for a
variance.
(c) Preexisting nonconforming nonresidential buildings shall be
permitted to expand in the buffer overlay within the 20,000
square feet of permitted cleared area and in conformance with
the requirements of the zone, subject to the following:
[1] Submission of a site plan identifying the proposed building
addition, site improvements and the limits of clearing and
including all required checklist items.
[2] Establishing that the expansion is situated in such a way
that it will have least possible impact on the buffer overlay.
[3] The applicant shall obtain a certificate of filing from the
Pinelands Commission prior to submitting the proposal
and request for variance relief to the municipal board with
jurisdiction. The application will be reviewed in
accordance with the requirements set forth in § 244-101F
§ 244-101 JACKSON CODE § 244-101
1:988
below as well as all other applicable standards and
regulations.
(d) Occupants of preexisting nonconforming buildings are
permitted to construct accessory structures within the 20,000
square foot cleared area around the existing principal
structure consistent with the requirements of the zone.
(5) Resource extraction activities and mining operations existing
legally as of the effective date of this section may continue to exist
and operate within the buffer overlay in accordance with a valid
mining permit issued pursuant to § 244-79F(6). Expansion of such
resource extraction activities and mining operations within the
buffer overlay may be permitted, provided that any such expansion
does not involve additional clearing and is located no closer to
wetlands than the activities and operations in existence as of the
effective date of this section.
(6) Active agricultural operations in existence as of the effective date
of this section may continue to exist and operate within the buffer
overlay. Expansion of such agricultural operations within the buffer
overlay may be permitted, provided that any such expansion meets
the following conditions:
(a) Is located no closer to wetlands than the agricultural
operations in existence as of the effective date of this section;
and
(b) Does not exceed 50% of the area in active agriculture as of the
effective date of this section.
F. Criteria. In considering a request for encroachment into the buffer
overlay, the Zoning Officer, Zoning Board, and Planning Board, as the
case may be, shall hear in mind the following criteria in determining
whether a hardship exists and what relief should be granted:
(1) The proposed structure must be located as far as is practically
possible from the wetlands.
(2) The buffer must be maintained to the maximum extent possible
while providing a beneficial use.
(3) The proposed structure must be situated to minimize the amount of
clearing of vegetation and trees that will be required and in no case
shall the total clearing on a lot be more than 20,000 square feet.
(4) Where adjacent lots are developed, the buffer on the subject lot
shall not be reduced to less than the existing buffer on the adjacent
lot.
(5) A one-day visual survey of the area proposed for development has
been completed by a qualified consultant, demonstrating that the
proposed development is unlikely to have a negative impact on any
§ 244-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-101
1:989
§ 244-102. Pinelands development credits.
threatened or endangered plant or animal species because there
are no threatened or endangered plants in the area to be
developed, nor any evidence of habitual seasonal use of said area
by any threatened or endangered animals.
(6) Where the buffer originates on one side of an existing paved road
and the subject property is impacted by the buffer but is on the
opposite side of the existing paved road the buffer may be waived.
(7) All development must comply with the area, yard and setback
requirements of the appropriate underlying zone or must seek
variance approval.
G. Special provisions for the RG-2 Zone. In accordance with the Pinelands
Comprehensive Management Plan, the Regional Growth Area in
Jackson Township must be configured to accommodate a net density of
3.0 dwelling units per acre with an additional net density of 1.50 units
per acre available with the use of Pinelands development credits. In the
RG-2 Zone, these net density requirements have been translated into a
maximum permitted gross density of 3.0 dwelling units per acre. In
order to allow a continued opportunity for these gross densities to be
achieved on parcels affected by the buffer overlay, it may be necessary
to permit a reduction in the lot sizes established in § 2 44-90D(1) to
accommodate the density requirement, while protecting the character
and environment of the Pinelands. The reduced standards are provided
in § 244-90D(2). [Amended 11-21-2017 by Ord. No. 22-17]
A. Except for land which was owned by a public agency on January 14,
1981, land which is thereafter purchased by the state for conservation
purposes, land which is subject to an easement limiting the use of land
to nonresidential uses or land otherwise excluded from entitlement in
§ 244-102B below, every parcel of land in the Preservation Area Zone
shall have a use right known as "Pinelands development credits" that
can be used to secure a density bonus for lands located in a regional
growth area. Pinelands development credits may also be allocated to
certain properties in the Township by the Pinelands Commission
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.61 et seq. [Amended 4-12-1993 by Ord.
No. 10-93]
B. Pinelands development credits are hereby established in the
Preservation Area Zone at the following ratios:
(1) Uplands which are undisturbed but currently or previously
approved for resource extraction pursuant to this Code: two
Pinelands development credits per 39 acres. [Amended
12-30-1996 by Ord. No. 27-96]
§ 244-101 JACKSON CODE § 244-102
1:990
(2) Uplands which are mined as a result of a resource extraction
permit approved pursuant to this Code: zero Pinelands
development credits per 39 acres.
(3) Other uplands: one Pinelands development credit per 39 acres.
(4) Wetlands: 0.2 Pinelands development credit per 39 acres.
C. The allocations established in Subsection B above shall be reduced as
follows:
(1) Any property of 10 acres or less which is developed for a
commercial, industrial, resource extraction, intensive recreation,
institutional, campground or landfill use shall not receive Pinelands
development credit entitlement. For such an improved property of
more than 10 acres, the area actively used for such use or 10 acres,
whichever is greater, shall not receive Pinelands development
credit entitlement.
(2) The Pinelands development credit entitlement of a parcel of land
shall be reduced by 0.25 Pinelands development credit for each
existing dwelling unit on the property.
(3) The Pinelands development credit entitlement for a parcel of land
shall be reduced by 0.25 Pinelands development credit for each
reserved right to build a dwelling unit on the parcel retained by the
owner of the property pursuant to § 244-103B below or when a
variance for cultural housing is approved by the Township pursuant
to § 244-98B of this chapter. [Amended 4-12-1993 by Ord. No.
10-93]
(4) The Pinelands development credit entitlement for a parcel of land
shall also be reduced by 0.25 Pinelands development credit for
each dwelling unit approved pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.61 et seq.
when a waiver of strict compliance is granted by the Pinelands
Commission. [Added 4-12-1993 by Ord. No. 10-93]
D. The owners of parcels of land which are smaller than 39 acres shall
have a fractional Pinelands development credit entitlement at the same
ratio established in Subsection B above.
E. Notwithstanding the provisions above, the owner of record of 0.10 or
greater acres of land in the Preservation Area Zone as of February 7,
1979, shall be entitled to 0.25 Pinelands development credits, provided
that the parcel of land is vacant, was not in common ownership with any
contiguous land on or after February 7, 1979, and has not been sold or
transferred except to a member of the owner's immediate family.
[Amended 12-30-1996 by Ord. No. 27-96]
F. The provisions of § 244-102E above shall also apply to owners of record
of less than 0.10 acres of land in the Preservation Area Zone, as of
February 7, 1979, provided that said owners acquire vacant, contiguous
§ 244-102 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-102
1:991
§ 244-103. Limitations on use of Pinelands development credits.
lands to which Pinelands development credits are allocated pursuant to
§ 244-102B above, which lands, when combined with the acreage of the
parcel owned prior to February 7, 1979, total at least 0.10 of an acre.
[Added 12-30-1996 by Ord. No. 27-96]
A. No Pinelands development credit may be conveyed, sold, encumbered
or transferred unless the owner of the land from which the credit has
been obtained has received a Pinelands development credit certificate
from the New Jersey Pinelands Development Credit Bank pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 3:42-3 and has deed restricted the use of the land in perpetuity
to those uses set forth in § 244-107 by a recorded deed restriction
which is in favor of a public agency or not-for-profit incorporated
organization and specifically and expressly enforceable by the
Pinelands Commission. [Amended 12-30-1996 by Ord. No. 27-96]
B. Notwithstanding the provision of § 244-103A above, an owner of
property from which Pinelands development credits are sold may retain
a right for residential development on that property, provided that the
recorded deed restriction expressly provides for the same and that the
total allocation of Pinelands development credits for that property is
reduced by 0.25 Pinelands development credit for each reserved right
to build a dwelling unit. Subdivision of the property shall not be
required until such time as the residential development right is
exercised.
C. The proposed density of a parcel of land on which Pinelands
development credits are used shall not exceed the density permitted in
the RG-2 and RG-3 Zones in accordance with § 244-90 and § 244-91.157
[Amended 2-26-1996 by Ord. No. 4-96; 11-21-2017 by Ord. No.
22-17]
D. No development involving the use of Pinelands development credits
shall be approved until the developer has provided the Commission and
the approval agency with evidence of his ownership and redemption of
the requisite Pinelands development credits; provided, however, that
the approval agency may grant general development plan, preliminary
subdivision or preliminary site plan approval conditioned upon such
evidence being presented as a prerequisite to final subdivision or site
plan approval. For such a final subdivision or site plan, the developer
shall provide evidence of Pinelands development credit ownership and
redemption to secure the same proportion of lots or residential units as
was approved for Pinelands development credit use in the preliminary
approval or, as appropriate, the general development plan. Notification
of any such development approval shall be made to the Pinelands
Commission pursuant to § 244-68D and to the New Jersey Pinelands
157. Editor's Note: Original § 109-93D of the 1972 Code, pertaining to residential development
approved by variance, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed
4-12-1993 by Ord. No. 10-93.
§ 244-102 JACKSON CODE § 244-103
1:992
§ 244-104. Use of Pinelands development credits. [Added 4-12-1993
by Ord. No. 10-93; amended 2-26-1996 by Ord. No. 4-96; 12-30-1996
by Ord. No. 27-96; 12-23-2002 by Ord. No. 50-02; 8-12-2014 by Ord.
No. 13-14; 11-21-2017 by Ord. No. 22-17]
Pinelands development credits shall be used in the following manner:
§ 244-105. Pinelands development credit bonus multiplier.
[Amended 2-26-1996 by Ord. No. 4-96]
Pinelands development credits which are used for securing a density bonus
for parcels of land located in the RG-2, RG-3 and RG-4 Zones shall yield a
bonus of four dwelling units per credit.
§ 244-106. Aggregation of development credits. [Amended
2-26-1996 by Ord. No. 4-96]
Pinelands development credits may be aggregated from different parcels for
use in securing a bonus for a single parcel of land in the RG-2, RG-3 and
development credit bank in accordance with N.J.A.C. 3:42-3.
Redemption of the requisite Pinelands development credits shall occur
in accordance with N.J.A.C. 3:42-3.6, prior to the memorialization of the
resolution granting final subdivision or site plan approval, or if no such
approval is required, prior to the issuance of any construction permits.
[Amended 4-12-1993 by Ord. No. 10-93158; 12-30-1996 by Ord.
No. 27-96; 12-23-2002 by Ord. No. 50-02]
A. To permit development of parcels of land in the RG-2 and RG-3 Zones
according to the density and lot area requirements as set forth in
§§ 244-90 and 244-91, respectively.
B. When a variance of density or minimum lot area requirements for the
PED-1, RG-2 or RG-3 Zones is granted by the Township, Pinelands
development credits shall be used for all dwelling units or lots in excess
of that otherwise permitted without the variance.
C. When a variance or other approval for a nonresidential use not
otherwise permitted in the PED-1, RG-2 or RG-3 Zones is granted by the
Township, Pinelands development credits shall be used at 50% of the
maximum rate permitted for Pinelands development credit use in the
zone in which the nonresidential use will be located for parcels under
10 acres in size, at 75% of the maximum rate for parcels between 10
and 20 acres in size, and at 100% of the maximum rate for parcels over
20 acres in size. This requirement shall not apply to variances or other
approvals which authorize the expansion of or changes to existing
nonresidential uses in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:50-5.2.
158. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed original § 109-93F and G of the 1972 Code,
pertaining to development approved by variance, which immediately followed this
subsection.
§ 244-103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-106
1:993
RG-4 Zones, provided that respective densities for the transfer of Pinelands
development credits is not exceeded.
§ 244-107. Recording of deed restrictions.
A. No conveyance, sale or transfer of Pinelands development credits shall
occur until the municipality with jurisdiction over the parcel of land
from which the Pinelands development credits were obtained, the
agency or organization to which the restriction is in favor and the
Pinelands Commission have been provided with evidence of recordation
of a restriction on the deed to the land from which the development
credits were obtained.
B. Such deed restriction shall specify the number of Pinelands
development credits sold and that the property may only be used in
perpetuity for the following uses in the Preservation Area Zone:
(1) Berry agriculture.
(2) Horticulture of native Pinelands plants.
(3) Forestry.
(4) Beekeeping.
(5) Fish and wildlife management.
(6) Agriculture employee housing as an accessory use.
(7) Low-intensity recreational uses in which the use of motorized
vehicles is not permitted except for necessary transportation,
access to water bodies is limited to no more than 15 feet of frontage
per 1,000 feet of frontage on the water body, clearing of vegetation
does not exceed 5% of the parcel and no more than 1% of the parcel
will be covered with impermeable surfaces.
(8) Accessory uses. [Added 3-12-2019 by Ord. No. 07-19]
§ 244-106 JACKSON CODE § 244-107
1:994
ARTICLE VIII
Conditional Uses
§ 244-108. Standards and principles.
Recognizing that certain uses, activities and structures are necessary to
serve the needs and provide for the convenience of the citizens of the
Township of Jackson and, at the same time, appreciating the fact that
they or any one of them may be or may become harmful to the public
health, safety and general welfare of the community if located without due
consideration to the existing conditions and surroundings, such uses are
designated as conditional uses subject to the standards and regulations
hereby established. These standards and regulations are intended to
provide the Planning Board with a guide for reviewing applications for
conditional uses as provided for by this chapter. As a result of the review
procedure, the applicant may be required to meet additional standards
and regulations imposed by the Planning Board during site plan review
which are in keeping with and will further the intent of these standards
and regulations. Such standards and regulations shall be provided for and
maintained as a condition of the establishment and maintenance of any use
to which they are a conditional use approval. In acting upon an application
for conditional use approval, the Planning Board shall be guided by the
following standards and principles:
A. The use for which an application is being made is specifically listed as a
conditional use within the zone where the property is located.
B. The design, arrangement and nature of the particular use is such that
the public health, safety and welfare will be protected and reasonable
consideration is afforded to the following:
(1) The adequacy of the proposed parking and traffic circulation for
the use(s) and/or structure(s) and the potential for traffic
congestion and/or the creation of undue traffic hazards.
(2) The adequacy of proposed drainage facilities which will serve the
use(s) and/or structure(s).
(3) The adequacy of plans for screening any adverse aspects of the
use(s) and/or structure(s) from adjoining properties.
(4) The adequacy of proposed outdoor lighting.
(5) Compliance with the performance standards established in
§ 244-160.
C. All conditional uses shall also be required to obtain site plan approval,
unless otherwise specified in this chapter.
D. Conditional uses shall adhere to the standards of the zone in which
located and to the additional standards specified for the particular use
§ 244-108 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-108
1:995
§ 244-109. Automobile repair shop (motor vehicle repair garage).
Automobile repair shops may be permitted as a conditional use in the zoning
districts specified, provided that the lot, use and structures shall adhere to
the minimum area, yard and building requirements of the particular district
and to the following:
§ 244-110. Automobile sales establishment for new and/or used
cars.
Automobile sales establishments for new and/or used cars may be permitted
as a conditional use in the zoning district specified, provided that the lot,
use and structures shall adhere to the following:
under this article, except where no additional standards are specified
herein.
E. No use specified within this article shall be considered a conditional use
unless it is specifically listed as a conditional use in the zoning district
regulations.
A. No outdoor oil drainage pits or hydraulic lifts shall be permitted.
B. All repairs shall be performed in a fully enclosed building.
C. All vehicles awaiting repair or under repair which are stored out of
doors shall be screened from the public by a solid fence and/or
evergreen plantings, as required by the Planning Board.
D. No vehicle awaiting repair or under repair may be stored out-of-doors
within the required front yard area, within 20 feet of any side or rear lot
line or within 50 feet of any adjoining lot within a residential zone.
E. If gas pumps are proposed, § 244-111, referring to automobile service
stations, shall also be applicable to automobile repair shops.
F. The storage of junk or dilapidated vehicles on the site shall not be
permitted.
A. The property on which an automobile sales establishment is located
shall conform to the lot requirements established in § 244-57D.
B. The leasing of automobiles is also permitted in conjunction with the
selling of autos.
C. A buffer area, a minimum of 25 feet in width, measured from the street
right-of-way, shall be provided along all such rights-of-way upon which
the site has frontage. Said buffer area shall be planted with grass and
low-growing shrubbery. Buffer areas, each a minimum of 25 feet in
width, shall be provided on all the side and rear property lines of the
site and shall be landscaped in accordance with the provisions set forth
in § 244-193. Where the site of an auto sales establishment abuts a
residential zoning district, the minimum width of the buffer area
§ 244-108 JACKSON CODE § 244-110
1:996
§ 244-111. Automobile service station (gas station or motor vehicle
service station).
Automobile service stations may be permitted as a conditional use in those
zoning districts specified, provided that the lot, use and structures shall
adhere to the minimum area, yard and building requirements of the
particular district and the following:
provided along the zone boundaries between the two districts shall
be increased to 50 feet; this buffer area shall also be landscaped in
accordance with the provisions set forth in § 244-193.
D. No vehicles shall be displayed, stored or parked within any buffer area.
E. All areas used for the display, storage or parking of vehicles shall be of a
paved surface, which drains into a facility provided with an oil trap or
similar device designed, intended and installed to prevent petroleum
products from draining directly into the ground and/or a public
drainage system.
F. No vehicles shall be displayed, stored or parked on any public street or
within any public or private right-of-way or easement.
G. No facilities for vehicle body work shall be permitted on the site, except
those facilities designed and intended for the preparation or
maintenance of vehicles sold on the same premises and where such
facilities are clearly incidental and subordinate to the principal use.
H. The delivery of autos shall take place on the premises and not on a
public street or within a public right-of-way.
I. Off-street customer parking shall be provided in accordance with the
provisions established as set forth in § 244-197.
J. All signs shall conform to the requirements set forth in § 244-207. No
banners, flags, movable signs, flashing lights, rotating signs or similar
devices shall be permitted.
K. All automobile sales establishments shall be subject to site plan
approval, as set forth by this chapter.
A. The site plan shall show the number and location of fuel tanks to be
installed, the dimensions and capacity of each storage tank, the depth
the tanks will be placed below the ground, the number and location of
pumps to be installed, the type of structures and accessory buildings to
be constructed and the number of automobiles which are to be garaged.
B. Convenience shops may be permitted, provided that:
(1) They contain not more than 5,000 square feet of gross floor area;
[Amended 8-13-2001 by Ord. No. 36-01]
§ 244-110 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-111
1:997
§ 244-112. Car washes.
Car washes may be permitted as a conditional use in those zoning districts
specified, provided that the lot, use and structures shall adhere to the
minimum area, yard and building requirements of the particular district and
the following:
(2) One additional parking space is provided for each 100 square feet
of floor area devoted to the convenience shop; and
(3) The location and access for the convenience shop does not impede
or interfere with vehicular circulation to and from fuel pumps.
C. All fuel pump islands shall be located at least 35 feet from all property
lines.
D. All fuel tanks shall be installed underground.
E. No outdoor oil drainage pits or hydraulic lifts shall be permitted.
F. Any repair of motor vehicles shall be performed in a fully enclosed
building. No parts or partially dismantled motor vehicle shall be stored
out of doors.
G. Coin-operated service stations are not permitted.
H. No auto bodywork shall be permitted.
I. Illumination shall be such that no direct glare from the lights shall fall
upon adjoining streets or properties.
J. The sale, rental or lease of new or used vehicles shall be prohibited.
K. A fifteen-foot-wide landscaped strip across the entire lot frontage shall
be provided and shall be landscaped with grass or ground cover, as well
as low-growing buffering shrubbery and shade trees in accordance with
the provisions of § 244-193. Additionally, all areas of the lot not deemed
necessary for the circulation or storage of automobiles, as determined
by the Planning Board, shall be landscaped.
L. Outdoor solid waste disposal shall be properly screened and buffered.
M. Accessory goods for sale may be displayed on the pump islands and the
building island only. The outside storage of oil cans and/or antifreeze
and similar products may be displayed on the respective islands, if
provided for in a suitable metal stand or rack.
A. All mechanical activities shall be conducted within a completely
enclosed building.
B. Wastewater from the use shall be discharged into the public sanitary
sewer system. No on-site septic system or dry well shall be permitted.
§ 244-111 JACKSON CODE § 244-113
1:998
§ 244-113. Cemeteries and mausoleums.
Cemeteries and mausoleums for human internment may be permitted as
a conditional use in those zoning districts specified, provided that the lot,
use and structures shall adhere to the minimum area, yard and building
requirements of the particular district and the following:
§ 244-114. Child-care centers; nursery schools; day-care centers.
Child-care centers, nursery schools and day-care centers may be permitted
as a conditional use in those zoning districts specified, provided that the lot,
use and structures shall adhere to the following:
A. Grave sites shall be set back a minimum of 100 feet from any public
right-of-way line and 50 feet from all other property lines.
B. Principal and/or accessory structures, including mausoleums, shall be
set back a minimum of 200 feet from all property lines.
C. Parking requirements shall be determined by the Planning Board, and
no parking shall be located closer than 100 feet to any public right-ofway.
A. A statement shall be submitted with the application setting forth the full
particulars regarding the use, activities and building.
B. The minimum required lot area for the proposed use shall be one acre.
Other lot and principle building bulk requirements for the respective
zoning district of the proposed use shall prevail.
C. Accessory buildings shall be located no closer than 20 feet to the rear or
side property lines. No accessory building shall be permitted within the
required front yard setback or the front building line of the principle
building, whichever is greater.
D. All interior facilities and areas to be used by the children shall be
located on the principal entrance floor and any other level which is not
more than 1/2 story above or below the finished grade at the location
from which pedestrian access is provided to the building.
E. A minimum of 100 square feet per rated building capacity of outdoor
space devoted to recreational use shall be provided and shall be
entirely fenced or otherwise protected from hazards, traffic and
driveways.
F. Basement areas shall not be utilized for child care, classrooms or
recreational purposes.
G. All loading and unloading of children shall take place on site and not in
the right-of-way of a public street.
H. No temporary or permanent residential dwelling facilities shall be
provided in a child-care center, nursery school or day-care center.
§ 244-113 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-114
1:999
§ 244-115. Churches and places of worship.
Churches and places of worship may be permitted as a conditional use in
those zoning districts specified, provided that the lot, use and structures
shall adhere to the following:
I. The use shall be licensed by the Division of Youth and Family Services,
New Jersey Department of Human Services.
A. The required minimum lot area shall be two acres.
B. The required minimum lot width shall be 200 feet.
C. The required minimum lot frontage shall be 200 feet.
D. No principal building shall be located closer than 100 feet to any public
street right-of-way and no closer than 50 feet to any rear or side
property line.
E. No accessory building or structure shall be permitted in any front yard,
nor shall any accessory building or structure be located closer than 30
feet to any rear or side property line.
F. The maximum permitted building coverage shall be 25%.
G. The height of structures to be constructed may exceed the maximum
height requirements of § 244-156 of this chapter; provided, however,
that the front, rear and side yard requirements set forth above shall be
increased by two feet for each foot by which the height of the structure
exceeds the maximum height which would be otherwise permitted by
this chapter, and further provided that in no case shall any proposed
structure exceed 50 feet in height.
H. The applicant shall submit a list of proposed activities and anticipated
participants, a timetable reflecting the hours in which each building will
be used and any other pertinent uses and activities intended to take
place on the site.
I. Lots shall not have their primary frontage or access on a residential
access or residential neighborhood street or any lower order street, as
defined by the Residential Site Improvement Standards. [Added
12-23-2002 by Ord. No. 50-02]
J. Buffer requirements. [Added 12-23-2002 by Ord. No. 50-02]
(1) Perimeter buffer. A landscaped buffer shall be required around the
entire length of side and rear property lines, except where access
drives or other accessory features must, of necessity, traverse this
reserved strip. The minimum landscape buffer widths shall be as
follows:
(a) From a nonresidential use or district: 25 feet.
(b) From a residential use or district: 50 feet.
§ 244-114 JACKSON CODE § 244-115
1:1000
§ 244-116. Commercial recreation activities.
(2) A required buffer shall be landscaped with trees, shrubs, and other
suitable plantings for beautification and screening. Natural
vegetation should be retained to the maximum degree possible. On
those sites where no existing vegetation is present or existing
vegetation is inadequate to provide screening, the applicant shall
suitably grade and plant the required buffer area, such that this
planting shall provide an adequate screen of at least six feet in
height so as to continually restrict the view. A minimum on-center
distance between plantings shall be such that upon maturity the
buffer will create a solid screen. The buffer may be supplemented
with a fence of solid material where necessary.
(3) Other site standards. The front yard, exclusive of walkways,
pavilion areas, or driveways, shall be landscaped with grass, trees,
shrubs, ground cover, flowers, existing vegetation, or any suitable
combination thereof. Plantings shall conform, however, to
restrictions on corner lot placement, in order to protect visibility.
A. Commercial recreation uses, such as skating rinks, miniature golf
courses, driving ranges, amusement parks, dance halls, commercial
swimming pools, arcades and amusement machines, coin-operated or
otherwise, such as video and/or pinball machines, may be permitted as
a conditional use in those zoning districts specified, provided that the
lot, use and structure shall adhere to the minimum standards of the
particular zone and the following:
(1) No building, structure, active recreation area or parking area shall
be located closer than 50 feet to any residential zone.
(2) Commercial swimming pools shall be subject to the provisions of
§ 244-216A.
B. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no conditional use permit shall be
required for the accessory use of five or fewer amusement machines,
coin-operated or otherwise, including but not limited to video and/or
pinball machines in any establishment, provided that the use of such
five or fewer machines is clearly an accessory use in such
establishment.
C. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no conditional use permit shall be
required for the placement of over five amusement machines, coinoperated
or otherwise, including but not limited to video and/or pinball
machines in any establishment presently approved or used as a
commercial recreation use, provided that such placement of said
amusement machines is a secondary use.159
159. Editor's Note: Original § 109-106, Community residences for the developmentally disabled,
of the 1972 Code, which immediately followed this section, was repealed 3-10-2003 by
Ord. No. 4-03.
§ 244-115 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-117
1:1001
§ 244-117. Community shelters for victims of domestic violence.
Community shelters for victims of domestic violence housing between seven
and 15 victims of domestic violence may be permitted as a conditional use
in those zoning districts specified, provided that the lot, use and structure
shall adhere to the minimum standards of the particular zone and the
following:
§ 244-118. Drive-in restaurants.
Drive-in restaurants may be permitted as a conditional use in those zoning
districts specified, provided that the lot, use and structures shall adhere to
the minimum standards of the particular zone and the following:
A. All of the conditions set forth above in § 109-106,160 regarding
community residences for the developmentally disabled, shall apply to
community shelters for victims of domestic violence.
A. A buffer area, a minimum of 20 feet in width, shall be provided adjacent
to all public street rights-of-way.
B. Side and rear buffer strips of 15 feet must be provided. Where the
property abuts a residential use or district, these buffers must be
increased to 30 feet. In addition to landscaped buffering, drive-in
restaurants shall be screened from abutting properties by a decorative
masonry or wooded fence of acceptable design six feet in height. No
such wall or fence shall be located so as to obstruct safe traffic vision.
C. There shall be at least one major means of access and egress, divided
by a median strip. Entrances and exists shall be located at least 80 feet
from a street intersection.
D. Direct access from the roadway right-of-way line to the nearest turn or
parking space on the lot on which the drive-in establishment is located
shall be an unobstructed distance of at least 20 feet.
E. All signs shall conform to the requirements set forth in § 244-207.
F. All service, storage and trash areas shall be completely screened from
public view. All outside trash receptacles shall be located within an
enclosure constructed of decorative masonry material a minimum of
four feet and a maximum of six feet in height and shall be provided with
opaque gates of the same height.
G. The minimum distance between driveways and adjacent property lines
shall be 20 feet, measured from the curb return to an extension of the
side property line.
H. The minimum distance between driveways on the site shall be 65 feet,
measured between the curb returns.
160. Editor's Note: Original § 109-106 of the 1972 Code was repealed 3-10-2003 by Ord. No.
4-03.
§ 244-117 JACKSON CODE § 244-118
1:1002
§ 244-119. Farmers' market.
Farmers' markets may be permitted as a conditional use in those zoning
districts specified, provided that the lot, use and structures shall adhere to
the minimum standards of the particular zone and the following:
§ 244-120. Health care facilities.
Health care facilities may be permitted as a conditional use in those zoning
districts specified, provided that the lot, use and structures shall adhere to
the following:
I. Drive-in window lanes shall be physically separated from the traffic
circulation system on the site by means of concrete curbed and
landscaped islands which allow for a minimum width of three feet for
landscaping. The drive-in window aisle shall have a minimum width of
10 feet. The length of the drive-in lane shall be such as to permit the
stacking of a minimum of five vehicles.
J. Sites shall be so designed as not to permit a conflict between pedestrian
and vehicular drive-in traffic in either the stacking lane or drive-in exit.
K. On-site lighting shall conform to the requirements set forth in
§ 244-197.
L. All utilities leading to and within the site shall be installed
underground.
M. A drive-in restaurant shall be connected to an approved and functioning
public water supply system and sanitary sewer system prior to the
issuance of any certificate of occupancy.
A. No area for outdoor sales or storage shall be located within the front
yard area or closer to the rear and side property lines than the required
rear yard and side yard setbacks for accessory buildings for the
particular zone, as established by this chapter.
B. The retailing of farm products raised off-site and transported to the
property in question for sale is permitted.
C. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the provisions
set forth in § 244-197.
D. The site shall not be located on a local street, as defined in § 244-6.
A. A statement shall be submitted with the application setting forth the full
particulars regarding the use, activities and building.
B. The lot upon which the use is proposed and the buildings shall conform
to the following minimum standards and requirements:
§ 244-118 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-120
1:1003
§ 244-121. Home occupations.
Home occupations may be permitted as a conditional use in those zoning
districts specified, provided that the lot, use and structure shall adhere to
the minimum standards of the particular zone and the following:
Requirements Lot
Lot requirements:
Lot area (acres) 5.0
Lot width (feet) 200
Lot frontage (feet) 200
Lot depth (feet) 250
Principal building requirements:
Front yard setback (feet) 100
Rear yard setback (feet) 50
Side yard setback, each side (feet) 50
Maximum building height (feet) 35
Accessory building requirements:
Front yard setback (feet) Not permitted in front yard
Rear yard setback (feet) 30
Side yard setback (feet) 30
Maximum building height (feet) 25
Maximum building coverage
(combined coverages of all principal
and accessory buildings)
25%
C. A minimum of 16 patient beds shall be provided.
D. Basement areas in health care facilities shall not be included in
calculating building height, nor shall these areas be utilized to house
patients or for recreation areas.
E. All health care facilities shall be licensed by and/or meet all applicable
standards of federal, state and county regulatory agencies.
A. There shall be no employees other than the bona fide residents of the
dwelling.
B. The portion of the dwelling utilized for the home occupation shall not
exceed 50% of the gross first floor area of the dwelling.
C. The occupation shall be conducted entirely within the dwelling or
within an accessory building or buildings.
§ 244-120 JACKSON CODE § 244-121
1:1004
§ 244-122. Home professional offices.
Home professional offices may be permitted as a conditional use in those
zoning districts specified, provided that the lot, use and structures shall
adhere to the minimum standards of the particular zone and the following:
D. There is no external display of goods or any outdoor activity or
advertising on the premises other than a nonilluminated identification
sign not to exceed 150 square inches.
E. No noise shall be audible to adjacent property owners or interfere with
the quiet enjoyment of their property.
F. The home occupation shall not adversely affect adjacent property
owners or interfere with their quiet enjoyment of their properties.
G. No use shall require internal or external alterations to the dwelling
unit.
H. No use shall involve construction features or the use of electrical or
mechanical equipment that would change the fire rating of the
structure.
I. No use shall be permitted which exceeds the maximum number of
occupants for which the dwelling has been constructed, as determined
by all applicable fire codes.
J. Resident employee parking shall not interfere with residential parking
on the street where the home occupation is permitted.
K. No firearms may be used in any form in said business, including repair
of nonfunctioning parts.
L. Not more than one home occupation shall be permitted per dwelling
unit.
A. Not more than one professional and one professional only, without
associates or partners, may utilize the office, except that one additional
professional may be permitted, provided that both professionals are
members of the same immediate family, which includes parents,
children and spouses only.
B. Not more than two persons may be employed as office personnel.
C. The portion of the dwelling devoted to professional office use shall not
exceed 30% of the total gross floor area of the dwelling.
D. The professional office use shall be conducted entirely within the
dwelling or within an accessory building or buildings.
E. There is no external display of goods or any outdoor activity or
advertising on the premises other than a nonilluminated identification
sign not to exceed 150 square inches.
§ 244-121 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-122
1:1005
§ 244-123. Hospitals; philanthropic or eleemosynary uses.
Hospitals and philanthropic or eleemosynary uses may be permitted as a
conditional use in those zoning districts specified, provided that the lot, use
and structures shall adhere to the following:
F. No noise shall be audible to adjacent property owners or interfere with
the quiet enjoyment of their property. The home professional office use
shall not adversely affect adjacent property owners or interfere with
their quiet enjoyment of their properties.
G. There shall be no outside storage of any kind related to the home
professional office use.
H. No home professional office use shall require internal or external
alterations to the dwelling unit.
I. No home professional office use shall involve construction features or
the use of electrical or mechanical equipment that would change the
fire rating of the structure.
J. Customer and employee parking shall not interfere with residential
parking on the street where the home professional office use is
permitted.
K. Not more than one home professional office use shall be permitted per
dwelling unit.
A. Minimum area, yard and building requirements:
Requirements Lot
Lot requirements:
Lot area (acres) 5.0
Lot width (feet) 200
Lot frontage (feet) 200
Lot depth (feet) 250
Principal building requirements:
Front yard setback (feet) 100
Rear yard setback (feet) 100
Side yard setback, each side (feet) 100
Maximum building height (feet) 100
Accessory building requirements:
Front yard setback (feet) Not permitted in front yard
Rear yard setback (feet) 50
Side yard setback (feet) 50
Maximum building height (feet) 25
§ 244-122 JACKSON CODE § 244-123
1:1006
§ 244-124. Hotels and motels.
Hotels and motels may be permitted as a conditional use in those zoning
districts specified, provided that the lot, use and structures shall adhere to
the following:
Requirements Lot
Maximum building coverage
(combined coverage of all principal
and accessory buildings)
25%
B. The site shall have frontage on and direct access to a major arterial or
minor arterial.
C. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements set forth in § 244-197.
D. The proposed use shall not be detrimental to the values of adjacent
properties.
E. A statement shall be submitted with the application setting forth the full
particulars regarding the use, activities and buildings.
A. Minimum area and yard requirements:
(1) Lot area. The required minimum lot area shall be two acres or the
minimum lot area required for the particular zone, whichever is
greater; however, in no case shall the minimum lot area per unit of
accommodation be less than 1,500 square feet.
(2) Lot width. The required minimum lot width shall be 200 feet or the
minimum lot width required for the particular zone, whichever is
greater.
(3) Lot frontage. The required minimum lot frontage shall be 200 feet
or the minimum lot frontage required for the particular zone,
whichever is greater.
(4) Lot depth. The required minimum lot depth shall be 200 feet or the
minimum lot depth required for the particular zone, whichever is
greater.
(5) Maximum building coverage (combined coverage of all principal
and accessory buildings). The maximum building coverage shall be
the same as permitted for the particular zone.
B. Principal building minimum requirements:
(1) Front yard, rear yard and side yard setbacks. The required
minimum front yard, rear yard and side yard setbacks for the
principal building shall be the same as required for the particular
zone.
§ 244-123 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-124
1:1007
(2) Building height. The height of the principal building may exceed
the maximum height requirement for the particular zoning district
within which the site is located; provided, however, that the front,
rear and side yard setback requirements set forth for the particular
zone shall each be increased by four feet for each foot by which the
height of the structure exceeds the maximum height permitted for
the particular zone, and further provided that in no case shall any
proposed structure exceed 50 feet in height.
C. Accessory building requirements:
(1) Setback requirements. No accessory building shall be located
within the front yard setback of the principal building required for
the particular zone. The required minimum rear yard and side yard
setbacks for an accessory building shall be the same for the
particular zone.
(2) Building height. The maximum height of an accessory building shall
be the same as permitted for the particular zone.
D. Off-street loading facilities shall be provided pursuant to § 244-196.
E. Off-street parking facilities shall be provided in accordance with the
provisions set forth in § 244-197.
F. A hotel/motel and all accessory buildings shall be connected to an
approved and functioning public water supply system and sanitary
sewer system prior to the issuance of any certificate of occupancy.
G. The required minimum number of units of accommodation shall be 20
units.
H. Permanent, on-site superintendent's living quarters shall be provided
within the principal building as the hotel/motel use. The
superintendent's living unit, however, shall not be counted toward the
required minimum number of units of accommodation.
I. A minimum of 10 units of accommodation shall be required in any
principal building.
J. No accessory building or structure shall be used as or contain, in whole
or in part, a unit of accommodation.
K. A unit of accommodation may contain efficiency facilities; provided,
however, that the applicant satisfactorily demonstrates the units
containing said facilities shall be utilized primarily for transients.
L. Each unit of accommodation shall contain a bathroom.
M. A restaurant may be permitted; however. if a restaurant is provided, it
shall be considered as an accessory use to the hotel/motel principal use
and shall be located within a principal building.
§ 244-124 JACKSON CODE § 244-124
1:1008
§ 244-125. Life care facility or development.
A life care facility or development may be permitted as a conditional use
in those zoning districts specified, provided that the lot, use and structures
shall adhere to the following:
N. Other accessory uses may be permitted on the same lot as the hotel/
motel principal use and may include but shall not be limited to a
swimming pool or other recreational facilities. These accessory uses
provided shall not be for use by the general public but shall be used
primarily by the guests of the hotel/motel. No additional on-site parking
shall be required for swimming pools; however, swimming pools shall
be subject to the requirements set forth in § 244-216A.
O. Landscaping, buffer areas and screening shall be provided in
accordance with the requirements set forth in § 244-193.
P. A statement shall be submitted with the application setting forth the full
particulars regarding the use, activities and buildings.
A. A statement shall be submitted with the application setting forth the full
particulars regarding the use, activities and buildings.
B. The site shall have frontage on and direct access to a major arterial or
minor arterial.
C. Minimum requirements; height.
(1) Minimum area, yard and building requirements:
Requirements Lot
Lot requirements:
Lot area (acres) 25.0
Lot width (feet) 200
Lot frontage (feet) 200
Lot depth (feet) 200
Principal building requirements:
Front yard setback (feet) 100
Rear yard setback (feet) 50
Side yard setback, each side
(feet)
50
Maximum building height [see
Subsection C(2) below] (feet)
—
§ 244-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-125
1:1009
Requirements Lot
Accessory building requirements
[NOTE: Accessory building
requirements shall be the same as
those established for the particular
zoning district within which the life
care facility or development is
located.]
—
Maximum building coverage
(combined coverage of all principal
and accessory buildings)
20%
(2) Maximum principal building height: 35 feet, subject to the
provisions set forth in § 244-156; provided, however, that the
height of a structure, or portion thereof, may exceed the maximum
as otherwise permitted, provided that the front, rear and side yard
requirements set forth above shall each be increased by five feet
for each foot by which the height of the structure, or part thereof,
exceeds the permitted maximum height, and further provided that
in no case shall any proposed structure, or part thereof, exceed
three usable floors and 40 feet in height, as defined in § 244-6 of
this chapter.
D. All support facilities, functions and services shall be intended for the
use and benefit of the resident users of the facility and their guests.
E. Health care and support services, functions and facilities within a life
care facility or development may include the following:
(1) Indoor and outdoor recreational facilities.
(2) Physical therapy facilities.
(3) Entertainment facilities.
(4) Libraries.
(5) Food preparation facilities.
(6) Dining facilities.
(7) Linen service facilities.
(8) Nursing service.
(9) Housekeeping service.
(10) Health care facilities and services, including nursing beds, security
facilities, administrative offices, storage facilities, chapels,
facilities for the temporary lodging of guests and limited service
facilities.
§ 244-125 JACKSON CODE § 244-125
1:1010
§ 244-126. Mini storage facility.
A mini storage facility may be permitted as a conditional use in the zoning
district specified, provided that the lot, use and structures shall adhere to
the following:
F. Parking facilities for the residents, employees and visitors of the life
care facility shall be provided based on a total of the following:
(1) One space per independent living unit.
(2) One space per six health care beds.
(3) One space per day-shift employee.
(4) One space per 10 independent living units for visitor parking.
G. The maximum permitted density shall be 12 dwelling units per acre. For
the purposes of computing density, each independent living unit shall
be considered one dwelling unit. Health care beds, either individually
or collectively, shall not be considered dwelling units.
H. Any health care facility shall be licensed by and/or meet all applicable
standards of federal, state or county regulatory agencies.
A. The site shall have frontage on and direct access to a major arterial or
minor arterial.
B. Minimum requirements.
(1) Minimum area, yard and building requirements:
Requirements Lot
Lot requirements:
Lot area (acres) 2.0
Lot width (feet) 175
Lot frontage (feet) 175
Lot depth (feet) 200
Principal building requirements:
Front yard setback (feet) 60
Rear yard setback (feet) 40
Side yard setback (feet) 40
Maximum building height (feet) 35
(2) Accessory building requirements shall be the same as those
established for the particular zoning district within which the mini
storage facility is located.
(3) The maximum permitted building coverage (combined coverage of
all principal and accessory buildings) shall be 30%.
§ 244-125 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-126
1:1011
§ 244-127. Natural production uses.
C. A landscaped buffer, a minimum of 25 feet in width shall be provided
along the property lines which abut a commercial use or zoning district.
D. A landscaped buffer, a minimum of 40 feet in width shall be provided
along the rear and side property lines which abut a residential use or
zoning district.
E. A minimum of 30 feet shall be provided between all buildings, when
more than one mini storage building is provided.
F. All access and on-site driveways and aisles shall be a minimum of 25
feet in width.
G. A dwelling unit, exclusively for the use and occupancy by the person or
persons managing the mini storage facility, may be provided. If such a
unit is provided, however, it shall be an accessory use. Such a unit shall
also be located within one of the principal buildings.
H. No hazardous, toxic or radioactive substance or material shall be stored
within any building or on the site.
I. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements set forth in § 244-197 for a business office and for a
dwelling unit, if provided. Additional parking may be required at the
discretion of the Planning Board.
A. Natural production uses may be permitted as a conditional use, in the
zoning district specified, for the excavation, mining and removal, for
commercial use or other disposition of sand, gravel, stone or other
natural mineral ore, provided that the lot, use and structures shall
adhere to the following:
(1) The owner of the premises making the application for such
conditional use shall file, with said application, a map indicating the
following:
(a) The exterior lines of the lands that will comprise the site of the
mining or other activities hereunder.
(b) The lot and block numbers of all adjoining lands as shown on
the Official Tax Map and identification of the owners thereof.
(c) The existence of a permanently established benchmark
approved by the Township Engineer.
(d) Contour lines showing elevations of the proposed mining site
at the time of the application.
(e) Proposed contour grades showing elevations from the intended
excavation, mining and removal of any natural mineral
deposits.
§ 244-126 JACKSON CODE § 244-127
1:1012
(f) The limits of the area to be mined or excavated.
(g) The location of all access roads and other roads adjoining the
property.
(h) The location of all slopes created by mining or excavation.
(i) The location of any artificial lakes that may be created as the
result of the mining or excavation activity.
(2) The application for a conditional use must specify the specific type
of activity for which such permit is requested, such as:
(a) Removal, excavation or other commercial disposition of sand,
gravel or stone.
(b) Excavation or removal for sale or other disposition of topsoil.
(c) The mining or excavation of materials such as mineral deposits
or ores or other mineral substances other than sand, gravel,
stone or topsoil.
(3) No conditional use shall be issued where the proposed area to be so
mined or excavated exceeds:
(a) In the case of mining for mineral substances other than sand,
gravel, stone or topsoil, an area of more than 400 acres.
(b) In the case of the excavation or removal of gravel, stone or
sand, 50 acres, and such excavation as shown on the map of
the proposed area shall not exceed a depth of 10 feet at any
point below the surface of any adjoining property or road.
(c) Where the use is for the removal of topsoil, an area of 10 acres.
(4) No natural production use shall be allowed if such use is within:
(a) Fifty feet of a boundary line of an adjoining property.
(b) One hundred feet of an existing residential dwelling.
(c) Fifty feet of a public street or road.
(5) In the case of an application for the mining or removal of gravel,
sand or stone, there must be an adequate access road to a public
road.
(6) Buffer strips of trees or hedges and/or screen fencing may be
required, if necessary to protect adjacent property from any
detrimental effects which could be caused by such use.
(7) It is ascertained by the Board that the proposed use or uses of the
proposed location will:
(a) Not adversely affect the value of adjacent properties.
§ 244-127 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-127
1:1013
§ 244-128. Public utilities.
Public utility uses, such as water towers, pumping stations, electric
substations, radio towers, transmission lines and switching stations, which
must be provided above ground, may be permitted as a conditional use in
those zoning districts specified, provided that the lot, use and structures
shall adhere to the following:
(b) Not impair the convenience, health, safety and character of the
areas adjacent to the proposed use.
(c) In no way be detrimental to the health, safety and general
welfare of the Township.
(d) Not adversely affect the coordinated and harmonious physical
development of the Township.
B. Notwithstanding the above, this section shall not abrogate the need to
obtain a soil removal permit or license pursuant to the requirements of
Chapter 185, Excavations, Mining and Dredging, of the Code of the
Township of Jackson.
A. A statement shall be submitted with the application setting forth the
reasons that the proposed installation must be provided above ground
in a specific location and why it is necessary and convenient for the
efficiency of the public utility system or for the satisfactory and
convenient provision of service by the utility to the neighborhood or
area in which the particular use is to be located.
B. The proposed use shall be located on a lot of not less than 20,000
square feet in area.
C. All of the building setback and coverage requirements of the particular
zone within which the site is located shall be met, except that no front
yard, rear yard or side yard setback of any structure shall be less than
125% of the height of the structure.
D. The design of any building in connection with such facility shall
conform to the general character of the area and shall not adversely
affect the safe and comfortable enjoyment of property rights of the zone
in which it is located.
E. Adequate and attractive fences and other safety devices shall be
provided.
F. Sufficient landscaping, including shrubs, trees and lawn shall be
provided and maintained on a regular basis.
G. No service or storage yards shall be permitted in any zone.
§ 244-127 JACKSON CODE § 244-129
1:1014
§ 244-129. Quasi-public and private club recreation areas.
Quasi-public or private club buildings and recreation areas, including
clubhouses, parks, playgrounds, tennis courts, swimming pools and other
such activities, may be permitted as a conditional use in those zoning
districts specified, provided that the lot, use and structures shall adhere to
the following:
§ 244-130. Recycling activity centers.
Recycling activity centers may be permitted as a conditional use in the
zoning district specified, provided that the lot, use and structure shall
adhere to the following:
A. A statement shall be submitted with the application setting forth the full
particulars regarding the use, activities and buildings.
B. The required minimum lot area shall be one acre.
C. All of the building setback and height requirements of the particular
zone within which the site is located shall be met.
D. The maximum permitted building coverage shall be 25%.
E. The required minimum unoccupied open space shall be 35%.
F. No parking area or recreation area shall be located closer than 50 feet
to a rear or side property line.
G. Swimming pools shall be subject to provisions set forth in § 244-216A of
this chapter.
H. For uses other than swimming pools, off-street parking requirements
shall be determined by the Planning Board, except that the off-street
parking requirements shall be not less than the requirements under
§ 244-197.
A. The intent and purpose of a recycling activity center is to provide for
the concentration and centralization of recycling development activity.
B. Site criteria.
(1) The site of a recycling activity center shall be located east of Ocean
County Route 547, south of the Central Railroad of New Jersey
easement and northwest of the Manchester Township municipal
boundary.
(2) The site shall front on a county road or other road classified as a
major arterial.
(3) The minimum tract size shall be 30 acres.
C. Uses permitted as part of a recycling activity center.
(1) Office: general, professional and commercial.
§ 244-129 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-130
1:1015
(2) Laboratories: research and testing.
(3) Industrial, manufacturing and recycling activities subject to the
performance standards set forth in § 244-160.
(4) Crushing of reclaimed asphalt and concrete products.
(5) Recycling stumps through grinding and the manufacturing of wood
chips.
(6) Asphalt processing plant and/or asphalt plant utilizing reclaimed
asphalt products.
(7) Warehouse and storage facilities.
(8) Trucking terminals.
(9) The use of heavy equipment used in the operation or outside
storage of materials.
(10) Outside storage of materials.
(11)Off-street parking facilities.
(12) Signs.
(13) Other uses, buildings and structures customarily associated with a
recycling activity center.
D. Prohibited uses. Those uses which are not specifically set forth in
§ 244-130C above shall be strictly prohibited as part of a recycling
activity center.
E. Master development plan.
(1) An applicant for a recycling activity center shall submit a master
development plan to the Planning Board for review and approval.
(2) The master development plan shall be accompanied by all required
application forms and fees, as set forth in § 244-12.
(3) Details of the recycling activity center shall be shown on the master
development plan as set forth in § 244-130E(1).
F. Construction of improvements. No land disturbance shall occur, nor
shall any improvements, buildings or other structures be installed or
constructed on the site, without a site plan approved by the Jackson
Township Planning Board.
G. Development controls.
(1) The minimum required setback for all buildings and structures of a
recycling activity center shall be 100 feet from all property lines.
(2) A buffer, a minimum of 50 feet in width, shall be provided around
the entire tract perimeter of a recycling activity center. Screening
§ 244-130 JACKSON CODE § 244-130
1:1016
§ 244-131. Truck terminals.
Truck terminals may be permitted as a conditional use in the zoning district
specified, provided that the lot, use and structures shall adhere to the
following:
and plantings within said buffer shall be determined by the
Planning Board. The buffer area shall remain unoccupied, except
for on-site access roads or utilities. No storage of materials or
disposal areas shall be permitted within the buffer area.
(3) Where a tract containing a recycling activity center abuts a
residential zoning district or a residential use, a buffer a minimum
of 100 feet in width shall be provided along the common property
with said residential zone or use. Supplemental screening and
landscaping shall be required, if deemed necessary by the Planning
Board. The buffer area shall remain unoccupied, except for utilities.
No storage of materials or disposal areas shall be permitted within
the buffer area.
A. The required minimum lot area shall be three acres.
B. Principal building and accessory building requirements and other lot
bulk requirements for the particular zone within which the site is
located shall apply.
C. The required minimum unoccupied open space shall be 35%.
D. No trucks shall be parked, stored or otherwise maneuvered within the
front yard setback area.
E. A heavily landscaped buffer area, a minimum of 25 feet in width, shall
be provided along all rear and side property lines, where the parking,
storing or maneuvering of trucks shall be prohibited.
F. Trucks, including tractor or trailer units, parked or stored on the lot
shall be arranged in an orderly manner in allocated spaces, as shown on
an approved site plan.
G. Trailer units shall be parked or stored only on paved surfaces, and
concrete surfaces shall be required under trailer support devices (e.g.,
crank-down wheels or pads).
H. All repair and service operations shall take place within completely
enclosed buildings in compliance with setback requirements for the
zone.
I. At least 10% of the area devoted to truck parking and storage shall be
landscaped. The landscaping should be located in protected areas along
walkways, center islands and at the ends of bays.
§ 244-130 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-132
1:1017
§ 244-132. Veterinary clinics, hospitals or animal care facilities.
Veterinary clinics, hospitals or animal care facilities may be permitted as
a conditional use in those zoning districts specified, provided that the lot,
use and structures shall adhere to the minimum standards of the particular
zone and the following:
§ 244-133. Professional offices. [Added 12-23-2002 by Ord. No.
50-02]
Professional offices may be permitted as conditional uses in all non-
Pinelands residential zoning districts subject to the following conditions:
A. No building or area used for kennels, pens or runs shall be located
closer than:
(1) One hundred feet to the front property line;
(2) Fifty feet from the rear and side property lines; and
(3) One hundred fifty feet to any off-site dwelling.
B. Sufficient space shall be provided indoors for all animals kept at the
facility, and no animals may be kept out of doors between 9:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m.
C. Detailed plans and proposals for sanitary sewage and solid waste
disposal shall be submitted to the Planning Board.
D. Provisions shall be made for noise control which, as a minimum, shall
include:
(1) Soundproofing of all enclosed structures.
(2) Noise baffles or dense screening and landscaping of all outside
pens, kennels, cages and runs.
(3) Secondary buffer plantings between pens, kennels, cages and runs
and any exterior property line buffer strip when required by the
Planning Board.
E. All such facilities shall be licensed by and/or meet all applicable
standards of federal, state or county regulatory agencies.
F. In residential zones, the veterinary clinic, hospital or animal care
facility shall be accessory to a permitted detached single-family
dwelling.
A. The property must have frontage along one of the following county
rights-of-way:
(1) County Route 528.
(2) County Route 526.
§ 244-132 JACKSON CODE § 244-133
1:1018
§ 244-133.1. Solar energy facilities. [Added 8-12-2014 by Ord. No.
13-14]
Solar energy facilities may be permitted as a conditional use in those zoning
districts specified, provided the following standards are met:
(3) County Route 547.
(4) County Route 527.
(5) County Route 537.
(6) County Route 571.
B. The bulk regulations as specified in the NC Zoning District shall apply
with the following exceptions:
(1) Minimum lot size: 30,000 feet.
(2) The building or parking setback from any property line common to
a lot which is residentially zoned shall be increased by a thirty-fivefoot
buffer area containing plantings, fencing and land forms
sufficient to visually screen the nonresidential use.
A. Public service infrastructure necessary to support the solar energy
facility is available, or can be provided without any off-site development
in the PA, FA-1, FA-2 or FA-3 Zone;
B. The solar energy facility, including any proposed off-site infrastructure,
shall be located and screened in such a way as to minimize visual
impacts as viewed from the Toms River, publicly dedicated roads and
highways, low-intensity recreational facilities and campgrounds and
existing residential dwellings on contiguous parcels;
C. Should the development of new or expansion of existing nonsite or offsite
infrastructure be necessary to accommodate the solar energy
facility, clearing shall be limited to that which is necessary to
accommodate the use. New rights-of-way shall be limited to a maximum
width of 20 feet, unless additional width is necessary to address specific
safety or reliability concerns; and
D. Any solar energy facility shall be decommissioned within 12 months of
the cessation of its utilization. Decommissioning shall include:
(1) Removal of all energy facilities, structures and equipment,
including any subsurface wires and footings, from the parcel;
(2) Restoration of the parcel in accordance with § 244-79B(4), unless
restoration is unnecessary because the parcel is to be put into
active agricultural use or approved for development in accordance
with this chapter within that twelve-month period; and
§ 244-133 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-133.1
1:1019
(3) Any other measures necessary to address ecological and visual
impacts associated with the solar energy facility, including the
removal of off-site infrastructure and restoration of affected lands.
§ 244-133.1 JACKSON CODE § 244-133.1
1:1020
ARTICLE IX
Nonconforming Uses, Lots, Buildings and Structures
§ 244-134. Continuance.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the lawful use of the land or a
building or structure existing at the date of the adoption of this chapter may
be continued, although such use, building or structure does not conform to
the regulations specified by this chapter for the zone in which such land,
building or structure is located; provided, however, that:
§ 244-135. Lots and structures rendered nonconforming. [Added
4-25-1994 by Ord. No. 9-94]
No previously conforming lot or structure shall be deemed nonconforming
with respect to lot area or front or side building setback under the
provisions of this chapter if said lot or structure shall have been rendered
nonconforming by property acquisition or condemnation of the county or
municipality, and further provided that any structure rendered
nonconforming with respect to a side or front yard setback by such
acquisition or condemnation may be expanded, provided that such
expansion into required setback area shall not extend closer to any property
line than the existing structure. The provisions of this section shall not be
applicable in the event that such acquisition or condemnation shall reduce
the actual lot area or building setback(s) by more than 50% of that required
pursuant to this chapter.
§ 244-136. Abandonment.
A nonconforming use shall be presumed to be abandoned when there occurs
a cessation of such use or activity by an apparent act or failure on the
part of the tenant or owner to reinstate such use within a period of one
year from the date of cessation or discontinuance. Such use shall not
thereafter be reinstated, and the structure shall not be reoccupied, except
in conformance with this chapter.
§ 244-137. Restoration. [Amended 3-23-2010 by Ord. No. 10-10]
A. No nonconforming lot shall be further reduced in size.
B. No nonconforming building or structure shall be enlarged, extended or
increased unless such enlargement is conforming.
C. No nonconforming use may be expanded.
A. If any nonconforming building or structure shall be destroyed by reason
of windstorm, fire, explosion or act of God or otherwise to an extent of
more than partial destruction as provided for in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-68,
then such destruction shall be deemed complete destruction, and the
structure may not be rebuilt, restored or repaired, except in conformity
with the regulations of this chapter. Nothing in this chapter shall
§ 244-134 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-137
1:1021
§ 244-138. Reversion.
No nonconforming use shall, if once changed to a conforming use, be
changed back again to a nonconforming use.
§ 244-139. Alterations.
A nonconforming building or structure may be altered, but not enlarged
or extended, during its life to an extent not exceeding, in the aggregate,
50% of the market value, unless said building or structure is changed to a
building or structure conforming to the requirements of this chapter.
§ 244-140. Prior approved construction.
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans,
construction or designated use of a building or structure for which a
building permit has been heretofore issued and substantial construction has
taken place prior to the date of the adoption of this chapter.
prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any wall,
floor or roof which has been declared unsafe by the Construction
Official.
B. Any nonconforming building, structure or use which has been damaged
by fire, explosion, flood, windstorm or act of God shall be examined by
the following three people:
(1) The Construction Code Official.
(2) The owner or an architect or engineer selected by the owner.
(3) A third person, agreed to by the Construction Code Official and the
owner, whose fee shall be paid by the owner. [Amended 2-8-2011
by Ord. No. 01-11]
C. If, in the opinion of the majority of the above three people, the value of
repairing the condition is 50% or greater of the total market value of
replacing the entire structure, it shall be considered destroyed and may
be rebuilt to the original specifications only upon approval of any
variance and/or site plan required by state statutes. [Amended
2-8-2011 by Ord. No. 01-11]
D. Where the value of repairing the condition is determined to be less than
50% of the value of replacing the entire structure, the nonconforming
structure or use may be rebuilt and used for the same purpose as
before, provided that it does not exceed the height, area and bulk of the
original structure.
E. The percent damaged shall be the current replacement costs of the
portion damaged, computed as a percentage of the current
replacement cost of the entire structure, and shall not include the cost
of the foundation unless the foundation is damaged or condemned.
§ 244-137 JACKSON CODE § 244-141
1:1022
§ 244-141. District boundary changes.
Whenever the boundaries of a district shall be changed so as to transfer
an area from one district to another district of a different classification,
the provisions of this chapter shall also apply to any nonconforming uses,
buildings or structures existing therein or created thereby.161
§ 244-142. Lots of record. [Added 6-14-2011 by Ord. No. 20-11]
Where a residential nonconforming lot was previously created by a
subdivision approved by the Jackson Township Planning Board, and where
such lot was located in the R-1 Residential Zone, and where such lot was a
conforming lot at the time of such subdivision approval, and where a singlefamily
home was developed on such lot, such residence may be expanded
and accessory structures may be constructed as long as same shall be in
conformance with § 244-47, R-1 Residential Zone, provided that:
§ 244-143. R-3 Zone accessory building requirements. [Added
9-16-1991 by Ord. No. 34-91; amended 12-23-2002 by Ord. No.
50-02]
On lots of record with preexisting single-family dwellings of three acres or
less within the R-3 Zone at the time of the adoption of this chapter, those
lots will have the same accessory building requirements as those specified
under § 244-142B above.
§ 244-144. Expansion of nonconforming structures. [Added
7-27-1992 by Ord. No. 14-92; amended 5-10-1993 by Ord. No.
21-93]
In the non-Pinelands portion of the Township, a preexisting detached singlefamily
dwelling and/or accessory structure thereto, which is nonconforming
with respect to a required setback or setbacks, may be expanded, provided
that the proposed expansion into a required yard area shall not extend
closer to the property line than the preexisting structure. Nothing in this
A. At the time of and since the adoption of the ordinance making such lot
nonconforming, the owner of the lot did not own adjoining property
which may be (have been) used to cause such lot to become a
conforming lot; and
B. The required front yard, side yard and rear yard setbacks are met as
required in the R-1 Residential Zone; and
C. Said lot shall have a minimum area of 43,560 square feet; and
D. This section shall apply only to the non-Pinelands area of Jackson
Township.
161. Editor's Note: Original § 109-130.1, Lots of record, of the 1972 Code, as amended, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed 11-9-2010 by Ord. No. 36-10.
§ 244-141 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-144
1:1023
subsection shall be construed to exempt required compliance with
§ 244-137.
§ 244-144 JACKSON CODE § 244-144
1:1024
ARTICLE X
General Provisions
§ 244-145. Conflict with other laws.
Any restrictions or requirements with respect to buildings, structures or
land which appear in other ordinances of the Township of Jackson or are
established by law and which are greater than those set forth herein shall
take precedence over the provisions of this chapter.
§ 244-146. Application of regulations.
Except as herein otherwise provided:
§ 244-147. Accessory buildings.
Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, accessory buildings shall
conform to the following regulations as to their locations on the lot:
A. No building or structure shall be erected and no existing building or
structure shall be moved, altered, added to or enlarged, nor shall any
land, building or structure be designed, used or intended to be used, for
any purposes or in any manner other than as specified among the uses
listed herein as permitted in the zone in which such building, structure
or land is located.
B. No building or structure shall be erected, no existing buildings or
structures shall be altered, enlarged or rebuilt, nor shall any open
space surrounding any building or structure be encroached upon or
reduced in any manner, except in conformity with the yard, lot area and
building location regulations herein designated for the zone in which
such building, structure or open space is located.
C. No off-street parking area or loading or unloading area provided to
meet the minimum off-street parking, loading or unloading
requirements for one use or structure shall be considered as providing
off-street parking, loading or unloading area for a use or structure on
any other lot, unless specifically permitted elsewhere in this chapter.
D. No subdivision may be approved unless each lot contained in said
subdivision complies with all the requirements of the zone in which said
lot is located or unless a variance has been granted therefrom.
E. No use shall be considered a permitted use or a conditional use in a
zoning district unless included as such in the particular zoning district.
A. Detached accessory buildings shall be located in other than a front yard
and, if located in a side or rear yard area, shall conform to side or rear
setback requirements of this chapter for the particular zoning district.
B. Accessory buildings shall occupy not more than 25% of the rear or side
yard area in any residential zone.
§ 244-145 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-147
1:1025
§ 244-148. Animals.
Animals shall be a permitted use in any residential zone; provided, however,
that they adhere to the following:
§ 244-149. Appearance of nonresidential buildings.
The exterior elevations shall be arranged, and outer walls of nonresidential
buildings shall be faced with materials approved by the municipal agency in
conjunction with site plan approval. The architecture of all buildings shall
be compatible with structures on adjacent lands and in the neighborhood.
§ 244-150. Appearance of residential structures.
No residential structure, be it manufactured or otherwise, shall be located,
placed or erected unless such structure shall have a finished elevation
which gives the same appearance as a residence that has been constructed
on a foundation. Manufactured detached single-family homes (dwellings)
shall be permitted to the same extent and subject to the same restrictions
as nonmanufactured homes, provided that the manufactured home is not
less than 22 feet wide upon final assembly of the sections, is located on a
permanent foundation and is to be constructed on a conforming lot the title
to which is held by the manufactured homeowner.
§ 244-151. Appearance of single- and two-family dwellings.
Within any residential district, no building with a permitted home
professional office or home occupation shall be constructed or altered so as
to be inharmonious to the residential character of adjacent structures. The
types of construction not considered to be residential in character include
but shall not be limited to storefront type of construction; garage doors
larger than needed for passenger vehicles or light commercial vehicles and
unfinished concrete blocks or cinder block wall surfaces.
§ 244-152. Bulk storage.
In zoning districts where bulk storage is a permitted accessory use, the
following minimum requirements shall apply:
C. No detached accessory structure in any residential zone shall be less
than 10 feet from the principal building.
A. The minimum health standards established and administered by the
Jackson Township Board of Health.
B. They are not for commercial use.
C. The provisions of Chapter 98, Animals, of the Code of the Township of
Jackson.
§ 244-147 JACKSON CODE § 244-152
1:1026
§ 244-153. Contiguous lot ownership.
Except as otherwise provided pursuant to § 244-142, where two or more
lots, created by the filing of a map pursuant to the Map Filing Law162 prior
to establishment of subdivision review by the Jackson Township Planning
Board, have any contiguous lines and are in single ownership and one or
more of the lots is nonconforming in any aspect, the lots involved shall be
considered to be an undivided parcel for the purposes of this chapter, and
no portion of said parcel shall be conveyed or divided except through the
filing of an approved subdivision in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 244-154. Floodplain management.
A. No bulk storage of materials or equipment shall be permitted in any
required front yard area or within 100 feet of any public street,
whichever is greater.
B. No bulk storage of materials or equipment shall be permitted between
any side or rear lot line and the required side or rear setback line.
C. All bulk storage areas shall be screened from public view by means of
suitable fencing and/or evergreen plantings as required by the
municipal agency. Where property is adjacent to a residential zone, the
screening shall meet the minimum requirements established by
§ 244-193.
D. No fence used to screen a bulk storage area shall be placed closer to
any property line than the distance constituting the required front, side
or rear setbacks, and all setback areas shall be landscaped in
accordance with the requirements of § 244-193.
E. All service roads, driveways and bulk storage areas shall be paved with
bituminous concrete or other surfacing materials, as required by the
municipal agency, which shall be of sufficient strength to handle the
anticipated use.
F. In no instance shall on-site bulk storage of material exceed the height of
10 feet.
G. No heavy equipment shall be operated or parked closer to the front
property line than the required front setback plus 50 feet, except as the
same may be in transit to or from the site.
A. All new construction and substantial improvements to residential
structures shall have the lowest floor, including basements, elevated to
or above the base flood level, unless the Township is granted an
exception by the Federal Insurance Administration for the allowance of
basements and/or storm cellars.
162. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.
§ 244-152 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-154
1:1027
B. All new construction or substantial improvements to nonresidential
structures shall have the lowest floor, including basements, elevated to
or above the base flood level or, together with attendant utility and
sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the
structure is watertight, with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water and with structural components having the capability
of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of
buoyancy. Where floodproofing is utilized for structures constructed
below the base flood elevation, a registered New Jersey professional
engineer and/or architect shall certify that the floodproofing methods
are adequate to withstand the flood depths, pressure, velocities, impact
and uplift forces and other factors associated with the base flood. The
Construction Official shall maintain a record of such certificates
indicating the specific elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which
such structures are floodproofed.
C. Plans submitted with applications for building permits for all new
construction or substantial improvements to residential and
nonresidential structures on land having an elevation of less than the
base flood elevation and/or within any A Zone, as shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Maps of the Federal Insurance Administration, shall
include the elevation of the first finished floor and the elevation of the
basement or cellar, where provided. Data shall be United States Coast
and Geodetic Survey data (MSL-0), and the source of data shall be
noted. The Construction Official shall maintain a record of all such first
finished floor, basement and cellar elevations submitted.
D. Prior to the issuance of any building permit on land located within an
unnumbered A Zone as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps of the
Federal Insurance Administration, the applicant shall undertake and
submit such studies as are necessary to determine the base flood
elevation.
E. Whenever an applicant proposes to alter or relocate a watercourse, he
shall notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection and submit copies of such notification to the
Federal Insurance Administration. The design of the alteration or
relocation of any watercourse shall be required to demonstrate that the
flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse is maintained.
F. All mobile homes located on land having an elevation less than the base
flood elevation shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral
movement by providing over-the-top and frame ties to ground anchors.
Specific requirements shall be as follows:
(1) Over-the-top ties shall be provided at each of the four corners of the
mobile home, with two additional ties per side at intermediate
locations, and mobile homes less than 50 feet long shall require one
additional tie per side.
§ 244-154 JACKSON CODE § 244-154
1:1028
(2) Frame ties shall be provided at each corner of the home, with five
additional ties per side at intermediate points, and mobile homes
less than 50 feet long shall require four additional ties per side.
(3) All components of the anchoring system shall be capable of
carrying a force of 4,800 pounds.
(4) Any additions to the mobile home shall be similarly anchored.
G. Any expansion to existing mobile home parks, or in existing mobile
home parks where the repair, reconstruction or improvement of the
streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50% of the value of the
streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or
improvement has commenced, located on land having an elevation
below the base flood elevation, shall make provision that stands or lots
are elevated on compacted fill or on pilings so that the lowest floor of
the mobile home will be at or above the base flood level, adequate
surface drainage and access for a hauler are provided and, in the
instance of elevation on pilings, lots are large enough to permit steps,
piling foundations are placed in stable soil no more than 10 feet apart
and reinforcement is provided for pilings more than six feet above the
ground level.
H. All mobile homes, not within mobile home parks, which are located on
land having an elevation below the base flood elevation shall make
provision that stands or lots are elevated on compacted fill or on pilings
so that the lowest floor of the mobile home will be at or above the base
flood level, adequate surface drainage and access for a hauler are
provided and, in the instance of elevation on pilings, lots are large
enough to permit steps, piling foundations are placed in stable soil no
more than 10 feet apart and reinforcement is provided for piers more
than six feet above ground level.
I. No alteration or removal of natural vegetation which would increase
potential flood damage shall be permitted.
J. No building, structure or use shall be permitted within floodways or
flood hazard areas.
K. With any application for development on land located within a floodway
and/or having an elevation of less than the base flood elevation, the
municipal agency shall require that the applicant submit a plan,
certified by a registered New Jersey professional engineer and/or
registered architect, of the flood-protection measures to be taken. Such
flood protection measures shall include, where applicable, the
following:
(1) Anchoring to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
(2) Installation of watertight doors, bulkheads and shutters or similar
methods of construction to protect against winds or wave action.
§ 244-154 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-154
1:1029
§ 244-155. Frontage on improved street.
(3) Reinforcement of walls to resist water pressures.
(4) Use of paint, membranes or mortars to reduce seepage of water
through walls.
(5) Addition of mass or weight to structures to prevent flotation or
lateral movement.
(6) Installation of pumps to lower water levels in structures.
(7) Construction of water supply and waste treatment systems so as to
prevent the infiltration of floodwaters.
(8) Pumping facilities or comparable practices for subsurface drainage
system for buildings to relieve external foundation wall and
basement flood pressures.
(9) Construction to resist rupture or collapse caused by water pressure
or floating debris.
(10) Installation of valves or controls on sanitary and storm drains
which will permit the drains to be closed to prevent backup of
sewage and stormwaters into the buildings or structures. Gravity
drainage of basements may be eliminated by mechanical devices.
(11) Location of all electrical equipment, circuits and installed electrical
appliances in a manner which will assure that they are not subject
to flooding and to provide protection for inundation by the base
flood.
(12) Location of any structural storage facilities for chemicals,
explosives, buoyant materials, flammable liquids or other toxic
materials which could be hazardous to public health, safety and
welfare in a manner which will assure that the facilities are
situated at elevations above the base flood elevation or are
adequately floodproofed to prevent flotation of storage containers
or damage to storage containers which could result in the escape of
toxic materials into floodwaters.
(13) Location and construction of parking areas and access drives to
permit safety of access for emergency vehicles in times of flood.
A. Except as otherwise provided in Subsection C, every principal building
shall be built upon a lot with frontage upon a street improved to meet
the Township requirements for improved public streets or for which
such improvement has been guaranteed by the posting of a
performance guaranty pursuant to this chapter, unless relief has been
granted under the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36.
B. Where a building lot has frontage on a street which the Master Plan of
the Township indicates is proposed for right-of-way widening, the
§ 244-154 JACKSON CODE § 244-155
1:1030
required front yard setback shall be measured from such proposed
right-of-way line.
C. A single-family residential dwelling shall be permitted to be built upon a
lot on a public street which is semi-improved, provided that the
following terms and conditions are complied with:
(1) The Township Engineer shall determine that the right-of-way of
such street abutting such lot is of the width herein required and
will allow for the future installation of curbs. In certifying
conformance with the foregoing, the Township Engineer shall
consider the potential availability of a right-of-way from property
owners directly opposite from the lot in question and for the entire
length of such semi-improved street so as to allow for the future
orderly development of the immediate area and the street.
(2) The lot upon which a building is proposed shall have access along a
semi-improved street to the public street system of the Township.
Nothing herein shall prevent a property owner from improving an
unimproved roadway to the status of a semi-improved roadway in
order to comply with this requirement.
(3) As used in this subsection, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
IMPROVED PUBLIC STREET — A street meeting all of the
following requirements:
SEMI-IMPROVED PUBLIC STREET — A street meeting all of the
following requirements:
(a) A dedicated public right-of-way of at least 33 feet.
Constructed with a suitable base and a hard surface treatment
of 24 feet in width.
(b)
Surface to be free of potholes with sufficient drainage so as to
avoid flooding or ponding of water. Drainage easements may
be required for this purpose from any applicant.
(c)
A dedicated right-of-way of at least 33 feet in width with a
traveled surface sufficiently wide so as to permit two motor
vehicles traveling in opposite directions on it to safely pass
each other, with a minimum of six inches of road gravel surface
of at least 24 feet in width over a suitable subbase.
(a)
Such gravel surface shall be free of potholes, with sufficient
drainage to avoid ponding, causing it to be passable to all
vehicles, including emergency and fire apparatus, at all times
of the year.
(b)
(4) Procedures:
§ 244-155 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-155
1:1031
(a) The applicant for a building permit on a semi-improved street
must receive from the Township Engineer a certification, in
writing, that said semi-improved street, as herein defined,
provides access from said lot to the presently existing public
street system and that the portion of the semi-improved street
upon which the lot abuts conforms to the provisions of the
foregoing Subsection C(3). Said certification must be received
prior to the issuance of a building permit and must be secured
at the sole expense of the applicant, which will include all
reasonable legal, engineering and inspection fees as shall be
necessary. An initial escrow fee of $500 shall be deposited with
the Township prior to any such inspection by the Township
Engineer, which initial deposit shall defray all or a part of the
actual cost of such inspections and estimates by the Township
Engineer and the review of the Township Attorney, as set forth
herein.
(b) In the event that a certification is granted by the Township
Engineer to the applicant, the Township Engineer shall
prepare an estimate of the cost of improving the semiimproved
street and shall also include the projected cost of
installing curbing and that portion of anticipated off-site
drainage necessitated by this construction.
(c) Before receiving a permit for construction of a single-family
residential dwelling on a semi-improved public street, an
applicant must comply with any one of the following
requirements:
[1] The applicant shall improve that portion of the semiimproved
street (full width) upon which the lot abuts, from
lot line to lot line, to the status of an improved street, with
a hard surface, curbing and drainage.
[2] The applicant shall deposit with the Township a cash
deposit or a performance guaranty with sufficient surety in
favor of the Township in a form approved by the Township
Attorney in amount of the estimate prepared by the
Township Engineer, which deposit or guaranty shall be
held by the Township until the improvement to the street is
completed by the applicant or until the Township deems, in
its discretion, that the semi-improved street shall be fully
improved by the Township. The deposit or guaranty so held
by the Township shall be used only to defray the cost of
improving the roadway to Township specifications and for
off-site drainage. In the event that the actual cost of
constructing and fully improving a semi-improved street
by the Township exceeds the amount of any deposit or
guaranty deposited with the Township, any additional sum
shall also be the responsibility of the owner of said lot and
§ 244-155 JACKSON CODE § 244-155
1:1032
§ 244-156. Height limitations.
§ 244-157. Noncommercial radio and television antennas.
may be collected by the Township by way of assessment or
by other means available to the Township.
[3] The applicant shall sign an agreement to be recorded in
the Ocean County Clerk's office acknowledging the
obligation of the applicant, or the applicant's successors
and assigns, to improve that portion of the semi-improved
street upon which the applicant's property abuts to the
status of an improved public street as defined above. This
agreement shall acknowledge that in the event that
improvement is not made by the applicant or the
applicant's successors or assigns, the Township shall have
the right to improve the public street or roadway as a local
improvement and to assess the cost of the improvement to
all properties abutting the street which will benefit by the
improvements thereof, such assessment to be made as an
assessment for a local improvement pursuant to law. In
addition, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy,
the applicant shall submit to the Township Attorney for
approval a deed for said property containing or
referencing the recorded road agreement. Proof of the
recording of the deed containing such provisions shall be
required prior to the issuance of the certificate of
occupancy. The Construction Code Official shall also cause
the certificate of occupancy to specifically reference the
recorded road agreement and deed.
A. No structure shall extend higher than the limit provided in each zone
created hereunder for building height.
B. The height limitations created hereunder shall not apply to spires,
belfries, cupolas or domes not used for human occupancy or to
parapets, walls or cornices extending not more than four feet above the
building height limit.
C. The height limitations created hereunder shall apply to chimneys,
ventilators, skylights, stair towers, elevator towers, appurtenances
usually carried above the roof level and noncommercial radio and
television antennas attached to a building, except that same may
exceed said height limitation by not more than 15 feet, except that
skylights, heating and air-conditioning equipment and ventilators may
exceed the height limitation by no more than six feet. Such features
shall not exceed, in total coverage, 20% of the total roof area.
D. Freestanding noncommercial radio and television antennas, flagpoles
and windmills may exceed the height limits created hereunder by not
more than 15 feet.
§ 244-155 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-157
1:1033
§ 244-158. Outdoor display of goods. [Amended 10-29-2019 by Ord.
No. 27-19]
§ 244-159. Outdoor storage of materials.
No person shall store materials of any kind outdoors in any district, except
for the construction of a structure to be erected on the premises, unless
specifically permitted elsewhere in this chapter.
A. Freestanding radio and television antennas shall only be placed in the
rear yard area and shall be located at least 15 feet from the rear lot line
and 15 feet from the side lot line or at least at the required side yard
setback for the particular zoning district in which the lot is located,
whichever is greater.
B. Freestanding antennas exceeding 20 feet in height or antennas
extending 20 feet above the point of attachment to a building shall be
built to withstand winds of at least 100 miles per hour.
A. Outdoor sales displays in accordance with this section shall be
permitted in the LC, HC, NC, MUNC, CR-1 Zones. Retail and/or
wholesale business uses shall not display goods for sale, including
motor vehicles, outdoors except in accordance with a site plan
approved by the municipal agency or for temporary sidewalk or other
types of outdoor sales, in accordance with a permit which may be issued
by the Zoning Officer in accordance with the following:
(1) All applications for outdoor displays of goods shall include plans or
layouts for the temporary sale.
(2) No temporary sidewalk or outdoor sale permit shall be issued for a
period of more than 21 days.
(3) No more than four temporary sidewalk or outdoor sales permits
shall be issued for a retail and/or wholesale business in any
calendar year.
(4) Any temporary outdoor sale located in a designated parking area
shall be adequately protected from vehicular traffic.
(5) No impediment to the free flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic
shall be created by the outdoor sales display.
B. Notwithstanding the general prohibition of obstructions in a front yard
area set forth in § 244-6, goods for sale which are displayed or stored
outdoors may be located in a front yard area for the duration of a permit
granted under this section, however the sale display shall not be
located within any required front setback area or within any sight
triangle area.
§ 244-157 JACKSON CODE § 244-160
1:1034
§ 244-160. Performance standards.
As a condition of approval and the continuance of any use, occupancy of
any building or structure and operation of any process or equipment, the
applicant shall supply evidence, satisfactory to the municipal agency or to
its designated representative, that the proposed use, building or structure,
process or equipment will conform fully to all of the applicable performance
standards. As evidence of compliance, the municipal agency may require
certification of tests by appropriate government agencies or by recognized
testing laboratories, any costs thereof to be borne by the applicant. The
municipal agency may require that specific types of equipment, machinery
or devices be installed or that specific operating procedures or methods
be followed if the government agencies or testing laboratories examining
the proposed operation shall determine that the use of such specific types
of machinery, equipment, devices, procedures or methods are required in
order to assure compliance with the applicable performance standards.
Permits and certificates required by other government agencies shall be
submitted to the municipal agency as proof of compliance with applicable
codes. The municipal agency may require that instruments and/or other
devices or professional reports or laboratory analysis be used to determine
compliance with the following performance standards for an existing or
proposed use, and the cost thereof shall be borne by the owner, applicant or
specific use in question:
A. Conditional permit.
(1) In the event that a determination cannot be made at the time of
application that a proposed use, process or piece of equipment will
meet the standards established in this chapter, the municipal
agency may issue or may recommend issuance of a conditional
permit. The conditional permit would be based on submission of
evidence that the proposed use, process or equipment will meet the
standards established herein after completion or installation and
during operation.
(2) Within 30 days after a conditional permit is granted, a certificate of
occupancy shall be applied for and satisfactory evidence submitted
that all standards established by this chapter have been met.
B. Noise. All uses in the Township of Jackson shall conform to the
provisions of Chapter 291, Noise, of the Code of the Township of
Jackson.
C. Air pollution. No substance shall be emitted into the atmosphere in
quantities which are injurious to human, plant or animal life or to
property or which will interfere unreasonably with the comfortable
enjoyment of life and property anywhere in the Township. All provisions
of the New Jersey Air Pollution Control Code, as amended and as
augmented, and all the following provisions stated, whichever shall be
more stringent, shall be complied with:
§ 244-160 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-160
1:1035
(1) Smoke. In any nonresidential zone, no smoke, the shade or
appearance of which is darker than No. 1 of the Ringelmann Smoke
Chart, shall be emitted into the open air from any fuel-burning
equipment; provided, however, that smoke emitted during the
cleaning of a firebox or the building of a new firebox, the shade or
appearance of which is not darker than No. 2 of the Ringelmann
Smoke Chart, may be permitted for a period or periods aggregating
no more than three minutes in any 30 consecutive minutes.
(2) Solid particles.
(a) In any residential zone, no discharge of solid particles through
a stack, duct or vent shall be permitted that is greater than
50% of the allowable emission, in pounds per hour, established
by Chapters 7 and 8 of the New Jersey Air Pollution Control
Code.
(b) In any other zone, except the Industrial Zone, the allowable
discharge shall be 75% of the allowable emission permitted by
the New Jersey Air Pollution Control Code.
(c) In the Industrial Zone, the allowable discharge shall be the
allowable emission permitted by the New Jersey Air Pollution
Control Code.
(d) No open burning shall be permitted in any zone unless a permit
is obtained from the State Forrest Fire Service and the burning
is conducted in accordance with the permit. [Amended
6-30-2003 by Ord. No. 15-03]
(e) All incinerators shall be approved by the State Department of
Environmental Protection.
(f) Any road, parking area, driveway, truck loading or unloading
station or any other exterior area having a substantial
movement of vehicles or equipment shall be paved or
otherwise stabilized during construction sufficient to prevent
the generation of dust from the movement of such vehicles or
equipment.
(3) Odors. In any zone, no odorous material may be emitted into the
atmosphere in quantities sufficient to be detected without
instruments. Any process which may involve the creation or
emission of any odors shall be provided with a secondary safeguard
system so that control will be maintained. Table I (Odor Thresholds
in Air) in Part 1 (Odor Thresholds for 53 Commercial Chemicals) of
Research on Chemical Odors, copyrighted October 1968 by the
Manufacturing Chemists Association, Inc., Washington, D.C., shall
be used as a guide in determining quantities of offensive odors.
D. Liquid waste. No liquid waste shall be discharged into any watercourse
or sewage collection and disposal system, except in accordance with
§ 244-160 JACKSON CODE § 244-160
1:1036
plans approved by the Jackson Township Municipal Utilities Authority
or, where applicable, the Ocean County Utilities Authority and, where
required, by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
E. Solid waste. All uses in the Township shall:
(1) Assume full responsibility for adequate and regular collection and
removal of all refuse, except if the municipality assumes the
responsibility.
(2) Comply with all applicable provisions of the Air Pollution Control
Code.
(3) Comply with all provisions of the State Sanitary Code, Chapter 8,
Refuse Disposal, Public Health Council of the State Department of
Environmental Protection.
(4) Permit no accumulation on the property of any solid waste, junk or
other objectionable materials.
(5) Not engage in any sanitary landfill operation on the property,
except as may be permitted by other Township codes and
ordinances.
(6) Comply with all applicable provisions of the New Jersey Statewide
Mandatory Source Separation and Recycling Act of 1987, P.L. 1987,
c. 102.163
F. Radiation. All use of materials, equipment or facilities which are of or
may be sources of radiation shall comply with all controls, standards
and requirements of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended, and
any codes, rules or regulations promulgated under such Act, as well as
the Radiation Protection Act, P.L. 1958, c. 116,164 as amended,
whichever shall be more stringent.
G. Fire and explosion hazards. If it appears that any proposed use,
building, structure, process or resulting product or material may
constitute a fire or explosion hazard, the municipal agency may require
the applicant to supply proof of:
(1) Approval of the use, building, structure, process or resulting
product or material from the State Department of Labor and
Industry indicating that adequate safeguards against fire and
explosion have been or will be taken or installed.
(2) Approval from the Township Fire Prevention Bureau that the
applicant has complied with all applicable Township fire prevention
regulations.
163. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.11 et seq.
164. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 26:2D-1 et seq.
§ 244-160 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-160
1:1037
H. No activity shall be maintained on the premises which will produce heat
or glare beyond any property line.
I. No machinery or operation shall be permitted which shall cause
perceptible earthshaking vibration beyond the property lines of the lot
on which the use is located.
J. Storage of flammable material. The storage of all flammable and
combustible liquids and gases shall be subject to approval by the
Bureau of Fire Prevention and the following regulations:
(1) The storage of fuel oil in aboveground tanks of a capacity greater
than 275 gallons, or of a capacity greater than 10 gallons within
structures, shall be prohibited in residential areas or in connection
with residential uses. (Gallonage shall be determined by water
capacity measurement.)
(2) The aboveground storage of any other flammable liquids or
materials in tanks or a capacity greater than five gallons of
combustible liquids or materials greater than 60 gallons and all
underground storage of any other flammable or combustible liquids
or materials, including dispensing equipment, shall be prohibited in
residential areas. (Gallonage shall be determined by water capacity
measurement.)
(3) The storage of liquefied petroleum gases or other types of bottled
gas, supplied or delivered for residential consumption, shall be
limited to a tank or tanks with a combined equivalent water
capacity of 500 gallons for each residential dwelling or structure
serviced.
(4) All installations of storage tanks for liquefied petroleum gas or
other types of bottled gas with a combined equivalent water
capacity in excess of 1,200 gallons shall comply with all
requirements of Chapter 204, Fire Prevention, and all installations
of storage tanks for liquefied petroleum gas or other types of
bottled gas with a combined equivalent water capacity in excess of
4,000 gallons shall be prohibited in areas not served by public
water mains and fire hydrants complying with the requirements of
the Fire Prevention Code. The bulk storage, processing or
manufacturing of liquefied petroleum gas or other types of bottled
gas or facilities therefor shall not be permitted in any residential
zone.
(5) All installations of flammable or combustible liquids, compressed
gases or other hazardous fuels shall comply with the requirements
of Chapter 204, Fire Prevention, of the Code of the Township of
Jackson and amendments thereto.
K. Fire-resistant construction. All new construction and additions shall be
of fire-resistant construction in accordance with the requirements of
the State Uniform Construction Code.
§ 244-160 JACKSON CODE § 244-160
1:1038
§ 244-161. Preservation of natural features.
Wherever feasible, all of the following shall be preserved in their natural
state:
§ 244-162. Number of principal buildings.
No lot utilized for single-family or two-family dwelling purposes shall
contain more than one principal building.
§ 244-163. Farms; sale of products; gardens.
L. Lighting and illumination. Artificial lighting or illumination provided on
any property or by any use shall adhere to the following standards:
(1) The illumination provided by artificial lighting on the property shall
not exceed 0.5 footcandle beyond any property line.
(2) Spotlights or other types of artificial lighting that provides a
concentrated beam of light shall be so directed that the beam of
light does not extend beyond any property line.
(3) Spotlights or other types of artificial lighting used to illuminate
signs or building faces shall not emit beams of light that extend
beyond the vertical plane of the sign or building face that they
illuminate and shall not be located in such a manner as to cause the
beams of light to be reflected upon any adjoining property, public
street or vehicular circulation area.
A. Floodway, floodplain and flood hazard areas, as defined in this chapter.
B. Wetlands, as defined by the Freshwater Wetlands Protection Act, P.L.
1987, c. 156.165
C. Areas containing a significant number of specimen trees, as defined in
§ 244-6.
D. Land with slopes in excess of 10%.
E. Existing watercourses, ponds, bogs and swamps.
F. Land with a seasonal high water table of less than two feet.
G. Extraordinary trees.
A. All buildings and structures utilized for farm purposes shall be set back
or in accordance with the setback requirements of the zone, and
provided that roadside stands for the sale of products raised on the
farm shall not be located closer than 40 feet to any street line.
B. The raising of vegetables and fruits for personal use, but not for sale,
shall be permitted in any residential zone.
165. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:9B-1 et seq.
§ 244-160 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-164
1:1039
§ 244-164. Property maintenance.
It shall be the responsibility of every property owner, tenant, developer
and applicant to maintain in a safe and orderly condition all buildings and
land in the Township of Jackson which he owns, uses, occupies or has
maintenance responsibility for. Land uses within the Township of Jackson
shall be maintained in accordance with the following regulations:
A. Maintenance of all land uses within the Township shall include but not
be limited to the following:
(1) Potholes and other pavement failures within paved parking areas
shall be repaired on a regular basis, but in no event shall potholes
or pavement failures be left unrepaired for a period in excess of 30
days. If such potholes or pavement failures are hazardous to
vehicles, they shall be appropriately barricaded and marked to
warn motorists.
(2) Paint striping, traffic control signs and markings and all other signs
and graphics shall be maintained in a condition whereby they can
be clearly seen and are legible.
(3) Curbing, other pavement edging and sidewalks shall be maintained
free of cracks and holes which would present a hazard to
pedestrians or are unsightly.
(4) Unpaved or gravel parking and pedestrian areas shall be
maintained and regularly regraded in a manner which will keep the
area free of holes and other severe grade changes which would be
hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian usage.
(5) All areas of the site shall be kept free of debris and other materials.
All users of shopping carts or similar items shall provide for the
regular pickup of such shopping carts or similar items from parking
areas and other portions of the site. All shopping carts or similar
items shall either be stored indoors or in a location adjacent to the
building specifically set aside for such storage during nonbusiness
hours. Shopping carts shall be marked with the name of the
establishment, the title and telephone number of the person
responsible for maintenance of the shopping carts and a notice that
they are not to be removed from the property on which the business
is located. If shopping carts are removed from the property and
abandoned, they shall be picked up by the business to which the
cart belongs within 24 hours of notice from the Township. Failure to
pick up such shopping carts within 24 hours of notice shall be a
violation of this chapter, subject to the penalties prescribed herein.
(6) All plantings and ground cover shall be regularly watered and cut.
All dead plant materials shall be removed or replaced. All lawn or
other nonpaved areas shall be kept trimmed and free from weeds
and other noxious growth.
§ 244-164 JACKSON CODE § 244-164
1:1040
§ 244-165. Satellite dish antennas.
(7) Building finishes shall be maintained reasonably free of peeling or
cracked paint, rust or other unsightly conditions.
(8) All refuse stored outdoors shall be kept within containers in a
manner that the refuse is not visible to pedestrians or persons
within vehicles on or off the site. Such containers shall be stored
only within the side or rear yard areas and shall not be so located
as to interfere with vehicular or pedestrian circulation. [Amended
12-9-1996 by Ord. No. 26-96]
(9) All outdoor lighting shall be maintained in a working condition.
B. All land uses for which future development (site plan or subdivision)
approval is granted subsequent to the adoption of this chapter or for
which site plan or subdivision approval was previously granted under
regulations heretofore in effect shall be required to maintain all
structures and improvements shown on the approved site plan or
subdivision in a safe and orderly condition. In addition to the
maintenance responsibilities specified in Subsection A above,
additional maintenance responsibilities shall include but are not limited
to the following:
(1) All ground cover and plantings within screening and landscaping
areas shown on an approved site plan or subdivision shall be
regularly maintained. When plant material shown on an approved
site plan or subdivision dies, it shall be replaced within the first 30
days of the next planting season.
(a) Refuse enclosures. Where a site plan specifies an outdoor
refuse storage area, such area shall contain an enclosure not
less than 100 inches wide, 84 inches deep and 72 inches high
and be sufficient to enclose containers of up to six cubic yards.
The enclosure shall have locking gates. Any containers larger
than six cubic yards must be located in an enclosure using
accepted industry requirements. Refuse containers located
elsewhere on the site shall not be permitted. [Added
6-12-2006 by Ord. No. 12-06166]
C. All uses in the Township of Jackson shall also be subject to the
provisions of Chapter 372, Streets and Sidewalks, of the Code of the
Township of Jackson.
D. Failure of the responsible property owner, tenant, developer and/or
applicant to maintain property in accordance with the provisions herein
shall be a violation of this chapter subject to the penalties prescribed in
§ 244-15.
166. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed original § 109-151B(2) of the 1972 Code,
regarding refuse storage areas, which immediately followed this subsection.
§ 244-164 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-165
1:1041
A. Satellite dish antennas shall be permitted accessory uses within all
zoning districts in the Township of Jackson.
B. General requirements. Satellite dish antennas proposed to be
constructed and operated within Jackson Township shall comply with all
of the following general requirements:
(1) A statement certified by the applicant shall be submitted, which
sets forth the range of azimuth and elevation angles within which
the proposed satellite dish antenna may be operated and the
maintenance program which will be observed by the applicant with
respect to the proposed satellite dish antenna, and which states
that the proposed satellite dish antenna fully complies with all
applicable federal and state statutes, regulations and
requirements. Attached thereto shall be copies of any license or
approval for the construction, placement or operation of the
proposed satellite dish antenna required by any federal or state
agency having jurisdiction.
(2) In connection with an application for a satellite dish which is to be
used for transmission of signals, a statement, certified by a licensed
engineer registered to practice in the State of New Jersey, shall be
submitted which sets forth the maximum anticipated effective
radiated power and the antenna pattern of the proposed satellite
dish antenna. This statement shall contain a structural engineering
analysis of the proposed satellite dish antenna and the extent to
which the proposed satellite dish antenna complies with the design
standards applicable to satellite dish antennas as set forth in this
chapter.
(3) A satellite dish antenna or any accessory building used for housing
equipment necessary for the operation of the satellite dish antenna
shall only be located in a rear yard and shall not be located in a
buffer area. Where the buffer setback requirements for rear yards
and side yards exceed those minimum rear yard and side yard
setback requirements for accessory buildings, the buffer setback
requirements shall govern.
(4) A satellite dish antenna or any accessory building used for housing
equipment necessary for the operation of the satellite dish antenna
shall not violate the rear yard or side yard setback requirements
applicable to accessory buildings within the particular zoning
district, as set forth in this chapter. Where the accessory building
setback requirements are less than the height of the satellite dish
antenna, the required setback shall be that of the height of the
satellite dish antenna.
(5) Any accessory building used for housing equipment necessary for
the operation of the satellite dish antenna shall not exceed a
building height of 12 feet, shall not exceed 150 square feet in area
and shall be finished in the same architecture, with the same
§ 244-165 JACKSON CODE § 244-165
1:1042
roofing and siding materials and in the same colors as the principal
building.
(6) All wiring and connecting cables between the satellite dish antenna
and the principal and accessory buildings on the property shall be
buried underground.
(7) A screening plan shall be required with every application for a
permit for the installation of a satellite dish.
(8) Only one satellite dish antenna shall be permitted on the
applicant's property.
(9) A satellite dish antenna shall be of mesh-type construction and
shall be painted so as to blend in with the immediate natural
environment.
(10)No satellite dish antenna shall obstruct the view of the traveling
public.
(11)No satellite dish antenna shall contain, be used as or be situated in
such a manner so as to constitute a sign.
(12)No satellite dish antenna shall be constructed on the roof, wall or
any other part of any structure, nor shall a satellite dish antenna be
affixed to utility poles, signs, trees or fences.
(13)No satellite dish antenna shall be erected without the issuance of a
development permit by the Jackson Township administrative
officer.
(14) The construction and operation of a satellite dish antenna shall
fully comply with all applicable federal and state statutes,
regulations and requirements, including those pertaining to safety
levels of radio frequency electromagnetic fields with respect to
human exposure.
(15) Any person or persons, firm, corporation, association or
partnership proposing to construct and operate a satellite dish
antenna within any zoning district in Jackson Township shall, prior
to such construction and operation, submit the following:
(a) The exact location, height and dimensions of the proposed
satellite dish antenna and any accessory building used for
housing equipment necessary for the operation of the satellite
dish antenna, and the diameter of the dish itself shown on a
property survey.
(b) The exact locations and dimensions of all buildings and
structures on the premises on which the satellite dish antenna
is to be located.
§ 244-165 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-165
1:1043
(c) Existing and proposed plantings or other natural barriers to
provide protection and screening.
(16) Satellite dish antennas proposed in the HC Highway Commercial,
RC Recreational Commercial, O/R Office/Research, LM Light
Manufacturing or I Industrial Zoning Districts or proposed on the
lots of nonresidential uses in the MUD Mixed Use Development
Zoning District shall comply with the following:
(a) The height of the satellite dish antenna, measured vertically
from the ground level to the area on which the satellite dish
antenna is located, and up to and including the highest point of
the satellite dish antenna when extended to its fullest height,
shall not exceed 25 feet.
(b) The dish of the satellite dish antenna shall not exceed a
diameter of 12 feet.
(17) Satellite dish antennas proposed in the R-3 Residential, R-2
Residential, R-5 Residential, R-20 Residential, R-15 Residential, R-9
Residential or NC Neighborhood Commercial Zoning Districts, or
proposed on lots of detached single-family dwelling units in the
PRC Planned Retirement Community, PMURD Planned MUD Mixed
Unit Residential Development or MUD Mixed Use Development
Zoning Districts, shall comply with the following: [Amended
12-23-2002 by Ord. No. 50-02]
(a) The height of the satellite dish antenna, measured vertically
from the ground level to the area on which the satellite dish
antenna is located, and up to and including the highest point of
the satellite dish antenna when extended to its fullest height,
shall not exceed 12 feet.
(b) The dish of the satellite dish antenna shall not exceed a
diameter of nine feet.
(18) Satellite dish antennas proposed in the MF Multifamily or MHP
Mobile Home Park Zoning Districts or proposed to serve attached
dwelling units in the PRC Planned Retirement Community, PMURD
Planned Mixed Unit Residential Development or MUD Mixed Use
Development Zoning Districts shall comply with the following:
(a) The height of the satellite dish antenna, measured vertically
from the ground level to the area on which the satellite dish
antenna is located and up to and including the highest point of
the satellite dish antenna when extended to its fullest height,
shall not exceed 25 feet.
(b) The dish of the satellite dish antenna shall not exceed a
diameter of 12 feet.
§ 244-165 JACKSON CODE § 244-165
1:1044
§ 244-166. Soil removal.
No topsoil, subsoil, sand or gravel shall be removed from any property or
site in any zone unless and until a soil removal permit and/or license shall
be obtained pursuant to Chapter 185, Excavations, Mining and Dredging, of
the Code of the Township of Jackson; provided, however, that the following
exceptions shall apply:
§ 244-167. Solid waste disposal.
The dumping of refuse, waste material or other substances is prohibited in
all districts within the Township, with the exception of designated landfill
sites approved by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
§ 244-168. Design of single- and two-family dwellings.
(c) Only one satellite dish antenna shall be permitted per
development in the MF and MHP Zoning Districts.
(d) Only one satellite dish antenna shall be permitted to serve the
attached dwelling units in developments in the PRC, PMURD
and MUD Zoning Districts.
A. The Township Engineer may issue a soil removal permit, in conjunction
with a building permit application, for removal of soil for building
foundations and other structures, provided that the total amount of soil
to be removed from any site does not exceed 500 cubic yards.
B. The Planning Board may approve a soil removal permit, as a condition
of its approval of an application for development, upon finding that the
removal is necessary for the development of the site as approved by the
Board, and further provided that the amount of soil to be removed from
the property or site does not exceed 1,000 cubic yards.
A. Except as provided in this section, not more than one building permit
shall be issued for any dwelling to be erected in a subdivision consisting
of two or more lots if it is substantially alike in exterior design and
appearance with any (adjoining) dwelling within 150 feet or separated
by less than two contiguous conforming building lots on the same side
of the street which is in existence or for which a building permit has
been issued or is pending. The one-hundred-fifty-foot distance specified
shall be the shortest distance between the property lines of the
respective lots as measured along the street line. [Amended 2-9-1998
by Ord. No. 4-98]
B. Adjoining dwellings shall be considered to be substantially alike in
exterior design and appearance when the front elevations are along the
same approximate plane and they have any one of the following
characteristics:
(1) The same basic dimensions are used without substantial
differentiation of one or more exterior elevations.
§ 244-165 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-168
1:1045
§ 244-169. Storage of boats and travel trailers.
The outdoor storage of a recreational vehicle, motor home, travel trailer,
camper or small boat shall be permitted on single-family properties,
provided that:
(2) The same basic dimensions are used without substantial change in
orientation of the houses on the lots.
(3) The height and designs of the roofs are without substantial change
in design and appearance.
(4) The size, type and location of windows and doors in the front
elevation are without substantial differentiation.
C. In addition to the requirements specified in Subsection B above, there
shall be not less than three separate basic house designs in every
subdivision consisting of 10 houses, not less than four basic house
designs in every housing development of 20 houses and not less than
five basic designs in every development consisting of 30 houses.
D. No building permit shall be issued for more than one dwelling in any
housing development, except as provided in Subsection E, until an
engineer's survey or an architect's drawing of the entire tract or part to
be developed has been submitted to the Zoning Officer, showing
thereon, or on a schedule attached thereto, the model number, type and
design of each house, with the proper street and lot numbers for each
house. The survey or drawing shall show the dimensions of each house
and its exact location on the lot, with setbacks and width or depth of all
yard spaces. In the event of a subsequent desired change in the basic
design, size or location of a house in such tract, a revised plan and
application therefor shall be filed and approved before such work is
started.
E. In lieu of the submission specified in Subsection D above, the Planning
Board of the Township of Jackson may, at its discretion, require an
affidavit or a performance guaranty approved as to form by the
Township Attorney, that the subdivision will be developed as a whole so
that the intent and purpose of this section is satisfied. The Zoning
Officer is also hereby authorized to require a similar affidavit or
performance bond before issuance of more than one building permit in
any housing development or part thereof for any subdivision heretofore
approved by the Planning Board prior to the enactment of this chapter
or for any land area not required to be subdivided.
A. Such storage shall not be permitted within any front yard area.
B. A recreational vehicle or small boat shall not exceed 35 feet in length
and eight feet in width.
C. Only one such recreational vehicle and one small boat shall be
permitted to be stored outdoors at any single-family residence.
§ 244-168 JACKSON CODE § 244-169
1:1046
§ 244-170. Storage of commercial vehicles.
§ 244-171. Temporary uses or structures.
The Board may grant the development of temporary uses or structures,
provided that the use is a permitted use and the term of existence will not
exceed one year by the minor site plan review procedure. Extensions of said
approval may be granted, provided that the application is made prior to the
expiration of said one-year term.
D. A recreational vehicle or small boat less than 35 feet in length and eight
feet in width shall be stored outside the required building rear and side
setback lines of the zoning district within which the property on which
it is stored is located.
E. Any such vehicles stored in accordance with this chapter shall not be
occupied and shall not be provided with utility connections.
F. Boats, trailer, etc., to be owned by property owner.
A. No person, firm or corporation shall park or store, between the hours of
9:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m., a motor-drawn vehicle, omnibus, school bus,
pole trailer, road tractor or commercial motor vehicle upon any land,
property or lot which is primarily used or zoned for residential
purposes. The words and phrases stated and used in this section are
intended to have the meanings set forth for such words and phrases
respectively as set forth in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the New Jersey
Revised Statutes.
B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the following:
(1) Any commercial vehicle having a gross weight of six tons or less.
(2) Any vehicles used at or stored upon an active construction site.
C. No vehicle which contains, carries or transports hazardous materials
and which is or should be placarded according to and complying with
the Department of Transportation Hazardous Materials Regulations as
published in Code of Federal Regulations, Title 49, shall be parked or
stored in the Township of Jackson unless such area or place for parking
or storage has received approval for such use by the appropriate
agencies or the Township of Jackson. No such area shall be approved
for parking or storage of such vehicles unless such area or place is
sufficiently secured by fencing so as to prevent any tampering with
such vehicle. In determining the suitability of such fences, review shall
be in conformance with the standards of this chapter and all applicable
codes and ordinances of the Township of Jackson.
§ 244-169 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-172
1:1047
§ 244-172. Tree removal requirements. [Added 12-22-2003 by Ord.
No. 41-03167]
The requirements for tree removal and replacement are set forth in Chapter
405, Tree Removal, of this Code.
§ 244-173. Water conservation. [Added 8-26-2002 by Ord. No.
36-02]
The following measures are to be encouraged in all new development:
§ 244-174. Wetlands.
§ 244-175. Yard areas.
A. For purposes of reducing water use, lawn areas will be limited and
native low maintenance vegetation will be utilized for landscaping;
B. Clearing of native vegetation, particularly trees, is to be minimized;
C. Water consenting devices, such as drip irrigation, are to be utilized for
irrigation purposes;
D. Low-flow shower heads, faucets and toilets are to be utilized.
A. In the non-Pinelands portion of the Township, no lot shall be created
unless a minimum of 75% of the required minimum lot area of the
particular zone within which it is located is situated outside of any
wetlands, and further provided that a minimum of 50% of the required
minimum lot area shall be situated outside of any wetlands and
wetlands transition (buffer) area.
B. All such wetlands shall be properly delineated by field measurements
and after field verification by the appropriate qualified professional and
as approved by the NJDEPE.
A. No yard or other open space provided around any building for the
purpose of complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be
considered as providing a yard or open space for any other buildings,
and no yard or other open space on one lot shall be considered as
providing a yard or open space for a building on any other lot.
B. All yards facing on a street shall be considered front yards and shall
conform to the minimum front yard requirements for the zone in which
the lot is located, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. Except
for corner lots, whenever there exists a conforming lot with a dwelling
unit, where said lot has frontage on two rights-of-way, only the yard
abutting the front facade of the dwelling unit shall be the front yard.
The other yard shall be considered a rear yard. [Amended 4-22-2002
by Ord. No. 20-02]
167. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed original § 109-159, Trees; penalty, of the 1972
Code, as amended 3-12-2001 by Ord. No. 07-01.
§ 244-172 JACKSON CODE § 244-175
1:1048
§ 244-176. Right to farm. [Added 7-10-1995 by Ord. No. 26-95]
C. Every part of a required yard shall be open and unobstructed from its
lowest level to the sky, except for the ordinary projections allowed by
the State Uniform Construction Code, including but not limited to sills,
belt courses, chimneys, flues, buttresses, ornamental features and
eaves; provided, however, that none of the aforesaid projections shall
project into the minimum required yards more than 24 inches, unless
otherwise permitted by this chapter. Unroofed entrance porches or
terraces which do not rise above the height of the floor level of the
ground floor may extend into any yard, provided that the total area of
all such porches which extend into such yards does not exceed 100
square feet.
D. Additions or alterations to existing single-family dwellings that remain
within the existing vertical planes shall be permitted; provided,
however, that no further encroachment into any setback area occurs.
E. Access ramps for handicapped individuals shall be exempt from the
building setback requirements for the particular zoning district.
A. The right to farm all land is hereby recognized to exist as a natural right
and is also hereby ordained to exist as a permitted use in all zones
where it currently legally exists or is currently an allowed use under
this chapter and all other ordinances of the Township, county and state
dealing with health, sanitation and environmental protection. The
"right to farm," as it is used in this section, includes the use of irrigation
pumps and equipment, aerial and ground seeding and spraying,
tractors, farm laborers and the application of chemical fertilizers,
insecticides and herbicides, as well as other mechanized equipment and
modern procedures, including composting and on-site disposal of
organic waste, all for the purpose of producing from the land
agricultural products such as but not limited to vegetables, grains, hay,
fruits, fibers, wood, trees, plants, shrubs, flowers and seeds, as well as
the propagation and maintenance of horses, cows and other grazing
livestock, fowl production, the maintenance of swine (as per and in
accordance with Board of Health regulations) and providing for the
processing and packaging, wholesaling and retailing of such products
as contribute to farm income, including the construction of buildings,
fences and parking areas in conformance with Township codes.
Livestock fencing shall conform to the use intended and shall require a
permit with no fee. [Amended 12-11-1995 by Ord. No. 38-95]
B. Definitions. For the purposes of interpretation of this chapter, the
following definitions shall apply:
COMMERCIAL AGRICULTURE — The production principally for sale to
others of plants and animals or their products, including but not limited
to forage and sod crops, grain and feed crops, dairy animals and dairy
products, livestock, including beef cattle, poultry, sheep, swine, horses,
ponies, mules and goats; the breeding and grazing of such animals,
§ 244-175 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-176
1:1049
bees and apiary products; fruits of all kinds, including grapes, nuts
and berries; vegetables; nursery, floral, ornamental and greenhouse
products.
FARM — An area of land of single or multiple contiguous or
noncontiguous parcels which is actively devoted to agricultural or
horticultural use, including but not limited to crop land, pasture, idle
or fallow land, woodland, wetlands, farm ponds, farm roads and certain
farm buildings and other enclosures related to agricultural pursuits.
HOME AGRICULTURE — The production principally for home use or
consumption of plants, animals or their products and for sale to others
where such sales are incidental, including but not limited to gardening,
fruit production and poultry and livestock products for household use
only.
C. The foregoing uses and activities included in the right to farm, when
reasonable and necessary for the particular agricultural/farming,
livestock and/or fowl production and when conducted in accordance
with generally accepted agricultural/farming practices, can and may
occur on holidays, Sundays and weekdays, at night and in the day, and
the usual noise, odors, dust and fumes that are caused by them are also
specifically permitted as part of the exercise of this right.
D. It is expressly found that whatever inconveniences may be caused to
others not of the farming community by such uses and activities so
conducted is legal for the farmer and is more than offset by the benefits
from farming to the neighborhood, community and to society in general,
by the preservation of open space, the beauty of the countryside and
clean air and by the preservation and continuance of farming
operations in Jackson Township and in New Jersey as a source of
agricultural products for this and future generations.
E. If a developer plans to build or sell 10 or more homes by creating a new
subdivision or site plan with multifamily development in an area within
500 feet in any direction of a property currently in active farm use or
zoned to allow said use, the developer or his or her agent must inform
prospective purchasers, in writing, that they are near or next to an
active farm and therefore may be subjected to such usual noises, odors,
dust and/or fumes that an active farm may normally have. Furthermore,
they should be aware of this right-to-farm ordinance which allows the
farmer to pursue his endeavors without complaints and/or harassment.
Also, any such development that occurs in the area of an active farm
use shall do so in a manner so as not to infringe on the rights of the
farm. Particular attention must be paid to the water problems in said
area as well as environmental issues. Such development cannot and will
not cause flooding problems for the farmer or the neighborhood.
Furthermore, if a development is erected next to an active use, the
developer must erect and maintain a buffer use of at least 50 feet on his
property for protection of both the existing farm and the new
development. [Amended 12-11-1995 by Ord. No. 38-95]
§ 244-176 JACKSON CODE § 244-176
1:1050
§ 244-176.1. Portable buildings and trailers. [Added 9-13-2016 by
Ord. No. 21-16]
F. In an effort to preserve and continue farming in the Township of
Jackson, residents involved in active farming and agricultural pursuits
should and can be allowed to construct buildings on their land that are
directly related to the farming pursuit, e.g., barns, storage buildings,
equipment buildings, etc. Said buildings must be erected in accordance
with Township building codes and shall follow the schedule as set for
the Township.
G. These statements are of a general intent and meant to express a basic
philosophy by which all other ordinances are to be considered and
interpreted.
A. Definitions. The following definitions shall apply to this section:
OFFICE TRAILER — A trailer, portable temporary container, or portable
structure with or without axles and wheels used for any nonresidential
or nonstorage activity at a site.
PORTABLE STORAGE STRUCTURE — A trailer, portable temporary
container, or portable structure with or without axles and wheels used
for storage activity at a site.
B. Location. Office and construction trailers shall not be permitted on any
location within the Township of Jackson, except as set forth herein.
Portable storage structures are permitted as set forth herein.
C. Permit required; application; fee. Before a portable storage container,
construction trailer or office trailer is placed on any property, the
owner, tenant or contractor working on the subject property must
submit an application for a development permit approving such
placement from the Zoning Officer. If the permit application is made by
a tenant or contractor, written permission of the owner of the subject
property for the placement of such trailer or structure on the subject
property must be provided to the Zoning Officer before a permit is
issued. Permits shall be issued for a time period of 60 days. The fee for
the permit shall be $50.
D. Number of portable storage structures. Only two portable storage
structures may be placed at any residential property at one time.
Commercial properties may have as many portable storage structures
as the bulk requirements of the Zoning Code will permit.
E. Size of portable storage container. A portable storage container may
not exceed 10 feet in height, eight feet in width or 20 feet in length.
F. Placement and condition. Portable storage containers are prohibited
from being placed in streets, public rights-of-way, or on unimproved
surfaces in the front yard of a property and may only be placed upon
driveways, side and rear yards if such locations meet the requirements
of this section. All such locations must be paved, off-street surfaces at
§ 244-176 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-176.1
1:1051
the farthest accessible point from the street, and all must comply with
the applicable minimum yard accessory structure setback requirements
for any accessory structures in the zone in which such portable storage
container is located. If the property does not have a driveway, or cannot
meet the standards described herein, the Zoning Officer may, as part of
the permit approval process, approve the placement of a container in
the front yard. If such portable storage container is to be permitted to
be located in the front yard, it must be kept at the farthest accessible
point from the street, and the surrounding area must be maintained
in a weed-free condition. Wherever portable storage containers may
be placed, they shall be subject to all property maintenance standards
applicable to accessory structures. No portable storage container shall
be allowed to remain outside in a state of disassembly or disrepair.
G. Regulations pertaining to office trailers. Office trailers are prohibited in
all zoning districts of the Township except upon compliance with the
following requirements:
(1) Office trailers may be used on a construction site as a construction
office, subject to individual approval by the Planning Board or
Zoning Board of Adjustment, and as individually approved by the
Construction Official. Said office trailer may not be placed on the
site prior to issuance of a building permit and must be removed at
the owner's expense upon completion of the job.
(2) Office trailers may be used as a temporary office, only after
property for a permanent site has been purchased and while the
permanent building is being designed and/or constructed, subject
to individual approval by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, and as individually approved by the Construction
Official, and must be removed, at the owner's expense, from the
premises within 30 days of the date the permanent facility is
occupied. Approval shall not be granted for a period in excess of
one year, but may be renewed annually, not to exceed three years.
The temporary sales office shall be located within the boundaries of
the subdivision or tract of land in which the real property is to be
sold or leased.
(3) Office trailers may be used as real estate sale offices, subject to
individual approval by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, and as individually approved by the Construction
Official. Approval shall not be granted for a period in excess of one
year, but may be renewed annually, not to exceed three years.
Permitted temporary real estate sales offices shall not be used as
any type of dwelling. Use of the temporary real estate sales office
for the sale or lease of residential sites or projects located off-site is
prohibited.
(4) Office trailers shall not be approved for permanent use.
§ 244-176.1 JACKSON CODE § 244-176.1
1:1052
(5) Office trailers may not exceed 10 feet in height, eight feet in width
or 20 feet in length and may not be combined or adjoined with
another office trailer.
(6) Wherever office containers may be placed, they shall be subject to
all property maintenance standards applicable to accessory
structures. No office container shall be allowed to remain in a state
of disassembly or disrepair.
(7) Mobile homes may not be used as offices.
(8) Mobile home usage for residential purposes shall be as otherwise
permitted by the Code of the Township of Jackson.
H. Grandfathering of existing temporary structures. Any use or structure
existing at the time of enactment or subsequent amendment of this
chapter, but not in conformity with its provisions, may be continued
with the following limitations. Any use or building which does not
conform to this may not be:
(1) Changed to another nonconforming use.
(2) Reestablished after abandonment of the use within the meaning of
the Municipal Land Use Law.
(3) Extended, except in conformity with these regulations.
(4) Rebuilt, altered or repaired after being more than partially
destroyed within the meaning of the Municipal Land Use Law.
I. Violations and penalties.
(1) Any portable storage structure, office trailer or construction trailer
placed in violation of this section or which is not removed at the
end of the time for which it may lawfully remain in place, or
immediately upon the direction of the Code Enforcement Officer,
Zoning Officer or a law enforcement officer for removal of such
temporary structure for safety reasons, shall be punishable, upon
conviction thereof, by a fine not to exceed $2,000 for each violation
committed hereunder.
(2) The owner of the subject property shall be afforded a fifteen-day
period to cure or abate such violation. Every day that a violation
continues after service of written notice by certified and/or regular
mail on the owner of the subject property as shown in the latest tax
duplicate shall be deemed a separate offense. The court may also
order the removal of the violation by the Township, and the cost of
such removal, together with the cost of administration of its
removal, may be assessed against the property on which the
temporary storage structure was located and upon approval by the
Superior Court, may be filed as a lien against such property by the
Township Clerk. Such lien shall be superior in dignity to all other
liens or encumbrances upon the property, including the lien of a
§ 244-176.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-176.1
1:1053
§ 244-176.2. Prohibited uses. [Added 3-16-2017 by Ord. No. 03-17;
3-16-2017 by Ord. No. 04-17]
mortgage, and shall be equal in dignity to the lien of ad valorem
taxes.
A. All uses not expressly permitted in any given district are expressly
prohibited in such district. No structure or addition thereto shall be
built, moved or remodeled, and no land shall be used, occupied,
reoccupied, designed or improved for use or occupancy, except for a
use that is expressly permitted within the zone.
B. The following shall be prohibited as principal or accessory uses or
structures in all zoning districts within the Township of Jackson:
(1) Dormitories.
§ 244-176.1 JACKSON CODE § 244-176.2
1:1054
ARTICLE XI
Sexually Oriented Businesses
[Added 1-25-1993 by Ord. No. 3-93]
§ 244-177. Statutory authority; findings; purpose and objectives.
A. Statutory authorization. It is the responsibility of the local government
to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare. Such power has been delegated to the municipalities
from the legislature of the State of New Jersey. The Township
Committee of the Township of Jackson, in order to better promote the
public health, safety and general welfare of its citizens, does ordain as
follows.
B. Findings of fact.
(1) Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:34-2b, the legislature of the State of New
Jersey has determined that it is a fourth-degree crime to sell,
distribute, rent or exhibit material which is obscene. Consequently,
the State of New Jersey has preempted the Township of Jackson
from prohibiting the sale of material which the Township believes
to be obscene. However, in order to promote the public health,
safety and general welfare of its citizens, the Township of Jackson
may promulgate reasonable time, place and manner regulations
with respect to the sale, distribution, rental or exhibition of various
items by sexually oriented businesses.
(2) The Township of Jackson has determined that sexually oriented
businesses have a deleterious effect on both the existing businesses
adjacent to such establishments as well as the surrounding
residential areas; cause increased crime, especially prostitution;
adversely affect property value; create an atmosphere which is
inimical to the values of a significant segment of the Township's
population; encourage residents and businesses to move
elsewhere; and that such sexually oriented businesses, when
located in close proximity to each other, contribute to urban blight
and downgrade the quality of life in the adjacent areas.
C. Purpose and objectives. It is the purpose of this article to regulate
sexually oriented businesses to minimize and control the adverse
effects recognized in the preceding section and to promote the public
health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the Township of
Jackson. The Township Committee of the Township of Jackson finds that
the secondary effects of adult entertainment establishments, as
established through the reports and studies of other cities and
municipalities with the appropriate resources to conduct the same, are
deleterious and inimical to health, safety and general welfare of the
residents of the municipality. It is not the purpose of this article to
restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials
protected by the First Amendment nor will this article have the effect of
restricting or denying such access.
§ 244-177 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-178
1:1055
§ 244-178. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADULT ARCADE — Any place to which the public is permitted or invited
wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or
mechanically controlled still or image-producing devices are maintained to
show images to one person per machine at any one time and where the
images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or
describing of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT BOOKSTORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE — A commercial
establishment which as one of its principal business purposes offers for sale
or for rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following:
ADULT CABARET — A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features:
ADULT MOTEL — A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which
offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration and
which:
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — A commercial establishment
where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, videocassettes,
slides or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are
characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas. Adult motion-picture theaters shall meet the
seating criteria established for adult theaters.
Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed material or
photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes or video
reproductions, slides or other visual representations which depict or
describe specific sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or
A.
Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in
connection with specified sexual activities.
B.
A. Persons who appear in a state of nudity; or
Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified
anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities.
B.
Provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films,
motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description
of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and has a
sign visible from a public right-of-way which advertises the availability
of this adult type of photographic reproductions;
A.
Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than 10
hours; or
B.
Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for
a period of time that is less than 10 hours.
C.
§ 244-178 JACKSON CODE § 244-178
1:1056
ADULT THEATER — A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar
commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear
in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by the
exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities.
Seating shall be provided in a design consistent with traditional movie
theaters. All sitting areas shall be visible and unobstructed.
COMMERCIAL DISPLAY — The exhibition to the senses of another person
for valuable consideration, whether the valuable consideration is paid by
the recipient of the exhibition or by another, and whether the exhibition
occurs at the exhibitor's place of business or elsewhere.
NUDITY or A STATE OF NUDITY — The appearance of a human bare
buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals or female breasts.
OBSCENE MATERIALS — The definition of "obscene materials" set forth
in P.L. 1978, c. 95, as amended by Section 1 of P.L. 1982, c. 211 (effective
December 23, 1982, as N.J.S.A. 2C:34-2), as the same shall be from time to
time amended or supplemented, as well as in accordance with and not more
strictly than judicial interpretations thereof pursuant to the Constitution of
the United States and of the State of New Jersey finally concluded in courts
of jurisdiction sufficient to render decisions on constitutional questions of
general application.
PERSON — An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association or other legal entity.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS — An adult arcade, adult bookstore or
adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion-picture theater
or adult theater.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS —
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Any of the following:
§ 244-179. Location requirements.
Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttock or female breasts below the point immediately above
the top of the areola; or
A.
Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely
and opaquely covered.
B.
The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttock or female breasts;
A.
Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy;
B.
C. Masturbation, actual or simulated; or
Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities
set forth in Subsections A through C.
D.
§ 244-178 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-179
1:1057
§ 244-180. Enforcement.
A. It shall be a violation of this article if a person operates or causes to be
operated or allows to be operated a sexually oriented business:
(1) Within one 1,500 feet of a place of worship.
(2) Within 1,500 feet of a school, whether public or private, or within
1,500 feet of any school bus stop.
(3) Within 1,500 feet of a boundary of a growth area, village or rural
development district.
(4) Within 1,500 feet of any other sexually oriented business.
(5) Within 1,500 feet of any residential use.
(6) Within 1,500 feet of any public park or playground.
B. Measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to
intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the
building or structure used as a part of the premises where a sexually
oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the
premises of a place of worship, a school, a boundary of a residential
district, a public park or playground, a lot devoted to residential use or
a school bus stop.
C. A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is
not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the
establishment of the sexually oriented business, of a place of worship,
school, public area, residential district or residential lot within 1,500
feet of the sexually oriented business.
D. Sexually oriented businesses shall conform to design standards and
development requirements established through the ordinances of the
Township of Jackson.
A. Any person violating any provision of this article, upon conviction, is
punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000 or a term of imprisonment not
to exceed 90 days, or both. In no event shall any person violating this
article, upon conviction, receive a fine below the amount of $100.
B. Each day a sexually oriented business is in operation, in violation of this
article, shall constitute a separate offense under this article.
C. Each separate film, videocassette or other visual reproduction or each
showing of live entertainment which is displayed to another in violation
of this article is a separate offense under this article.
§ 244-179 JACKSON CODE § 244-180
1:1058
ARTICLE XII
Design Standards and Improvement Specifications
§ 244-181. Improvement standards.
§ 244-182. Design standards.
A. General. All improvements shall be installed in complete accordance
with the standards of this chapter, with other particular specifications
approved by the municipal agency and Township Engineer and with all
other applicable municipal, county, state and federal regulations.
Should improvements be required which are not provided for within
this chapter, they shall be designed and constructed in accordance with
good engineering practice and recognized design standards. The
developer or his engineer shall submit detailed design calculations and
construction specifications in each such instance. Prior to the initiation
of such specialized design, the particular standards to be utilized shall
be submitted for review by the municipal agency and Township
Engineer.
B. Standard specifications and construction details. The Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction of the New Jersey
Department of Transportation (latest edition), including all addenda,
and the Standard Construction Details of the New Jersey Department of
Transportation (latest revision), as modified, supplemented, amended
or superseded by the requirements of this chapter, by the approved
final plat, by particular agreement among the municipal agency and
subdivider or by other applicable municipal, county, state or federal
regulations, shall govern the completion of the required improvements.
Such Standard Specifications and Standard Construction Details are
made a part of this chapter by reference and will not be herein
repeated. It is the responsibility of all developers to familiarize
themselves with these standards. The requirements of this chapter, of
an approved final plat or of particular agreements and conditions of
approval and of applicable municipal, county, state or federal
regulations shall govern and prevail in the case of conflict between
them and the Standard Specifications or Standard Construction Details.
Should the Township adopt, subsequent to the effective date of this
chapter, particular and specific Standard Construction Details for
Jackson Township, they shall govern and prevail over the Standard
Construction Details of the New Jersey Department of Transportation
previously referred to.
A. Objectives. All site plan and subdivision plats shall conform to design
standards that will encourage desirable development patterns within
the Township. The site plan or subdivision shall conform to the
proposals and conditions shown on the adopted Master Plan. The
streets, drainage rights-of-way, school sites, public parks and
playgrounds and other municipal facilities shown on the adopted
Master Plan shall be considered in the review of site plans and
§ 244-181 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-182
1:1059
subdivision plats. Where the Master Plan makes no provisions therefor,
streets and drainage rights-of-way shall be shown on the final plat in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. and shall be such as to lend
themselves to the harmonious development of the municipality and the
enhancement of the public welfare.
B. Responsibility for design. Within the criteria established by and subject
to the review and approval of the municipal agency, all design of a site
plan or subdivision is the responsibility of the developer, and he shall be
responsible for and bear the entire cost of any and all investigations,
tests, reports, surveys, samples, calculations, environmental
assessments, designs, researches or any other activity necessary to the
completion of the design. The standards set forth in this chapter shall
be taken to be the minimum necessary to meet its purposes, as set forth
elsewhere herein. The responsibility of the municipal agency shall be to
see that these minimum standards are followed and that, in those cases
not covered by these standards, sufficient precautions are taken to
assure that the eventual design is conducive to the implementation of
the purposes of this chapter and the Township Master Plan. The
municipal agency may employ professionals in various disciplines to
advise and assist it in its determinations. Any decisions of the municipal
agency regarding the suitability or sufficiency of any design proposal,
taken upon advice of its professionals and subject to the provisions of
this chapter, shall be deemed conclusive.
C. Design data. To properly execute the design of a site plan or
subdivision, it is anticipated that the developer will obtain or cause to
be obtained certain design data, including but not limited to soil tests
and analyses, environmental assessments, traffic studies and traffic
projections, surveys, reports and similar design data. Any and all such
data obtained by the developer, or by others retained by him to
complete the design, shall be made available to the municipal agency
and its employees and professional consultants for the purpose of
reviewing the proposed design. Should the Planning Board determine
that the design data submitted is not sufficient for the purpose of
completing a full review of the proposal, it may request the applicant to
provide such additional information as is deemed necessary. Until the
applicant supplies such information, no submission under the
provisions of this chapter shall be termed complete. Nothing contained
herein shall be interpreted to prevent the municipal agency from
making or causing to be made such independent studies, calculations or
other undertakings as it deems necessary in the review of any
application for development.
D. Design standards. When a developer determines that it will be
necessary to utilize design standards in addition to or other than those
minimum requirements established herein, he is advised to consult with
the Engineer of the municipal agency, prior to beginning his detailed
design, for review and approval of his proposed design standards.
Standards utilized should generally be nationally recognized and in
§ 244-182 JACKSON CODE § 244-182
1:1060
common use in this area. Design standards may not be utilized if they
do not have the approval of the Engineer of the municipal agency.
E. Waiver of requirements. It is recognized that, in certain instances,
preexisting conditions or the uniqueness of a particular proposal may
require the waiver of some of the standards presented herein. The
municipal agency may consider and, for cause shown, may waive strict
conformance with such of these detailed standards as it sees fit. Any
developer desiring such action shall present with his application for
development a listing of all such waivers desired, together with the
reasons therefor.
F. Exceptions to residential development improvement standards. [Added
6-8-1998 by Ord. No. 15-98]
(1) The municipal agency may grant such de minimis exceptions from
the requirements of the site improvement standards adopted
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:21 as may be reasonable and within the
general purpose and intent of the standards if the literal
enforcement of one or more provisions of the standards is
impracticable or will exact undue hardship because of peculiar
conditions pertaining to the development in question.
(2) An application for an exception pursuant to this section shall be
filed, in writing, with the municipal agency and shall include:
(a) A statement of the requirements of the standards from which
an exception is sought;
(b) A statement of the manner by which strict compliance with
said provisions would result in practical difficulties; and
(c) A statement of the nature and extent of such practical
difficulties.
(3) Exceptions shall become a part of the construction documents and
shall be retained by the municipal agency.
(4) Within 30 days of granting a de minimis exception request, the
secretary of a municipal agency agreeing to an exception pursuant
to this section shall send a copy of the document(s) constituting the
de minimis exception resolution and/or document to the New
Jersey Department of Community Affairs, Division of Codes and
Standards, 101 South Broad Street, CN 802, Trenton, NJ
08625-0802. Such notice shall be clearly marked "Site
Improvement Exception(s)."
(5) An application for an exception may also be an made by an officer
or agency of the municipality.
(6) Examples of de minimis exceptions include, but are not limited to,
the following:
§ 244-182 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-182
1:1061
§ 244-183. Blocks.
(a) Reducing the minimum number of parking spaces and the
minimum size of parking stalls;
(b) Reducing the minimum geometries of street design, such as
curb radii, horizontal and vertical curves, intersection angles,
center line radii and others;
(c) Reducing cartway width; and
(d) Any changes in standards necessary to implement traffic
calming devices.
(7) The municipal agency's granting of a request for a de minimis
exception shall be based on a finding that the requested exception
meets the following criteria:
(a) It is consistent with the intent of the Site Improvement Act;
(b) It is reasonable, limited and not unduly burdensome;
(c) It meets the needs of public health and safety; and
(d) It takes into account existing infrastructure and possible
surrounding future development.
G. Agreement to exceed standards. [Added 6-8-1998 by Ord. No.
15-98]
(1) A standard set forth in these rules may be exceeded when both the
developer and the municipal agency agree that such exceeding of a
standard is desirable under the specific circumstances of a
proposed residential development.
(2) Any agreement between developer and municipal agency to exceed
a standard set forth in these rules shall be placed in writing by the
developer.
(3) The developer shall transmit forthwith to the Department
notification of each agreement with a municipal agency to exceed
any of the standards set forth in these rules.
A. The block length, width and acreage within bounding roads shall be
such as to accommodate the size and dimensions of lots required for the
zoning district by this chapter and to provide for convenient access,
circulation control and safety of vehicles and pedestrians.
B. Block lengths may vary between 500 and 3,000 feet, but blocks along
other than local, local collector, minor collector or major collector
streets shall not be less than 1,200 feet long.
C. Interior crosswalks with a right-of-way 20 feet wide containing a
sidewalk of four feet or greater in width and fenced on both sides may
§ 244-182 JACKSON CODE § 244-183
1:1062
§ 244-184. Clearing and grading.
be required for blocks longer than 1,200 feet, from the ends of the
culs-de-sac to adjacent streets and elsewhere as required by the public
convenience, including the provision of walks giving access to schools,
playgrounds and shopping centers, without the necessity of crossing
traffic thoroughfares.
A. All grading, excavation or embankment construction shall be in
accordance with the approved final plans and shall provide for the
adequate disposal of all stormwater runoff and such groundwater
seepage as may be encountered. All clearing, excavation and
embankment construction shall be in accordance with the applicable
requirements of the standard specifications. No excavated material
may be removed from the site except in accordance with an approved
final plan or without the prior approval of the Township Engineer.
Where borrow excavation materials from off-site sources are required
to complete the necessary grading, such material shall be subject to the
approval of the Township Engineer.
B. Material which the Township Engineer judges unsuitable for use in
embankments may be used for grading outside the roadway right-ofway
or outside pavement areas with the permission of the Township
Engineer. Any unsuitable material which cannot be satisfactorily
utilized on the site shall be removed from the site and disposed of at
places to be provided by the developer.
C. All construction layout and grading stakes shall be set by a licensed
land surveyor or professional engineer employed by the developer or
his contractor.
D. All rough grading must be completed prior to the construction of
pavement subgrade. All sidewalk areas and slope areas must be fully
graded prior to the construction of finished pavements or pavement
base courses.
E. To preserve the integrity of pavements, embankments and excavations
for streets or roadways shall be provided with slopes no steeper than
one foot of vertical rise for every three feet of horizontal distance.
F. Such slopes shall be suitably planted with perennial grasses or other
ground cover plantings in accordance with the plans approved by the
municipal agency. In areas where excavations or embankments would
extend significantly beyond road rights-of-way, thereby causing
disruption to the natural environment of the development, the
municipal agency may, upon its own initiative, direct the use of
terraces, retaining walls, crib walls or other means of maintaining
roadway slopes. In any event, the entire roadway right-of-way shall be
fully graded, and any retaining walls, crib walls or terraces shall be
located outside of the roadway right-of-way, and their maintenance
shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property on which they
§ 244-183 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-184
1:1063
are constructed. The developer shall make suitable provisions in the
instruments transferring title to any property containing such terraces,
retaining walls or crib walls and shall provide a copy thereof to the
municipal agency and the Township Clerk. All graded areas within or
outside of the roadway right-of-way shall be neatly graded, topsoiled,
fertilized and seeded to establish a stand of perennial grasses.
G. Lot grading. Lots shall be graded to secure proper drainage and to
prevent the collection of stormwater. Said grading shall be performed
in a manner which will minimize the damage to or destruction of trees
growing on the land. Topsoil shall be provided and/or redistributed on
the surface as cover and shall be stabilized by seeding or planting.
Grading plans shall have been submitted with the preliminary and final
plats, and any departure from these plans must be approved in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter for the modification
of improvements. Grading shall be designed to prevent or minimize
drainage to structures or improvements when major storms exceeding
the design basis of the storm drainage system occur.
(1) Wherever possible, the land shall be graded so that the stormwater
from each lot shall drain directly to the street. If it is impractical to
drain directly to the street, it shall be drained to a system of
interior yard drainage designed in accordance with the standards
for drainage facilities, and suitable drainage easements shall be
provided.
(2) Unless otherwise required by the standard specifications or
approved by the Engineer, all tree stumps, masonry and other
obstructions shall be completely removed.
(3) The minimum slope for lawns shall be 2%. The minimum slope for
smooth, hard-finished surfaces other than roadways shall be 1%.
[Amended 9-11-2000 by Ord. No. 19-00]
(4) The maximum grade for lawns within five feet of a building shall be
10% and, for lawns more than five feet from a building, 25%.
(5) Retaining walls installed in slope control areas shall be constructed
of heavy treated timber or logs, reinforced concrete or other
reinforced masonry or of other construction acceptable to the
Engineer of the municipal agency and adequately designed and
detailed on the final plat to carry all earth pressures, including any
surcharges. The height of retaining walls shall not exceed 1/3 of the
horizontal distance from the foundation wall of any building to the
face of the retaining wall. Should the Township adopt, subsequently
to this chapter, standard details for such construction, the same
shall govern. Retaining walls will not be permitted in required
buffer areas.
(6) The developer shall take all necessary precautions to prevent any
siltation of streams during construction. The developer shall
§ 244-184 JACKSON CODE § 244-184
1:1064
§ 244-185. Concrete requirements.
§ 244-186. Curbs: nonresidential development. [Amended 6-8-1998
by Ord. No. 15-98]
provide adequate provisions in accordance with a Soil Erosion
and Sediment Control Plan approved by the Ocean County Soil
Conservation Service to prevent all deposition of silt or other
eroded material in any stream or watercourse. Such provisions may
include but are not limited to construction and maintenance of
siltation basins or holding ponds and diversion berms throughout
the course of construction.
A. All concrete used in any subdivision or site improvement shall be
prepared in accordance with the requirements of the standards
specifications for the various classes of concrete used.
B. Unless specific written permission is obtained from the Township
Engineer to the contrary, only concrete obtained from dry-batched redimixed
trucks shall be allowed.
A. General requirements. Vertical concrete curb or granite (Belgian) block
curb shall be constructed along both sides of every street within a
subdivision and along all pavement edges within site developments for
uses other than single-family or two-family homes. Where the site
boundary is along an existing street, the curb need only be constructed
on the side of the existing street adjacent to the site. Any existing
pavements damaged by curb construction shall be repaired to the
standards contained in this chapter or as may otherwise be approved by
the Township Engineer. Concrete curb shall be constructed of Class B
concrete, air-entrained, in accordance with the requirements of the
standard specifications. Preformed bituminous cellular-type joint filler,
1/2 inch thick, cut to match the cross section of the curb, shall be used
at all expansion joints at intervals not greater than 20 feet.
Intermediate plate joints shall be provided at intervals not exceeding 10
feet. The curb cross section for vertical concrete curb shall be as shown
on Exhibit 109-1.168 Where the use of granite block curb is proposed,
construction details shall be submitted for approval of the Township
Engineer. The requirements of the standard specifications regarding
curing precautions shall be strictly observed.
B. Timing of curb construction. In areas with bituminous concrete
pavement, required curb shall be constructed prior to the construction
of the bituminous base courses. Any required repairs to curbs which are
not suitable for acceptance shall be made prior to construction of the
final pavement wearing course.
C. Combination curb and gutter may be considered for use, subject to
approval of the Township Engineer, in those areas having a pavement
168. Editor's Note: Exhibit 109-1 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 244-184 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-186
1:1065
§ 244-187. Curbs and gutters: residential development. [Added
6-8-1998 by Ord. No. 15-98]
Curbs, curbs and gutters and shoulders in all residential development shall
be designed and constructed in accordance with Subchapter 4 (Streets
and Parking) of N.J.A.C. 5:21 (Residential Site Improvement Standards), as
amended.
§ 244-188. Easements.
with a grade greater than 8% or less than 1%. When concrete curb
and gutter is permitted, the gutter shall be eight inches thick and shall
be constructed of Class B air-entrained concrete. Joints in the gutter
shall be formed simultaneously with joints in the curb and shall be at
the spacing specified for vertical concrete curb. The cross section for
combination curb and gutter shall be as shown on Exhibit 109-2.169
D. Where curb is to be constructed on streets under the jurisdiction of the
County of Ocean, the county standards for curb shall be utilized.
Generally, only one type of curb should be utilized on both sides of a
street for the entire block length.
E. Alternate curb types. In certain instances it may be necessary or
desirable to construct alternate curb types. For example, these may be
required by the municipal agency on the perimeter of channelizing
islands or in the areas of unusually heavy gutter drainage flow or may
be desired by the developer for decorative purposes or to preserve
vegetation. If alternate curb types are to be permitted, an appropriate
construction detail shall be submitted for approval with the preliminary
and final plats. Continuous slip-formed curb or combination curb and
gutter may be permitted if such is considered to be acceptable by the
Township Engineer. The use of continuous slip-formed curb or
combination curb and gutter may only be permitted if the applicant
submits for review and approval details and specifications concerning
equipment, materials and methods proposed for use, and if the
Township Engineer has inspected the installation and tested and
approved a suitable sample section of curb or combination curb and
gutter. In the event that the Township Engineer does not approve the
sample section of curb or combination curb and gutter, the developer
shall remove the sample section and replace it with a type of curb or
curb and gutter permitted by this chapter or such other alternate as
may be approved by the municipal agency.
A. Conservation easements.
(1) All freshwater wetland areas and required adjoining buffer areas,
as determined by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, shall be included within conservation easements on
subdivisions and site plans submitted to the municipal agency. The
169. Editor's Note: Exhibit 109-2 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 244-186 JACKSON CODE § 244-188
1:1066
municipal agency may also require conservation easements to
protect wooded areas and steep slope areas and along
watercourses and drainage easements not delineated as freshwater
wetlands.
(2) Metes and bounds information for conservation easements shall be
included on subdivision plat maps to be filed with the Ocean County
Clerk. Deeds of easements shall be provided for conservation
easements on site plans and on minor subdivisions which are to be
filed by deed.
(3) Such conservation easements shall contain provisions to restrict
the removal of trees and ground cover except for the following
purposes: removal of dead or diseased trees and thinning of trees
and other growth to encourage the more desirable growth. The
easements shall also prohibit filling or grading of the lands and the
disposal of refuse or waste material of any type within the limits of
the easement.
B. Drainage easements.
(1) If the property on which a proposed development is to be located is
or is proposed to be traversed by a drainage facility of any kind,
including a pipe, channel, stream or swale, the municipal agency
may require that a stormwater and drainage easement or right-ofway
along said facility be provided by the developer. If existing land
drainage structures, such as French drains, are encountered
during the course of construction of any development, such
drainage structures shall either be removed entirely, or a revised
final plat showing the location of such drainage structures, and
accompanied with detailed cross sections thereof, shall be filed
with the Engineer of the municipal agency for consideration by the
municipal agency. The municipal agency, after consulting its
Engineer and other appropriate agencies, shall either require that
the structure be removed in part or in its entirety or recommend
such other action to the governing body as it deems appropriate.
(2) All easements shall be shown on the final plat with a notation as to
the purpose and restrictions of the easement. Easement lines on
the final plat shall be shown with accurate dimensions and bearings
unless the easement lines are parallel or concentric with lot lines.
(3) The width of drainage easements for stormwater conduits or
constructed channels shall be a minimum of 15 feet or such
additional width as may be required for the construction and
maintenance of the proposed drainage facilities. The area of all
retention and detention basins shall be contained within a drainage
easement. The width of drainage easements for natural
watercourses shall conform to the floodplain limits along both sides
of the watercourse, except that, if the location of such watercourse
is at or near the boundary of the subdivision, the dimensions of the
§ 244-188 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-188
1:1067
easement and right-of-way shall be modified to retain it within the
confines of the development. Said drainage easement or right-ofway
shall include provisions assuring the following:
(a) Preservation of the channel of the watercourse.
(b) Except in the course of an authorized drainage improvement,
prohibition of alteration of the contour, topography or
composition of the land within the easement or right-of-way.
(c) Prohibition of construction within the boundaries of the
easement and right-of-way which will obstruct or interfere with
the natural flow of the watercourse.
(d) Reservation of a public right-of-entry for the purpose of
maintaining the storm drain, drainage channel or the natural
flow of drainage through the watercourse, of maintaining any
and all structures related to the exercise of the easement or
right-of-way and of installing and maintaining a storm or
sanitary sewer system or other public utility.
C. Sight triangle easements. [Amended 6-8-1998 by Ord. No. 15-98]
(1) Nonresidential development.
(a) In addition to right-of-way widths required for the full design of
all streets and the wider intersections as specified, sight
triangle easements shall be required on all corners at all street
intersections. Such easements shall include provisions to
restrict the planting of trees or other plantings or the location
of structures exceeding 30 inches in height that would obstruct
the clear sight across the area of the easements and shall
include a reservation to the public of a right-of-entry for the
purpose of removing any object, natural or otherwise, that
obstructs the clear sight. Such easements shall include
triangular areas on each corner that are bounded by the rightof-
way lines and straight lines connecting points on each rightof-
way line which are 50 feet from the intersection of the rightof-
way lines, or their prolongations, with points on the other
intersecting street which are the following distances from the
intersection of the right-of-way lines:
[1] On local street or the minor collectors: 50 feet.
[2] On major collectors: 150 feet.
[3] On minor or major arterials: 250 feet.
(b) Where intersections occur on highways or roadways under the
jurisdiction of the State of New Jersey or County of Ocean, the
sight triangle easements required by the state or the County of
Ocean may be substituted in lieu of the requirements above.
§ 244-188 JACKSON CODE § 244-188
1:1068
§ 244-189. Environmental impact statement.
(2) Residential development. Sight triangles shall be in accordance
with 1990 AASHTO's A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways
and Streets standards and based on the speed limits established by
the government agency having jurisdiction. Sight triangle
easements shall be required and shall include the area of each
street corner that is bounded by the line which connects the sight
or the connecting points located on each side of the right-of-way
lines of the intersecting street. The planting of trees or other
plantings, or the location of structures exceeding 30 inches in
height that would obstruct the clear sight across the area of the
easements, shall be prohibited, and a public right-of-entry shall be
reserved for the purpose of removing any object, material or
otherwise, that obstructs the clear sight.
D. Shade tree and utility easement.
(1) There shall be provided, where possible and practical, a shade tree
and utility easement with a minimum width of six feet in the
following locations:
(a) Adjacent and parallel to both sides of each new street in a
subdivision.
(b) Adjacent and parallel to existing streets bordering the
proposed development.
(c) At such other locations and/or at greater widths as may be
required by the municipal agency.
(2) Shade tree and utility easements may be utilized for the
construction and maintenance of drainage, utilities, landscaping
and shade trees and for such other municipal or public utility
purposes as required. Such easements shall be considered part of
the lots they traverse for the purpose of determining lot depths,
setbacks, frontages and areas.
(3) In cases where a proposed development provides for the extension
of an existing street or abuts an existing street, where shade trees
and utilities have already been installed in a location other than as
specified above, the municipal agency may approve alternate utility
easement locations in order to provide for the continuation of
existing construction.
A. General provisions.
(1) The impact on the environment associated with development
projects necessitates a comprehensive analysis of the variety of
problems that may result and the measures that can be taken to
minimize the adverse impacts. It is recognized that the level of
detail required for the variety of development applications will vary
§ 244-188 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-189
1:1069
depending on the size of the project, the site conditions, the
location of the project and the information already in the
possession of the Township.
(2) Some flexibility is needed in preparing the environmental impact
statement (EIS). The EIS requirements pertaining to different types
of development applications are listed below.
(a) All agricultural operations conducted in accordance with a
plan approved by the Soil Conservation District and all
silviculture operations conducted in accordance with a plan
prepared by a professional forester are specifically exempt
from the environmental impact statement requirements.
(b) Any variance applications to the Zoning Board of Adjustment
not involving a site plan or subdivision application shall not
require an environmental impact statement unless specifically
requested by the Board. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall
inform the applicant regarding any information that may be
required.
(c) All preliminary major subdivision applications where more
than seven lots are created and/or preliminary major site plan
applications involving the construction of 20,000 square feet of
new gross floor area shall be accompanied by an
environmental impact statement.
(d) When, due to the particular characteristics of the site, the
Planning Board or Zoning Board determines that review of the
environmental impact statement is beyond the expertise of the
professionals normally employed by the Township to review
application materials, the reviewing Board may enlist the
services of a qualified environmental scientist to review the
materials submitted by the applicant. The qualified
professional will report to the Planning Board or Zoning Board
with copy to the Environmental Commission on the
methodology utilized to assess the environmental impacts, the
scope and comprehensiveness of the EIS and the credibility of
the findings. [Added 3-27-2006 by Ord. No. 07-06]
B. Submission format. When an environmental impact statement is
required, the applicant shall retain one or more competent
professionals to perform the necessary work. The qualifications and
background of the professionals shall be provided, and the method of
investigation shall be described. All applicable material on file in the
Township pertinent to evaluation of regional impacts shall also be
considered, including the Township Master Plan and the Natural
Resources Inventory. Furthermore, as much original research as
necessary shall be conducted to develop the environmental impact
statement. The inventory required by this section shall be accompanied
by a log indicating the dates, times, weather conditions and specific site
§ 244-189 JACKSON CODE § 244-189
1:1070
locations of all on-site inspections. All environmental impact statements
shall consist of written and graphic materials which clearly present the
required information utilizing the following format:
(1) Project description. Indicate the purpose and scope of the proposed
project. Enumerate the benefits to the public which will result from
the proposed project, and describe the suitability of the site for the
intended use. A description of the proposed project shall be
presented to indicate the extent to which the site must be altered,
the kinds of facilities to be constructed and the uses intended. The
resident population, working population and visitor population
shall be estimated. The compatibility or incompatibility of the
proposed project shall be described in relation to the following:
(a) Township Master Plan.
(b) Jackson Township Natural Resources Inventory.
(c) Master plans of adjacent municipalities.
(d) Ocean County Master Plan.
(e) Regional and state planning guides.
(f) Other pertinent planning documents.
(2) Site description and inventory. Provide an inventory of
environmental conditions on the site, which shall include the
following items:
(a) Geology. Describe the geologic formations, confining layers,
etc., including surficial deposits.
(b) Soils. The site location should be outlined on a copy of the
Ocean County Soil Survey. Soil boring data shall be submitted
as required in §§ 244-26B(25) and 244-30B(19). The location of
the soil borings shall be presented on a plan of the site.
(c) Surface water. Identify and describe all surface water features
on the subject site, including receiving water bodies in the
area. The applicant should incorporate best management
practices and best available technology to minimize impacts
associated with stormwater runoff into surface water bodies.
In addition, the applicant shall comply with federal, state or
county surface water testing requirements and submit any test
results as part of the environmental impact statement.
(d) Subsurface water. Describe subsurface water conditions on the
site in terms of aquifers present, depth to groundwater and
water supply capabilities. If the area for development is
proposing water supply wells, the name of the aquifer to be
utilized must be provided. In addition, provide information on
existing wells within 500 feet of the site from existing sources
§ 244-189 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-189
1:1071
such as the State of New Jersey Department of Environmental
Projection and/or the Ocean County Health Department
relative to depth, capacity, water quality and recharge
capabilities. The Township Engineer and/or the Township
Environmental Commission reserves the right to request
additional site specific information when warranted.
(e) Topography and existing development features. Provide
topographic contours and any existing features that are not
considered to be part of the natural environment on the site
and a minimum of 50 feet surrounding the site.
(f) Wetlands and state open waters. Freshwater wetlands,
transition area widths and state open waters shall be
delineated and certified pursuant to the Freshwater Wetlands
Protection Act Rules (N.J.A.C. 7:7A) outside of the State
Pinelands Area and pursuant to the Pinelands Protection Act
Rules170 within the State Pinelands Area. The delineation
report and plan shall be submitted as part of the EIS.
(g) Floodplains. The floodplain shall be identified and included on
site plan. Construction within the one-hundred-year floodplain
must be approved by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Bureau of Floodplain Management.
(h) Vegetation. Describe the existing vegetation on the site. A map
shall be prepared showing the location of major vegetation
groupings such as woodlands, open fields and wetlands. Where
woodlands are delineated, the forest types shall be indicated.
(i) Wildlife. Prepare an inventory of all wildlife species which may
utilize the subject site, including terrestrial and aquatic
vertebrates and avian species. This inventory shall identify all
such species which were encountered through on-site
investigations. All habitat on-site which is unique to Jackson
Township or the Ocean County region shall be identified. All
habitat which is critical in the maintenance of wildlife shall
also be identified. These areas may include but are not limited
to stream corridors, Atlantic White Cedar swamps, extensive
ecotone or cranberry bogs.
(j) Endangered or threatened species. Identify any endangered or
threatened species (plant or animal) protected by the state or
federal government which may utilize any portion of the site.
The New Jersey Natural Heritage Program and/or the New
Jersey Division of Fish, Game and Wildlife shall be contacted
regarding all endangered or threatened species sizings within
three miles of the project location for animals or 1.5 miles of
the project location for plants. A description of the type of
170. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:18A-1 et seq.
§ 244-189 JACKSON CODE § 244-189
1:1072
habitat utilized by any species identified within the limits
described above shall be provided, as well as the identification
of such habitat which is found on-site.
(k) Air quality. Provide the most recent quantitative air quality
data from the nearest state sampling station.
(l) Noise. Describe the existing noise conditions at the site.
(m) Cultural, historical and archaeological resources. Identify,
describe and map any existing cultural, historical or
archaeological resources. The Jackson Township Historical and
Cultural Commission and the Office of New Jersey Heritage
shall be contacted for the most recent resource records.
(n) Land use. Describe existing land uses on and within 500 feet of
the site.
(3) Impact. Provide an assessment of both the adverse and positive
impacts during and after construction. The specific concerns that
shall be considered include the following and shall be accompanied
by specific quantitative measurements where possible and
necessary:
(a) Soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from surface runoff.
(b) Flooding and floodplain disruption.
(c) Degradation of surface water quality.
(d) Groundwater pollution.
(e) Reduction of groundwater capabilities.
(f) Sewage disposal.
(g) Solid waste disposal.
(h) Vegetation destruction and disruption of vegetative
communities.
(i) Disruption of wildlife habitats, particularly those of
endangered and protected species.
(j) Destruction or degradation of scenic and historic features.
(k) Air quality degradation.
(l) Noise levels.
(m) Energy utilization.
(n) Wetland impacts.
(4) Environmental performance controls. A description of steps to be
taken to minimize adverse environmental impacts during
§ 244-189 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-189
1:1073
§ 244-190. Fences and walls.
construction and operations, both at the project site and in the
surrounding region. Such description shall be accompanied by
necessary maps, schedules and other explanatory data that may be
needed to clarify and explain the action to be taken.
(5) Commitment of resources. A statement concerning any irreversible
and irretrievable commitment of resources which would be
involved in the proposed project and a statement concerning steps
which could be taken which might avoid some or all of the adverse
environmental effects, including the no-action alternate.
(6) Unavoidable impacts. A listing and evaluation of adverse
environmental impacts which cannot be avoided, with particular
emphasis upon air or water pollution, increase in noise, damage to
natural resources, displacement of people and businesses,
displacement of existing farms, increase in sedimentation and
siltation. Describe all increases in municipal services and
consequences to municipal tax structures. Off-site impact shall also
be set forth and evaluated.
(7) Other required approvals. As a direct result of the investigations
made under the environmental impact statement, an inclusive
listing shall be provided stipulating the licenses, permits and
approvals required by federal, state, county or municipal law. The
status or copies of these permits and approvals shall also be
included.
C. Report submission. The environmental impact statement, including
appropriate references, shall be submitted to the Environmental
Commission for its review and recommendation.
D. Environmental impact statement waiver. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, the Planning Board may, at the request of an applicant, waive
the requirements for an environmental impact statement if it finds that
sufficient evidence has been submitted to support a conclusion that the
proposed development will have a negligible environmental impact.
Portions of such requirement may likewise be waived upon a finding
that the complete report need not be prepared in order to evaluate
adequately the environmental impact of a particular project.
A. General requirements.
(1) Fences and walls shall function to:
(a) Create privacy.
(b) Separate areas.
(c) Provide security.
(d) Screen areas from view.
§ 244-189 JACKSON CODE § 244-190
1:1074
(e) Aid in climate control.
(f) Serve other necessary functions.
(2) The design and materials of fences and walls shall be functional,
shall compliment the character of the size and type of building with
which they are associated and shall be suited to the nature of the
project.
(3) Walls may be constructed out of brick or stone or other
maintenance-free material, subject to review and approval by the
municipal agency. Concrete block, painted or unpainted, shall not
be permitted.
(4) Fences may be wooden or of another material, subject to review
and approval by the municipal agency.
(5) No fence or wall shall be constructed, installed or erected within a
sight triangle or sight distance area so as to constitute a hazard to
traffic or safety.
(6) No fence or wall shall contain spikes, barbed wire, razor ribbon or
any similar object.
(7) The following fences and fencing construction materials are
specifically prohibited in all districts in the Township of Jackson,
except for agricultural purposes:
(a) Barbed wire fences.
(b) Canvas fences.
(c) Cloth fences.
(d) Electrically charged fences.
(e) Expandable fences.
(f) Collapsible fences.
(8) All fences and walls must be erected within the property lines, and
no fence or wall shall be erected so as to encroach upon a public
right-of-way.
(9) All supporting members of a fence shall be located on the inside of
the fence, and if erected along or adjacent to a property line, the
supporting members of the fence shall face the principal portion of
the tract of land of the property upon which the fence is erected.
The finished side of fences and walls shall face adjacent properties.
B. Solid fences and walls hereafter erected, altered or reconstructed in
the front yard area of any zone in the Township of Jackson shall not
exceed 30 inches in height.
§ 244-190 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-190
1:1075
§ 244-191. Floor area requirements.
The following minimum gross habitable floor area requirements shall apply
to all detached single-family dwellings:
§ 244-192. Guardrails.
Guardrails, pipe railing or other appropriate barricades, as required by
the municipal agency, shall be designed and placed at drainage structures,
streams, embankment limits, curves and other required locations.
Guardrails shall be standard steel-beam type with galvanized steel posts
in accordance with the Standard Construction Details. Alternate designs of
guardrails and barricades may be used and shall be submitted for approval
of the municipal agency as part of the final plat submission.
§ 244-193. Landscaping; buffer areas; screening; shade trees.
C. Open fences located in the front yard area in any zone shall not exceed
48 inches in height. Fences exceeding 48 inches in height shall not
extend forward of the front building line of any existing dwelling.
D. Fences and walls shall not exceed six feet in height above ground level
when located in any side or rear yard, except as follows:
(1) In any business or industrial zone, fences or walls not exceeding
eight feet in height may be erected in the rear or side yard areas
and behind the front building line.
(2) On public park, recreation or school properties, open wire fences
not exceeding eight feet may be erected, except that fences
enclosing outdoor tennis courts, baseball backstops and other
fences normally provided with recreation facilities may be open
wire fences not exceeding 12 feet in height.
(3) Fences specifically required by other provisions of this chapter and
other municipal and state regulations.
E. Security and animal enclosure fencing within the RC Zone shall be
exempt from the requirements of this section.
A. One-bedroom dwelling: 860 square feet.
B. Two-bedroom dwelling: 960 square feet.
C. Three-bedroom dwelling: 1,060 square feet.
D. Four-or-more-bedroom dwelling: 1,160 square feet.
A. Landscaping.
(1) Landscaping plans submitted with subdivision or site plan
applications shall include the following:
§ 244-190 JACKSON CODE § 244-193
1:1076
(a) A listing of proposed plantings, including the common and
scientific name of each as well as the quantity of each.
(b) The location of the proposed plantings. For large projects in
which certain plant groupings repeat, a typical detail may be
shown rather than drawing the individual plantings
throughout. Symbols and a legend are desirable.
(c) Size of material to be planted, including deciduous trees by
caliper, shrubs, evergreens, small flowering and ornamental
trees according to Standards of the American Association of
Nurserymen.
(d) Details of the methods to be used in welling, staking and
guying, mulching and wrapping.
(e) Ground covers to be used in design, which may be indicated as
a mass planting, but spacing must be specified in the plant list.
(f) Screening and buffer plantings as required by this chapter.
(2) Plant selection.
(a) On slopes, the landscape plan should recommend plantings
that prevent erosion. Along major roads, the plantings should
provide a buffer from noise and lights; on north slopes,
plantings should serve as a wind screen; and to the south, the
landscaping should provide shade from the sun. The overall
landscaping plan should break up long buildings and screen
parking service, utility and loading/unloading areas. The plan
should provide for a variety of different species to protect
against disease attacking all the trees. A variety should be
selected with consideration for various seasons and of different
colors, textures, shapes, blossoms and foliage. The plan should
be particularly sensitive to local soil conditions; lack of or
overabundance of water, topography and climatological
factors. The type of tree, shrub or ground cover selected for a
particular site should be based on expert advice as to the most
appropriate species for the particular weather, soil conditions
and proposed function of the plant.
(b) Shade (street) trees. The following species shall be utilized as
shade and/or street trees:
[1] In areas of significant available moisture:
Willow oak (Quercus phellos)
Red maple (Acer rubrum)
Green ash (Fraxinus pennsylvanica)
Sweet gum (Liquidambar styraciflua)
Sour gum (Nyssa sylvatica)
§ 244-193 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-193
1:1077
River birch (Betula nigra) (single-trunked specimen)
[2] In all other areas:
Hop hornbeam (Ostrya virginiana)
Red oak (Quercus rubra)
White oak (Quercus alba)
Chestnut oak (Quercus prinus)
Scarlet oak (Quercus coccinea)
Linden tree (Tilia cordata)
Tulip tree (Liriodendron tulipifera)
Sugar maple (Acer saccharum)
White ash (Fraximus americana)
Scholar tree (Sophora japonica)
Mountain ash (Sorbus aucuparia)
(3) Plant size. The following minimum sizes should be utilized for trees
and shrubs unless otherwise approved by the municipal agency:
(a) Shade trees: two inches caliper or 10 to 12 feet tall, whichever
is greater.
(b) Evergreens, ornamental and foundation trees: 1 1/2 to 1 3/4
inches B & B or five feet to six feet tall, whichever is greater.
(c) Shrubs: two to 2 1/2 feet in height or spread, except in the case
of dwarf species or varieties which do not attain this size.
(4) Planting requirements:
(a) All plant materials should conform to the horticulture
standards as set forth by the American Association of
Nurserymen.
(b) Planting holes should be a minimum of 12 inches larger in
diameter than the soil ball or root mass, excluding ground
covers, and backfilled with a planting mixture incorporating a
minimum of 25% of organic matter, by volume.
(c) At least one tree of each variety planted should be tagged with
a durable label bearing the following information:
[1] Genus, species, variety and plant patent number, if a
patented tree.
[2] Cultural requirements, including watering and
fertilization.
(d) Trees should be staked in the following manner:
§ 244-193 JACKSON CODE § 244-193
1:1078
[1] Two stakes driven a minimum of two feet into undisturbed
soil outside the planting hole.
[2] Stakes, when driven, should be 1/2 to 2/3 the height of the
tree measured from ground level.
[3] Stakes should be two inches diameter minimum at the
thick end.
[4] Stakes should be placed in line with prevailing winds.
[5] Stakes should be attached to the tree with twelve-gauge
galvanized wire covered with rubber or plastic hose, or
tree ties especially manufactured for this purpose. The
loop in contact with the tree shall be loose enough to
permit growth and prevent girdling for two years, but shall
be tightly bound to the stake to prevent slipping.
(e) Wrapping. Each tree shall be wrapped with an expandable
paper or cloth treated to last at least one year.
[1] This wrap shall extend from the ground level up the trunk
to the first branches.
[2] This wrap should be attached or fastened at each end with
a material that will permit tree growth.
(f) Saucer. A ring of packed soil shall be placed around the
finished planting hold of each tree.
[1] This saucer shall be a minimum of four inches higher than
the finished grade.
[2] Saucers placed on slopes shall be level at the top and
perpendicular to the tree trunk.
(g) Plant material used should not be of a variety requiring
substantial maintenance or material highly subject to
pollution, salt damage along highways and current insect
disease manifestations.
(h) Trees and shrubs should be planted only when the soil is friable
and not muddy.
(i) Ground covers.
[1] All planting beds must be covered to a depth of three
inches, and type of covering to be used noted on the
landscape plan.
[2] All planted beds surrounded by grass should be edged by a
physical edging flush with the soil to permit mowing.
§ 244-193 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-193
1:1079
[3] Ground cover areas and steep banks greater than 15%
should be planted with an approved ground cover and an
approved mulch.
(j) All seed mixtures and sod types must meet the approval of the
Township Engineer.
(5) Protection of existing trees and shrubs.
(a) Trees designed to remain on the construction site should be
protected with a physical barrier. Such physical barrier shall
be clearly visible and consist of silt fencing or snow fencing or
other suitable barrier. All such barriers shall be approved by
the Planning Board or Township Engineer. The barrier shall be
installed before any site clearing, grading, excavation or
construction or installation of improvements is begun.
(b) The grade of land located within six feet of a tree shall not be
raised or lowered more than six inches unless compensated by
welling or retaining methods herein described.
(c) Tree wells shall be constructed around each tree or group of
trees before any grades are increased. Wells shall be
constructed of uncemented stone, block or any other suitable
material. This well should be a minimum of three feet in
diameter for a tree of four inches or less caliper, with the wall
located 18 inches from the trunk, with the construction
starting on existing grade so as not to disturb roots with
foundation construction. For trees of more than four inches
caliper, there should be added one foot to the diameter of the
well for each inch of caliper over four inches, as measured 12
inches above natural ground level.
(d) Retaining walls should be constructed around each tree or
group of trees immediately after the grade is lowered. This
retaining wall shall be constructed of railroad ties or any other
suitable material, subject to approval by the Township
Engineer.
(e) Any cleaning within six feet of tree trunk should be done by
hand. No equipment is to be run over this area, and no building
materials are to be attached against the tree or within the area
of the barrier.
(f) No tree should support any scaffolding, signs, temporary utility
or any other device. Topsoil is to be stockpiled in an area at
least eight feet from any tree designated to remain.
(6) Topsoil preservation. No topsoil shall be removed from the site or
used as spoil, except excess topsoil remaining after all
improvements have been installed in accordance with an approved
site plan or subdivision map after topsoil has been redistributed. All
§ 244-193 JACKSON CODE § 244-193
1:1080
topsoil moved during the course of construction shall be
redistributed on all regraded surfaces so as to provide an even
cover and shall be stabilized by seeding or planting. All regraded
areas and all lawn areas shall be covered by a four-inch minimum
thickness of topsoil. If sufficient topsoil is not available on the site,
topsoil meeting the requirements of the standard specifications
shall be provided to result in a four-inch minimum thickness.
(7) Removal of debris. All tree stumps and other tree parts or other
debris shall be removed from the site and disposed of in
accordance with law. No tree stumps, portions of a tree trunk or
limbs shall be buried anywhere in the development. All dead or
dying trees, standing or fallen, shall be removed from the site. If
trees and limbs are reduced to chips, they may, subject to the
approval of the Township Engineer, be used as mulch in landscaped
areas.
(8) Selective thinning. Throughout the development, except in areas
specifically designated to remain in their natural state, in
landscaped or buffer areas, on building lots and in open space
areas for public or quasi-public use, the developer shall selectively
thin or remove all dead or dying vegetation, either standing or
fallen, and shall remove, including grubbing out stumps, all
undesirable trees and other growth.
B. Buffer areas.
(1) All proposed uses, other than single-family and two-family
dwellings shall provide buffer areas along all side and rear property
lines which abut areas zoned for residential use and along front
property lines on local, minor collector and major collector streets
which abut areas zoned for residential use. Except as may
otherwise be provided in this chapter, the width of the buffer area
shall be not less than 10 feet or more than 50 feet, in accordance
with the minimum provided for in the following schedule or as
determined to be appropriate by the municipal agency.
(a) Building size less than 15,000 square feet: 10 feet.
(b) Building size 15,000 to 50,000 square feet: 25 feet.
(c) Building size greater than 50,000 square feet: 35 feet.
(2) If a proposed residential subdivision abuts a major collector or
minor or major arterial or an area zoned for or occupied by
nonresidential uses, the municipal agency shall consider the need
for buffer areas and may require that:
(a) A buffer strip not exceeding 50 feet in width be provided and
maintained in its natural state and/or suitably planted with
screening and landscaping;
§ 244-193 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-193
1:1081
(b) The adjacent lots front on an interior street and have sufficient
depth to provide suitable screening and landscaping planted at
the rear; or
(c) Other suitable means of separation be provided.
(3) Buffer areas shall be maintained and kept free of all debris,
rubbish, weeds and tall grass.
(4) No structure, storage of materials or parking of vehicles shall be
permitted within the buffer area, except that, where permitted by
the municipal agency, the buffer area may be broken for vehicular
or pedestrian access and appropriate directional and safety signs
provided.
(5) Prohibited activities within buffer areas:
(a) Removal, excavation, grading or disturbance of the soil.
(b) Dumping or filling with any materials.
(c) Erection of structures.
(d) Placement of pavements or any impervious cover.
(e) Destruction of plant life which would alter the existing pattern
of vegetation or cause substantial change of the buffer,
including but not limited to clear cutting, burning or
application of herbicides.
(6) Conditional activities. The following activities may be conducted in
buffer areas, provided that the activities are performed in a manner
that minimizes adverse effects to the buffer area:
(a) Normal property maintenance, which means activities
required to maintain lawfully existing artificial and natural
features, and landscaping.
(b) Mowing of existing lawn or field.
(c) Pruning of trees and shrubs.
(d) Selective cutting of trees with the approval of the Township
Forester.
(e) Replacement of existing nonnative plants with either native or
nonnative species.
(f) Limited supplemental planting of nonnative species that will
not significantly change the character of the existing
vegetational community of the buffer area. The creation of
lawn is not considered supplemental planting.
(g) Planting of native species.
§ 244-193 JACKSON CODE § 244-193
1:1082
(h) Maintenance of artificial features, including the repair,
rehabilitation, replacement, maintenance or reconstruction of
any previously authorized serviceable structure.
(i) Temporary placement of scaffolds, ladders or construction
supports for a period not to exceed six months.
(j) Removal of human-made debris by nonmechanical means
which does not destroy woody vegetation.
C. Screening. Within required buffer areas, there shall be provided
screening in accordance with the following regulations:
(1) Location.
(a) The location of screening within buffer areas wider than 20
feet shall be arranged in order to provide maximum protection
to adjacent properties and to avoid damage to or interference
within desirable existing plant material and shall be subject to
approval by the municipal agency. Possible arrangements
include but are not limited to those shown in Exhibits 109-3,
109-4 and 109-5.171
(b) Those portions of the buffer area not included within the
screening strip shall either contain existing vegetation
approved by the municipal agency and/or be planted with trees
and shrubs in accordance with a landscaping plan approved by
the municipal agency.
(2) Except as otherwise provided elsewhere in this chapter, the
screening area shall be a minimum of 20 feet in width and shall be
planted with evergreen trees approved by the municipal agency.
Trees shall be planted in two staggered rows eight feet apart and
shall be between five feet and six feet in height and shall conform to
the current American Standard for Nursery Stock sponsored by the
American Association of Nurserymen, Inc. Within each row, the
trees shall be planted on six-foot centers. (See Exhibit 109-6 at the
end of this chapter.)
(3) Where significant trees or significant native vegetation exists
within a screening area, they should be retained and supplemented
with shade-tolerant evergreen plantings to provide the equivalent
of the required screening as determined by the municipal agency.
(4) Where all proposed buildings, parking areas and other
improvements are located 100 feet or more from a property line
abutting a residential zone or use, the municipal agency may
permit a screening area 10 feet in width planted with a single row
of evergreen trees in a location approved by the municipal agency,
planted at five-foot intervals with a minimum height of five feet to
171. Editor's Note: Exhibits 109-3, 109-4 and 109-5 are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 244-193 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-193
1:1083
six feet to be substituted for the screening area required in Exhibit
109-6. (See Exhibit 109-7 at the end of this chapter.)
(5) The required height for a screening area shall be measured in
relationship to the elevation of the land at the nearest required
rear, side or front yard setback line of the abutting residential zone
or use. Where the average ground elevation of the location at which
the screening strip is to be planted is less than the average ground
elevation at the nearest required rear, side or front setback line on
the abutting residential zone or use, the municipal agency may
require that the height of trees planted in the required screening
strip be increased by an amount equal to the difference in
elevation. Where the average ground elevation of the location
which the screening strip is to be planted is greater than the
average ground elevation at the nearest required rear, side or front
setback line on the abutting residential zone or use, the municipal
agency may permit the height of trees planted in the required
screening strips to be decreased by an amount equal to 1/2 the
difference in elevation, except that in no case shall the required
height be reduced to less than four feet.
(6) All trees in a screening area shall be watered weekly through the
first growing season. The developer shall construct an earth saucer
around each tree to hold water and fill with suitable mulch. Trees
shall be nursery-grown, balled and bagged, sheared and shaped, of
the required height and planted according to standards of the
American Association of Nurserymen, Inc.
(7) At the following locations within required screening areas,
evergreen shrubs with a maximum mature height of 30 inches or
less, approved by the municipal agency as to type, location and
spacing, shall be provided in lieu of the evergreen trees specified
above:
(a) Within sight triangle easements.
(b) Within 25 feet of intersections where sight triangle easements
are not provided.
(c) Within 25 feet of access drives.
(8) Waiver. The municipal agency, after recommendation by its
professional staff and Environmental Commission, and after
examination and review, may waive, fully or partially, provisions of
this section in heavily wooded areas, in areas unsuitable for
plantings or because of other exceptional conditions and/or may
require supplementary plantings.
D. Shade trees. In each subdivision of land, the developer shall plant trees
in accordance with the following:
§ 244-193 JACKSON CODE § 244-193
1:1084
§ 244-194. Lots.
(1) Within shade tree easements, or between the sidewalk and
property line where easements are not provided, shade trees shall
be planted at a minimum distance of 40 feet apart and a maximum
of 50 feet apart.
(2) Shade trees shall be planted a minimum of five feet from sidewalks
and driveways and a minimum of 25 feet from street intersections
or streetlights.
(3) In addition to required street trees where existing trees to be saved
are insufficient, the developer shall plant supplemental shade trees
such that each lot shall have shade trees at a minimum rate of six
shade trees per acre of lot area. The Planning Board may require,
at its discretion, additional shade tree plantings based upon site
conditions.
A. Lot and block numbers.
(1) In accordance with the Tax Map specifications of the State of New
Jersey dated May 1975, prepared by the State of New Jersey
Department of the Treasury, as amended, subdivided lots and
blocks shall generally bear the original numbers with a number
added as a subscript. The use of letter designations shall
particularly be avoided.
(2) Prior to final plat approval by the municipal agency, two (2) copies
of the map shall be submitted to the Tax Map Consultant for proper
assignment of lot and block numbers. One copy of said map shall be
returned with the new lot and block numbers shown. The other
copy will be retained for Tax Map purposes.
B. House numbers. House numbers shall be assigned each lot by the
Township Engineer prior to final plat approval by the municipal agency.
C. Area and side lot lines. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, lot
dimensions and area shall not be less than the requirements of the
particular zoning district. Insofar as is practical, side lot lines shall be
at right angles to straight streets and radial to curved streets.
D. Lot frontage. Each lot shall front on an improved street accepted or to
be accepted by the Township.
E. Lot line on widened street. Where extra width is to be provided for the
widening of existing streets, lot measurements shall begin at the
proposed right-of-way line, and all setbacks shall be measured from
such lines, unless otherwise provided by this chapter.
F. Unsuitable lots. All lots shall be suitable for the purpose for which they
are intended to be used. To prevent the use of lots which are not
suitable because of adverse topography, rock formation, wetlands, flood
§ 244-193 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-194
1:1085
conditions or similar circumstances, the municipal agency may require
such revisions in a layout of the subdivision as will accomplish one of
the following:
(1) That the area of the unsuitable lot is included in other lots by
increasing the size of the remaining lots.
(2) That it is included in an area to be deeded to the Township or other
public or quasi-public body and will be held in its natural state for
conservation and/or recreation purposes.
(3) That some other suitable arrangement is made.
G. Driveways.
(1) All structures must be accessible by means of a driveway which
shall be not less than 10 feet wide and which shall have a centerline
grade of not less than 0.5% and not greater than 10%.
(2) All non-single-family uses shall provide on-site turnarounds to
eliminate the necessity of any vehicles backing onto any street.
(3) Driveways for all non-single-family uses shall be constructed in
accordance with the requirements of § 244-197.
(4) Driveways for single-family uses shall be constructed of bituminous
concrete, portland concrete or gravel according to the following
specifications:
(a) Bituminous concrete driveways shall consist of 1 1/2 inches of
bituminous concrete Type FABC on a six-inch-thick crushedstone
base.
(b) Concrete driveways shall consist of a minimum of four-inchthick
Class B concrete, shall be air-entrained and shall be
reinforced with 10/10 welded wire fabrics six inches by six
inches or the equivalent approved by the Township Engineer.
(c) Driveways fronting on other than minor streets shall be T-type,
or an equivalent approved by the Township Engineer,
permitting vehicles to turn around in the driveway areas.
(d) Driveways for their entire length and at the sidewalk or
property line shall be a minimum of 12 feet wide for a one-car
driveway and 16 feet for a two-car driveway.
(e) Driveways must be extended to the existing edge of the
pavement, curbline or edge of roadway and shall be a minimum
of 14 feet in width and tapering to not less than 12 feet at the
property line or sidewalk for a one-car driveway and 18 feet in
width tapering to not less than 16 feet for a two-car driveway.
(f) If proposed front yard building setbacks are a minimum of 20
feet in excess of the required front yard setback, a minimum of
§ 244-194 JACKSON CODE § 244-194
1:1086
§ 244-195. Monuments.
Monuments shall be of a size and shape required by Section 4 of Chapter
358 of the Laws of 1953172 and shall be placed in accordance with said
statute.
§ 244-196. Off-street loading.
§ 244-197. Off-street parking: nonresidential development.
[Amended 6-8-1998 by Ord. No. 15-98]
In all zoning districts and in connection with every industrial, commercial,
institutional/professional, recreational, or any other use, there shall be
provided off-street parking spaces in accordance with the following
requirements and parking lot standards:
six inches of compacted stone may be substituted for a paved
driveway. Except for driveways on unimproved roadways, the
driveway must be confined at its terminus at the roadway with
either a concrete apron or sidewalk meeting the requirements
of § 244-203 to prevent the stone from accumulating on the
roadway.
A. For every building, structure or part thereof having over 10,000 square
feet of gross floor area erected and occupied for any use other than
residential, there shall be provided at least one truck standing, loading
and unloading space on the premises, not less than 12 feet in width, 35
feet in length and with a minimum vertical clearance of 14 feet.
Buildings that contain an excess of 15,000 square feet of gross floor
area shall be required to provide additional off-street loading spaces as
determined by the municipal agency during site plan review.
B. Access to truck standing, loading and unloading areas shall not be
provided directly from a public street or alley or from any right-of-way.
C. Unless otherwise permitted, fire zones designated by the Jackson
Township Bureau of Fire Prevention shall not be used as standing,
loading or unloading areas.
D. Loading areas, as required under this section, shall be provided in
addition to off-street parking spaces and shall not be considered as
supplying off-street parking spaces and shall not be located within any
driveway aisle or conflict with parking space access.
E. No off-street loading and unloading area shall be permitted in any
required front yard area.
A. Type of parking permitted. Each dead storage bay of an off-street
parking space may be perpendicular to the aisle, parallel to the aisle or
172. Editor's Note: See now N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.
§ 244-194 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-197
1:1087
at any angle between 60° and 90°. No angle parking layout shall be
permitted with an angle of less than 60°.
B. Stall size.
(1) Automobiles. Each perpendicular or angle off-street parking space
shall occupy a rectangular area of not less than nine feet in width
and 18 feet in depth exclusive of access drives and aisles, except
that parking spaces for the physically handicapped shall be 12 feet
wide. The Planning Board may, at its sole discretion, require that all
or a portion of required off-street parking spaces be a minimum of
10 feet in width. Where sidewalks occur in parking areas, parked
vehicles shall not overhang or extend over the sidewalk unless an
additional sidewalk width of two feet is provided in order to
accommodate such overhang. Parallel parking spaces shall occupy
a rectangular area of 10 feet by 23 feet.
(2) Other vehicles.
(a) Uses that own, rent or service motor vehicles larger than
automobiles which must be parked and/or stored on the site
shall indicate, in a statement of operations submitted with the
site plan, the size of such vehicles and the anticipated largest
number of such vehicles to be stored and/or parked on the site
at any single time, and the site plan shall show a sufficient
number of parking and/or storage stalls at an adequate size for
the largest number of such vehicles to be parked and/or stored
on the site at any one time. Aisles providing for access to such
parking and/or storage stalls shall be of adequate width for the
vehicles to be served.
(b) Failure of an applicant to indicate, where applicable, in the
statement of operations that vehicles larger than automobiles
are to be parked and/or stored on the site and provide for such
parking and/or storage on the site plan shall be a violation of
this chapter, and any building permit or certificate of
occupancy that has been issued shall not be valid and may be
revoked.
(c) Any change of use to a use which requires parking and/or
storage space for a greater number of vehicles larger than
automobiles than the previous use shall be required to make
application for site plan approval.
C. Aisle widths.
(1) Aisles from which cars directly enter or leave parking spaces shall
not be less than 24 feet wide for perpendicular parking or for
parking at any angle greater than 60° and 20 feet wide for sixtydegree-
angle parking, except that all two-way aisles shall be a
minimum of 24 feet wide.
§ 244-197 JACKSON CODE § 244-197
1:1088
(2) Only angle parking stalls or parallel parking stalls shall be used
with one-way aisles.
D. Access drives.
(1) Entrance and exit drives shall have a minimum width of 18 feet for
those designed for one-way traffic and 24 feet for those carrying
two-way traffic.
(2) Parking areas for 25 or more cars and access drives for all parking
areas on major or minor arterials shall provide curbed return radii
of not less than 15 feet for all right-turn movements and left-turn
access from one-way streets and concrete aprons on entrance and
exit drives.
E. Paint striping. All parking areas shall provide paint striping to delineate
parking stalls, barrier lines, lane lines, directional arrows, stop lines,
fire lanes and other striping as may be required to ensure safe and
convenient traffic circulation. Such striping shall be in substantial
conformance with the Uniform Manual on Traffic Control Devices.
F. Traffic signs. All parking areas shall provide traffic control signs and
devices necessary to ensure safe and convenient traffic circulation.
Such devices shall be in substantial conformance with the Uniform
Manual on Traffic Control Devices.
G. Curbing. The perimeter of all parking areas and internal islands within
all parking areas open to the general public shall have continuous castin-
place concrete curbing (see Exhibit 109-1 at the end of this chapter)
with a six-inch face or such alternate curb types as may be approved by
the municipal agency at the time of site plan approval. The municipal
agency may waive the requirement for curb areas open only to service
vehicles or for loading and unloading, provided that drainage, vehicle
control and safety are properly accommodated by alternate means.
H. Paving. All parking areas shall provide pavement in accordance with
the requirements of local street and minor collector streets set forth in
§ 244-210, except as follows:
(1) Parking areas for fewer than 25 cars, which the municipal agency
determines are not likely to be utilized by heavy truck traffic or
drive-up window service, may be paved with two inches of
pavement, Type FABC-1, over a six-inch gravel base, all in
accordance with the specifications contained in § 244-196 of this
chapter.
(2) In parking areas for over 100 cars, the municipal agency may
require that access drives and aisles provide a minimum surface of
not less than two inches of pavement, Type FABC-1, a minimum
bituminous stabilized base course of not less than three inches and
a dense graded aggregate base course of six inches in conformance
§ 244-197 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-197
1:1089
with the standards of § 244-210. Alternate design specifications
may be approved subject to approval by the Township Engineer.
I. Location of parking.
(1) Parking areas in residential zones for uses other than single-family
and two-family dwellings may be located in the rear or side yard
but shall not be located in any required front yard setback.
(2) No area shall be used for parking unless it is large enough to
provide for at least three contiguous stalls.
(3) Where parking is permitted between the front building line and the
right-of-way line, whether by this chapter or variance, a safety
island or raised median separating the public street from the
parking area shall be provided in accordance with the following
minimum requirements:
(a) The width of the safety island shall be that width between the
proposed curbline and a point eight feet inside the property
line. When this width is less than 18 feet, the parking area shall
be reduced to provide a minimum width for the safety island of
18 feet. All required tree and shrub plantings shall be placed
on the on-site portion of the safety island.
(b) When perpendicular or angled parking spaces abut the safety
island, the stall depth may be measured from a point one foot
outside the face of the curb for perpendicular spaces or angled
spaces greater than 60° and two feet outside the face of curb
for sixty-degree-angle spaces. Such parking spaces shall be
separated from access drives by curbed islands with a
minimum width of 10 feet.
(c) Safety islands shall be landscaped, topsoiled and be provided
with a cover or mulch of maintenance-free materials which
provide a clear and unmistakable distinction between the
parking area and the safety island.
(d) Notwithstanding the use of maintenance-free materials, there
shall be provided an average of at least one deciduous tree two
inches in diameter at breast height every 40 feet, or part
thereof, on all safety islands. For each tree provided, a
minimum of three shrubs shall also be planted. The portions of
the safety island within 25 feet of any access drive or street
intersection shall be planted with shrubs less than 30 inches in
height. The plantings provided need not be arbitrarily
arranged in regular, geometric patterns. Continuous massing
of plants of single species and plantings which visually relate
and unify the design are preferable. Alternate or additional
plantings may be permitted by the municipal agency in
accordance with an approved site plan. All parking lot
landscaping shall be of such quality as to improve and enhance
§ 244-197 JACKSON CODE § 244-197
1:1090
the site and its surrounding areas. Appropriate places for
landscaping include the raised walkways or sidewalk areas at
the end of bays and in specific planting islands established
throughout the lots. In narrow islands, low-spreading and lowmaintenance
plants shall be used. Where more space is
available, taller shrubs shall be used.
(e) No commercial signs, light standards or other aboveground
obstructions other than plantings and traffic control devices
and signs shall be permitted within 10 feet of the street rightof-
way.
(4) All required parking spaces and facilities shall be located on the
same lot or parcel as the structure or use it shall serve. In the case
of nonresidential uses, parking facilities may be provided on other
lots or parcels within a radius of 300 feet from the boundary of the
lot containing the use to which said parking spaces and facilities
are accessory, provided that said lots are in the same ownership as
the lot containing the principal use and subject to deed restrictions
binding the owner and his heirs, successors and assigns to
maintain the required number of spaces available and required
facilities throughout the life of such use.
(5) Required parking spaces for the physically handicapped shall be
located to provide convenient access to building entrances by way
of depressed curbs and ramps in accordance with state regulations.
Parking spaces for the physically handicapped shall be a minimum
of 12 feet in width, and the number of spaces to be provided shall
be determined by the following table:
Total Parking Spaces in
Parking Area
Minimum Number of Spaces to
be Provided for Physically
Handicapped
Up to 50 1
51 to 200 2
Over 200 2, plus 1% of the number of
spaces over 200 rounded to the
next higher whole number
J. Number of parking lot spaces.
(1) Parking lots having 50 or fewer spaces shall be designed to provide
the following minimum design requirements:
(a) A safety island in accordance with Subsection I above, where
parking is provided in the front yard area.
(b) An unbroken landscaping strip along side and rear property
lines a minimum of 10 feet in width. These landscaping strips
shall have the same minimum planting requirements as safety
islands, except that:
§ 244-197 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-197
1:1091
[1] Where screening is required under this chapter, the
screening requirements shall take precedence.
[2] Where the property abuts a lot zoned for nonresidential
purposes, but utilized for residential purposes, the
municipal agency may also require screening.
(c) Not more than one two-way access drive or two one-way access
drives shall be permitted on any street.
(d) Where possible, access drives shall not be located closer than
100 feet to the nearest right-of-way line of an intersecting
street.
(e) No parking stall shall be located to require a vehicle to back
into any portion of the right-of-way in order to enter or exit the
parking stall.
(f) All parking areas for 10 or more vehicles shall have artificial
lighting that will provide a minimum lighting level of 0.5
horizontal footcandle throughout the parking area and access
drives. For multifamily uses, such lights shall be operated from
dusk to dawn and for all other uses when the site or structure
is occupied. Freestanding light poles shall be no higher than
the height of the highest principal building or 30 feet,
whichever is less. Shielding shall be required where necessary
to prevent light trespass glare upon adjacent properties or
streets.
(2) Large parking areas.
(a) Parking lots which have a capacity for parking more than 50
vehicles shall incorporate the following minimum design
standards:
[1] All the minimum design standards for small parking areas.
[2] Entrance and exit drives.
[a] All entrance drives shall extend a minimum distance of
100 feet back from the street right-of-way or to a
parking access aisle or major circulation drive.
[b] All exit drives shall extend a minimum distance of 60
feet back from the street curb or to a parking access
aisle or major circulation drive.
[c] No parking stalls shall utilize the required entrance
and exit drives or major circulation drives as parking
access aisles.
[3] Access drives.
§ 244-197 JACKSON CODE § 244-197
1:1092
[a] Wherever feasible, access drives located along oneway
streets or divided roadways shall be separated
one-way drives. Said drives shall be located so that
vehicles enter the parking area at the beginning of the
property and exit at the far end of the property unless
other considerations, such as a median opening,
dictate otherwise.
[b] Access drives shall not be located closer than 100 feet
to the nearest right-of-way line of an intersecting
street, except that for uses such as shopping centers
which, in the opinion of the municipal agency, will
generate large traffic volumes, access drives shall not
be located closer than 200 feet to the nearest right-ofway
line of an intersecting street.
[c] No driveway shall be located less than 10 feet from
the side property line or within 30 feet of an existing
drive, whichever is greater.
[d] Properties having a continuous frontage in excess of
500 feet on any one street shall be permitted two-way
and one-way access drives providing for not more than
two entrance and two exit movements on the street.
Properties having a continuous frontage in excess of
1,000 feet on any one street may be permitted to have
additional access drives subject to the approval of the
municipal agency.
(b) Where the municipal agency determines that the total number
of off-street parking spaces required by this chapter may not
be immediately required for a particular use, it may permit a
staged development plan which requires that only a portion of
the parking area, but not less than 65% of the required spaces,
be completed initially, subject to the following regulations:
[1] The site plan shall clearly indicate both that portion of the
parking area to be initially paved and the total parking
needed to provide the number of spaces required by this
chapter.
[2] The site plan shall provide for adequate drainage of both
the partial and total parking areas.
[3] The portion of the parking area not to be paved initially
shall be landscaped in accordance with a plan approved by
the municipal agency.
[4] The applicant shall post separate performance guaranties,
in addition to the performance guaranties required under
Article V of this chapter, which shall reflect the cost of
§ 244-197 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-197
1:1093
installing the additional parking facilities necessary to
provide the total number of parking spaces required.
[5] In lieu of a permanent certificate of occupancy, a
temporary certificate of occupancy shall be issued for a
time period not to exceed two years. Prior to the expiration
of the allotted time period, the applicant may either install
the additional parking shown on the approved site plan
and apply to the Construction Official for issuance of a
permanent certificate of occupancy or apply to the
municipal agency after the use has been in operation a
minimum of 18 months for a determination as to whether
or not the initial parking area provided is adequate. If the
municipal agency determines that the parking facility is
adequate as originally constructed, the performance
guaranties may be released and a permanent certificate of
occupancy issued. If, however, the municipal agency
determines that the partial off-street parking area is not
adequate, the applicant shall be required to install the
additional parking facilities in accordance with the terms
of the performance guaranties prior to the issuance of a
permanent certificate of occupancy.
[6] Any change of use, on a lot or parcel for which the
municipal agency may have approved a partial paving of
off-street parking areas, to a use which requires more
parking spaces than are provided on the site shall require
submission of a new site plan for the entire lot or parcel.
K. Parking area landscaping. Landscape island areas should be provided
at the end of parking rows where parking access aisles intersect
circulation drives. In addition, large parking areas should provide
landscaped dividing strips which separate the parking area into smaller
areas containing 50 spaces or less. The plantings required within the
parking area shall be considered exclusive from any other plantings
that may be required for screening or safety island planting. All
landscaping for end islands and dividing strips shall be shown as part of
the detailed landscaping plan submission, where required. The
following criteria shall apply for internal landscaped end islands and
dividing strips:
(1) They should have a minimum width of 10 feet.
(2) They shall be topsoiled, and turf grass or other vegetative ground
cover shall be provided. The use of maintenance-free material
other than seeding and topsoil may be permitted if the same
provides a safe and attractive alternative.
(3) Unless otherwise approved by the municipal agency, they shall be
planted with deciduous trees of two-inch diameter at breast height
with an average distance between trees at ground level of 40 feet.
§ 244-197 JACKSON CODE § 244-197
1:1094
All trees shall be planted in a dormant state and in accordance with
the appropriate requirements of § 244-193. The area between trees
shall be planted with an average of three shrubs. The plantings
provided need not be arbitrarily arranged in regular geometric
patterns. Continuous massing of plants of single species, and
plantings which visually relate and unify the design are preferable.
(4) The depth of perpendicular or angled parking stalls which abut a
landscaped dividing strip may be measured from a point one foot
outside the face of the curb for perpendicular spaces or angled
spaces greater than 60° and two feet outside the face of the curb
for sixty-degree-angle spaces.
L. Retaining walls and embankment slopes.
(1) In the event that parking is proposed on a lot or site having a slope
greater than 10%, regardless of size, it shall be terraced, utilizing
retaining walls or properly reinforced embankment slopes and
providing for adequate safety, stability and drainage. At no time
should an embankment slope that is not reinforced, or any other
earthen material having a greater elevation than the adjacent
parking area, have a slope exceeding a ratio of 3:1.
(2) When retaining walls, terraces, embankment slopes or similar
types of earthen retaining devices are necessitated adjacent to or
within the parking area, they shall be kept in good repair or
otherwise maintained so as to keep the parking area free of debris
and dirt.
M. Access to adjoining property. No unrestricted vehicular access shall be
permitted between adjacent properties. Vehicular access, if agreed
upon by the owners or possessors of adjacent properties, or if required
by the municipal agency, shall normally be limited to one opening with a
minimum aisle width of 24 feet, providing two lanes of traffic, and shall
be located in such a manner as to offer continuity of a similar access
drive on the adjacent property. The opening shall occur at a point
having the greatest distance from the street line which would facilitate
the joining of properties. Access shall normally be denied across the
remainder of the side lines by construction of a landscaped dividing
strip, 10 feet in width, on the property being developed. If and when the
adjacent property is developed, there shall be a similar dividing strip at
least 10 feet wide. All dividing strips shall be landscaped as provided in
this section. The municipal agency may also require that provision be
made for future connection to adjacent undeveloped properties.
N. Required parking spaces.
(1) Minimum off-street parking spaces required.
§ 244-197 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-197
1:1095
Type of Establishment Number of Spaces
Automobile repair shop 1 for each 400 square feet of gross
floor area
Automobile sales
establishment
1 for each 400 square feet of gross
floor area shall be provided for
customer and employee parking. These
areas shall be in addition to areas
utilized for display and storage of
vehicles. Site plans shall specify which
parking spaces are designated for
customers, employees, display and
storage.
Automobile service
station
5 for each service bay, exclusive of
vehicle service area. In no instance
shall there be fewer than 5 off-street
parking spaces.
Banks, savings and loan
associations and similar
financial institutions
1 for each 200 square feet of gross
floor area
Bar, cocktail lounge,
nightclub, including
restaurants with bars
1 for each 50 square feet of gross floor
area
Barber and beauty shop 3 for each chair (if known), but not less
than 1 per 200 square of gross floor
area
Boat sales 1 1/2 for each 1,000 square feet of
land area in the site
Bowling alley 5 for each alley. Other commercial
uses within the same building will be
computed separately in accordance
with this section.
Business offices
[Amended 12-23-2002
by Ord. No. 50-02]
1 for each 200 square feet of gross
floor area
Car washes 5 for employees, plus off-street storage
(stacking) space equal to at least 5
times the number of cars that can be
in the wash process at 1 time
§ 244-197 JACKSON CODE § 244-197
1:1096
Type of Establishment Number of Spaces
Churches and places of
worship
1 for each 4 seats in the main
congregation seating area. Where no
individual seats are provided, 20
inches of bench shall be considered as
1 seat. Where seats or benches are not
provided or are provided only in a
portion of the main congregation
seating area, there shall be 1 parking
space for each 50 square feet of floor
area within the main congregation
seating area.
Community center,
library, museum, art
gallery
1 for each 200 square feet of gross
floor area
Community club, private
club, lodge
1 for each 100 square feet of gross
floor area
Convalescent home,
nursing home, rest home
1 for each 2 beds, based on its licensed
bed capacity
Convention or conference
center, meeting rooms,
assembly or exhibition
hall
1 for each 50 square feet of gross floor
area
Dwellings 2 for each dwelling unit in singlefamily
homes, 2-family homes,
attached dwellings or multifamily
dwellings
Dental or medical offices
[Amended 12-23-2002
by Ord. No. 50-02]
1 for each 150 square feet of gross
floor area, except that if located within
a building housing 3 or more separate,
unassociated practitioners, the
requirement shall be 1 parking space
for each 200 square feet of floor area
Drive-in restaurant 1 for each 35 square feet of gross floor
area
Driving range, miniature
golf
1 for each tee or hole
Farmers' market 1 for each 1,000 square feet of land
area in the site
Furniture and appliance
stores or similar types of
uses requiring large
amounts of storage
1 for each 400 square feet up to 4,000
square feet, plus 1 parking space for
each 800 square feet of gross floor
area above 4,000 square feet
§ 244-197 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-197
1:1097
Type of Establishment Number of Spaces
Government office To be determined by the municipal
agency, except that governmental
offices within privately owned
buildings shall provide a minimum of 1
parking space for each 150 square feet
of gross floor area
Hardware and auto
supply stores
1 for each 400 square feet of gross
floor area
Hospital (general,
mental, sanatorium)
1 for each 2 beds based on its licensed
capacity
Hotel, motel 1 for each guest unit, plus 10 for each
1,000 square feet of gross floor area
devoted to other commercial uses
Laundromat or similar
coin-operated cleaning
establishment
1 for each 200 square feet of gross
floor area
Manufacturing or
industrial establishment,
research or testing
laboratory, bottling plant
or similar uses
1 for each 500 square feet of gross
floor area
Mortuary, funeral home 1 for every 100 square feet of gross
floor area
Nursery school, childcare
center, day camp or
similar use
1 for each 500 square feet of gross
floor area
Professional office
[Amended 12-23-2002
by Ord. No. 50-02]
1 for each 200 square feet of gross
floor area
Public and private
utilities, electrical
substation, gas regulator,
waterworks, pumping
station and similar
facilities
To be determined by the municipal
agency based on the specific need of
the use
Restaurant, cafe, diner,
luncheonette
1 for each 50 square feet of gross floor
area
Recreation facilities Those not specifically mentioned shall
be determined by the municipal
agency
§ 244-197 JACKSON CODE § 244-197
1:1098
Type of Establishment Number of Spaces
Retail stores, except
otherwise specified
[Amended 12-23-2002
by Ord. No. 50-02]
1 for each 200 square feet of gross
floor area
Studio (art, music, dance,
gymnastics and similar
for the purpose of giving
instruction rather than
shows or exhibitions)
1 for each 100 square feet of gross
floor area
Schools
Elementary 1 for each 8 students based on design
capacity
Middle or junior high
school
1 for each 5 students based on design
capacity
High school 1 for each 3 students based on design
capacity
College or university 1 for each 1 1/2 students based on
design capacity
§ 244-197 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-197
1:1099
Type of Establishment Number of Spaces
Shopping centers 6 for each 1,000 square feet of gross
floor area for centers having less than
500,000 square feet. Shopping centers
having 500,000 square feet or more
shall provide parking at the rate of 5.5
spaces for each 1,000 square feet of
gross floor area, except that if the use
of said formula shall produce 2,500
parking spaces or more, then parking
shall be provided at the rate of 5
spaces for each 1,000 square feet of
gross floor area. If more than 5% of
the enclosed gross floor area of any
shopping center is occupied by malls,
lobbies, corridors, heating plants or
other space not utilized for direct
commercial purposes which, in the
opinion of the municipal agency, will
not generate a need for parking, the
municipal agency may allow the
parking required to be based on the
gross leasable area of the shopping
center at the above rate. The "gross
leasable area," for the purpose of this
chapter, shall be defined as the total
floor area designed for tenant
occupancy and exclusive use, including
basements, mezzanines and upper
floors.
Stadium 1 for every 2 1/2 seats, plus an area
designed and designated to
accommodate buses at a rate of 1 bus
for every 500 seats
Theater 1 for each 35 square feet of gross floor
area
Veterinary clinics or
hospitals or animal care
facilities
1 for each 400 square feet of gross
floor area
Warehouse, wholesale,
machinery or large
equipment sales
1 for each 1,500 square feet of gross
floor area, plus 1 for each vehicle used
in connection with the business
(2) Criteria for determining required parking spaces.
(a) In computing the number of the above required parking
spaces, the following rules shall govern:
§ 244-197 JACKSON CODE § 244-197
1:1100
§ 244-198. Off-Street parking: residential development. [Added
6-8-1998 by Ord. No. 15-98]
Off-street parking requirements for residential developments shall be in
compliance with, and all parking areas shall be designed and constructed
in accordance with, Subchapter 4 (Streets and Parking) of N.J.A.C. 5:21
(Residential Site Improvement Standards), as amended.
§ 244-199. Open spaces.
Common open space or public open space areas proposed to be provided in
conjunction with applications for development for subdivisions or site plans
shall be subject to the following requirements:
[1] Where fractional spaces result, the required number shall
be construed to be the nearest whole number.
[2] The parking space requirements for a use not specifically
mentioned herein shall be the same as required for a use
of similar nature as determined by the municipal agency
based upon that use enumerated herein which is most
similar to the proposed use. If there is no use enumerated
herein having sufficient similarity to the use proposed to
enable the municipal agency to establish rational parking
requirements, the municipal agency may, in its discretion,
direct the applicant to furnish the municipal agency with
such data as may be necessary to enable the municipal
agency to establish rational parking requirements.
(b) Nothing in the above requirements shall be construed to
prevent the joint use of off-street parking facilities by two or
more uses on the same site, provided that the total of such
spaces shall not be less than the sum of the requirements for
various individual uses computed separately by the above
requirements.
(c) No part of off-street parking required by a structure or use
shall be included as part of an off-street parking requirement of
another use.
A. Open space requirements. For the purposes of this section, the term
"open space" is defined to mean any area of land (exclusive of lot yard
requirements, streets, utility rights-of-way and detention basins) or
water which is open to the sky and which is dedicated, designated or set
aside for active or passive recreational use. Open space areas within
developments in the MF, MHP, PRC, PMURD, PMUD, R-2, R-3, R-5, R-9,
R-15, R-20, PV, RG-2, RG-3 and RG-4 zoning districts shall be subject to
all provisions of this section and the following specific requirements:
[Amended 5-12-2003 by Ord. No. 6-03]
§ 244-197 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-199
1:1101
(1) A minimum of 40% in the MF Zone; 30% in the MHP PRC, PMURD
and PMUD Zones; and 10% in the R-2, R-3, R-5, R-9, R-15, R-20, PV,
RG-2, RG-3 and RG-4 Zones of the tract of land proposed for
development shall not be included in building lots or streets and
shall be set aside for open space. In the R-2, R-3, R-5, R-9, R-15,
R-20, PV, RG-2, RG-3 and RG-4 Zones, the requirement applies to
subdivisions of 10 lots or 10 units or more.
(2) Each open space area shall contain a minimum of two contiguous
acres.173
(3) Where feasible, the following land areas and features should be
preserved as open space:
(a) Floodway and flood hazard areas, as defined in Chapter 210,
Flood Damage Prevention, of the Code of the Township of
Jackson.
(b) Freshwater wetlands and adjacent buffer areas under the
jurisdiction of the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection.
(c) Land with slopes in excess of 15%.
(d) Existing watercourses, ponds, bogs and swamps.
(e) Land with a seasonal high water table of less than two feet.
Atsion, Berryland, Manahawkin, Mullica and Shrewsbury soils
usually have a seasonal high water table of less than two feet.
(4) Within any development, a minimum of 50% of the open space area
shall be land which can be developed for recreational use and shall
be exclusive of the types of areas cited in Subsection A(3) above or
required buffer areas. Stormwater management facilities shall not
be included in the usable open space. If more than 50% of a tract of
land is undevelopable wetlands, then the Planning Board may
waive the open space requirement. Recreation facilities in
accordance with § 244-200 may be constructed on the usable open
space.
B. Site preparation. Within open space areas, the municipal agency may
require a developer to make certain site preparation improvements,
which may include but are not limited to the following:
(1) Removal of dead or diseased trees.
(2) Thinning of trees or other growth to encourage more desirable
growth.
173. Editor's Note: Original § 109-178A(3) of the 1972 Code, regarding the width of open space
areas, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 11-19-1998 by Ord. No.
28-98.
§ 244-199 JACKSON CODE § 244-199
1:1102
(3) Removal of trees in areas planned for ponds, lakes, active
recreational facilities or pathways.
(4) Grading and seeding.
C. Reservation of public areas.
(1) If the Township Master Plan provides for the reservation of
designated streets, public drainageways, flood-control basins or
public areas within the proposed development, before approving a
subdivision or site plan, the municipal agency may further require
that such streets, ways, basins or areas be shown on the plat in
locations and sizes suitable to their intended uses. The municipal
agency may reserve the location and extent of such streets, ways,
basins or areas shown on the plat for a period of one year after the
approval of the final plat or within such further time as may be
agreed to by the developer. Unless during such period or extension
thereof the municipality shall have entered into a contract to
purchase or institute condemnation proceedings according to law
for the fee or a lesser interest in the land comprising such streets,
ways, basins or areas, the developer shall not be bound by such
reservations shown on the plat and may proceed to use such land
for private use in accordance with applicable development
regulations. The provisions of this section shall not apply to streets
and roads, flood-control basins or public drainageways
necessitated by the subdivision or land development and required
for final approval.
(2) The developer shall be entitled to just compensation for actual loss
found to be caused by such temporary reservation and deprivation
of use. In such instance, unless a lesser amount has previously been
mutually agreed upon, just compensation shall be deemed to be the
fair market value of an option to purchase the land reserved for the
period of reservation, provided that determination of such fair
market value shall include but shall not be limited to consideration
of the real property tax apportioned to the land reserved and
prorated for the period of reservation. The developer shall be
compensated for the reasonable increased cost of legal,
engineering or other professional services incurred in connection
with obtaining subdivision approval or site plan approval, as the
case may be, caused by the reservation.
D. Open space ownership.
(1) The type of ownership of land dedicated for open space purposes
shall be selected by the owner, developer or subdivider subject to
the approval of the municipal agency and may include but is not
necessarily limited to the following:
(a) The Township of Jackson, subject to acceptance by the
Township Committee.
§ 244-199 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-199
1:1103
(b) Other public jurisdictions or agencies, subject to their
acceptance.
(c) Quasi-public organizations, subject to their acceptance.
(d) Homeowners' or condominium associations or organizations.
(e) Shared, undivided interest by all property owners in the
development.
(2) Any lands dedicated for open space purposes shall contain
appropriate covenants and deed restrictions approved by the
municipal agency, which ensure that:
(a) The open space area will not be further subdivided in the
future.
(b) The use of the open space areas will continue in perpetuity for
the purposes specified.
(c) Appropriate provisions are made for the maintenance of the
open space areas.
E. Maintenance of common open space.
(1) The Township or other governmental agency may, at any time and
from time to time, accept the dedication of land or any interest
therein for public use and maintenance, but the municipal agency
shall not require, as a condition of approval, that land proposed to
be set aside for common space be dedicated or made available to
public use.
(2) The developer shall provide for an organization for the ownership
and maintenance of any open space for the benefit of owners or
residents of the development, if said open space is not dedicated to
the Township or other governmental agency. Such organization
shall not be dissolved and shall not dispose of any open space, by
sale or otherwise, except to an organization conceived and
established to own and maintain the open space for the benefit of
such development, and thereafter such organization shall not be
dissolved or dispose of any of its open space without first offering to
dedicate the same to the Township.
(3) Failure to maintain; hearing.
(a) In the event that such organization shall fail to maintain the
open space in reasonable order and condition, the Township
Attorney may serve written notice upon such organization or
upon the owners of the development setting forth the manner
in which the organization has failed to maintain the open space
in reasonable condition, and said notice shall include a demand
that such deficiencies of maintenance be cured within 35 days
or any permitted extension thereof and shall state the date and
§ 244-199 JACKSON CODE § 244-199
1:1104
§ 244-200. Recreation standards for residential developments.
[Added 5-12-2003 by Ord. No. 6-03]
place of a hearing thereon, which shall be held within 15 days
of the notice.
(b) At such hearing, the Township, in order to preserve the open
space and maintain the same for a period of one year, may
enter upon and maintain such land. Said entry and
maintenance shall not vest in the public any rights to use the
open space except when the same is voluntarily dedicated to
the public by the owners.
(c) Before the expiration of said year, the Township Attorney shall,
upon his initiative or upon the request of the organization
theretofore responsible for the maintenance of the open space,
call a public hearing upon 15 days' written notice to such
organization and to the owners of the development, to be held
by the Township Attorney, at which hearing such organization
and the owners of the development shall show cause why such
maintenance by the Township shall not, at the election of the
Township, continue for a succeeding year.
(d) If the Township Attorney shall determine that such
organization is ready and able to maintain said open space in
reasonable condition, the Township shall cease to maintain
said open space at the end of said year. If the Township
Attorney shall determine that such organization is not ready
and able to maintain said open space in a reasonable condition,
the Township may, in its discretion, continue to maintain said
open space during the next succeeding year, subject to a
similar hearing and determination in each year thereafter. The
decision of the Township Attorney in any such case shall
constitute a final administrative decision subject to judicial
review.
(4) The cost of such maintenance by the Township shall be assessed
pro rata against the properties within the development that have a
right of enjoyment of the open space in accordance with assessed
value at the time of imposition of the lien and shall become a lien
and tax on said properties and shall be added to and be a part of the
taxes to be levied and assessed thereon and shall be enforced and
collected with interest by the same officers and in the same manner
as other taxes.
A. All residential developments which will result in five dwelling units or
more shall provide recreational facilities in accordance with the
requirements of this section. The developed open space shall consist of
developable land devoid of buildings and other physical structures
except for outdoor recreational facilities.
§ 244-199 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-200
1:1105
(1) Land provided in accordance with this section shall be provided in
a single area or in individual parcels to accommodate the proposed
recreation, but in any case not less than one acre in size.
(2) For the purposes of this section, a single-family detached house
shall be deemed to contain three persons; a townhouse shall be
deemed to contain 2.5 persons; and a garden apartment shall be
deemed to contain two persons.
(3) Development of open space area improvements and construction of
recreational facilities shall progress at the same rate as
development of the dwelling units. An overall phasing plan should
be submitted prior to final approval.
B. The location, form and design of such areas shall be approved by the
reviewing board. The area specifically designated for recreational
purposes shall be fully usable for that purpose and shall have all
improvements as required by this section. Wherever possible,
recreation sites should be located next to adjacent school sites. The
applicant shall determine with the Township's approval whether the
land to be utilized for recreational purposes shall remain for private
recreational uses or be dedicated for public use.
(1) Open space areas that will be maintained by a homeowners'
association or other private entity shall be recorded in the master
deed and/or homeowners' documents for each project. This will
ensure permanent preservation of the open space. Such documents
shall be submitted to the Planning Board prior to final approval of
the project.
C. Exception. In special circumstances where the development will result
in at least five but no more than 10 dwelling units or where, due to the
size, location and design requirements of the development, it is not
feasible in the opinion of the reviewing board to set aside such area or
areas for developed open space, the applicant shall make payment in
lieu of the provision of such open recreation land to the Township. Such
payments shall be placed in a special recreational open space land fund
to be utilized solely for the purchase of or improvement of public
recreational open space. Additionally, developers of five or more units
in the FA-1, FA-2 and FA-3 Zones shall make a payment in lieu of
providing facilities, since only low-intensity recreation is permitted in
these zones. (See §§ 244-82A, 244-83A and 244-84A.)
(1) The required amount of the contribution in lieu of providing
recreation facilities and equipment that would otherwise be
required for the proposed development shall be estimated based
upon the value of the land and the improvements. This estimated
cost shall also account for the value of the additional lots that the
developer shall have for sale as a result of not providing
recreational space.
§ 244-200 JACKSON CODE § 244-200
1:1106
D. Improvements. The developer shall install, as a minimum, the following
recreational facilities or their equivalent on the land which has been set
aside for recreational purposes.
(1) The developer's recreation plans shall be submitted to the
reviewing boards for review and approval. The Board and its
professional planner and engineer shall evaluate the plans in terms
of the following considerations:
(a) District parks and preservation areas. A minimum standard of
10 acres per 1,000 persons is recommended. Large tracts of 50
acres or more are preferable to scattered sites. Lands with
mature vegetation, high scenic qualities, historical
significance, or other unique characteristics are especially
recommended.
(b) Neighborhood playgrounds. A minimum standard of two acres
per 1,000 persons is recommended. Individual sites should be
three to five acres in size and within walking distance of the
people served. Separate play areas for age groups one through
five, six through ten and eleven through fifteen should be
included. Equipment for these areas should be based on the
recreation needs for each age group.
[1] Infants through five-year-olds should have a sand area,
small swings, static play animals, a small sliding board,
and other similar equipment. A sitting area for parents
should be provided in close proximity to the play areas.
Tricycle space and pavement should be a part of this area.
[2] Children through 10 years old are interested in movement,
slides, seesaws, balance beams, rope climbing areas, chinup
bars and other similar equipment.
[3] Children 11 through 15 are interested in two kinds of
spaces, a general use field where a Frisbee or a football
can be thrown and a space of identity for the age group.
Bicycle paths and hills, jumps and other similar features
are recommended in this area. Landscaping should
provide shade and separation for each area.
(c) Tennis courts. A recommended standard is one court per 1,500
persons.
(d) Baseball diamonds. A recommended standard is one diamond
for every 3,000 persons.
(e) Softball diamonds. A recommended standard is one softball
diamond for every 2,000 persons.
(f) Football fields. A recommended standard is one football field
for every 10,000 persons.
§ 244-200 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-200
1:1107
§ 244-201. Screening of equipment or machinery.
(g) Soccer fields. A recommended standard is one field per 3,000
persons.
(h) Lacrosse/field hockey fields. A recommended standard is one
field per 4,000 persons.
(i) Multipurpose/general-use fields. A recommended standard is
one field per 6,000 persons.
(j) Basketball courts. A recommended standard is one hardsurface
play area with basketball nets for every 2,000 persons.
(k) Picnic areas. One acre per 1,000 persons is recommended.
This use may be part of a district park.
(l) Bike trails. One mile of five-foot-wide bituminous trail for each
1,000 persons is recommended. These trails should link homes
with local recreation and service opportunities.
(m) Jogging and fitness trails. One mile per 1,000 persons is
recommended. These should be integrated into district parks
or create linkages to other recreation areas.
(n) Volleyball courts. A recommended standard is one court per
2,000 persons.
(o) Street hockey. A recommended standard is one street hockey
rink per 8,000 persons.
(p) Community pools. A recommended standard is one community
pool for every 25,000 persons.
(q) Golf courses. A recommended standard is one golf course per
25,000 residents.
(2) All improvements, play surfaces and equipment shall be
constructed and installed to current industry standards and in
compliance with all relevant laws, subject to review and approval
by the Township Engineer.
A. When the effective operation of a building or structure, or equipment
within a building or structure, necessitates placing machinery, motors,
generators or similar devices for cooling, heating or generating
purposes outside or on top of any structure, they shall be screened from
public view. Said screening may consist of the following:
(1) Densely planted evergreen shrubs, which shall grow to not less
than five feet after one growing season; and
(2) A solid and uniform fence at least five feet in height on four sides of
said equipment; or
§ 244-200 JACKSON CODE § 244-201
1:1108
§ 244-202. Sewage disposal.
(3) A masonry wall at least five feet in height on four sides of said
equipment; or
(4) Extensions of parapet walls or mansard rooflines or structural or
ornamental screens or baffles; or
(5) Any similar type of solid or uniform screening which will prevent
exposure of such equipment to public view.
B. The above requirements shall not be construed to prevent an opening in
any required screening for maintenance purposes. However, any such
opening shall be made as inconspicuous as is possible so as not to
present any unsightly display of said equipment to public view.
A. The design and construction or approval of all public systems or
extensions of existing system(s), either publicly or privately owned,
shall be under the jurisdiction of the Jackson Township Municipal
Utilities Authority or Ocean County Utilities Authority, as the case may
be.
B. Prior to the approval of any final plat of a subdivision or site plan, the
full approval of any sewage disposal system must have been obtained
from the appropriate Utilities Authority and filed with the municipal
agency, or the final approval will be conditioned upon full approval of
the appropriate Utilities Authority.
C. Septic systems.
(1) In the event that the appropriate Utilities Authority determines
that the lots in any subdivision or site plan cannot be served at the
time of application by a public sewage disposal system, septic
systems may be installed, provided that:
(a) The requirements of state statute, including the New Jersey
Realty Improvement Sewerage and Facilities Act,174 are met.
(b) They are installed in accordance with the regulations of the
Ocean County Board of Health.
(c) The minimum lot size shall not be less than 40,000 square feet.
However, the Ocean County Board of Health may require a
larger lot size if it deems such increased lot size is necessary
for such purposes. In the Pinelands Area of the Township,
minimum lot size shall be one acre.
(d) If any existing land drainage structures, such as french drains,
are encountered during the course of construction of any
development, no septic system or any part thereof shall be
installed on any lot within 400 feet thereof without the prior
174. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 58:11-23 et seq.
§ 244-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-202
1:1109
§ 244-203. Sidewalks and curbing generally. [Added 2-26-2008 by
Ord. No. 08-08]
approval of the Ocean County Board of Health. Such approval
shall only be granted if new percolation tests, taken at least
two months after such drainage structures are removed, show
that satisfactory soil conditions exist and that installation of
such septic system in the area affected by the removal of the
drainage structures will not be detrimental to the health of the
Township residents or cause pollution of any of its water.
(e) The developer conforms to all conditions set forth in the report
of the Utilities Authority which originally provided that public
sewage was not available.
(2) Mounded disposal fields shall only be permitted upon approval by
the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, pursuant
to N.J.A.C. 7:9A-1.1 et seq.
D. All private development utilizing public sewerage collection shall be
required to utilize a public water supply. [Added 12-23-2002 by Ord.
No. 50-02]
A. Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary in Chapter 244,
sidewalks and curbing shall be required along all street frontages as a
condition relating to any development for which approval is granted by
the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment. The proposed curbing shall
be designed and constructed in accordance with the requirements of
§§ 244-186 and 244-187, and the proposed sidewalk shall be designed
and constructed in accordance with the requirements of §§ 244-204 and
244-205.
B. Payment in lieu of sidewalk and curbing.
(1) Any developer seeking approval may request a waiver of the
requirement to install curbing and sidewalks along all street
frontages of the subject property by agreeing to pay a sum to the
Jackson Township Pedestrian Safety Fund equal to the cost of said
curbing and sidewalk. Said cost shall be determined by the
Township Engineer based on documented construction costs for
public improvements prevailing in the general area of the
municipality.
(2) In determining whether to grant the requested waiver and accept a
payment in lieu of the installation of sidewalk and curbing, the
Planning Board or Board of Adjustment shall consider the following
factors:
(a) The presence or absence of curbing and sidewalks in the
general vicinity of the subject property.
§ 244-202 JACKSON CODE § 244-203
1:1110
§ 244-204. Sidewalks and graded areas: residential development.
[Added 6-8-1998 by Ord. No. 15-98]
Sidewalks and graded areas shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with Subchapter 4 (Streets and Parking) of N.J.A.C. 5:21
(Residential Site Improvement Standards), as amended.
§ 244-205. Sidewalks and aprons: nonresidential development.
[Amended 6-8-1998 by Ord. No. 15-98]
(b) The practical difficulty as established by the applicant of
installing such improvements in or adjacent to the subject
property due to exceptional topographic conditions, drainage
concerns and/or the deleterious impact or surrounding
properties as a result of the installation of such improvements.
(c) The recommendation of the Board or Township Engineer.
C. Jackson Township Pedestrian Safety Fund.
(1) There is hereby established the Jackson Township Pedestrian
Safety Fund (hereinafter "fund").
(2) Said fund shall be dedicated to pay for the cost of designing and
constructing various pedestrian safety projects within Jackson
Township.
(3) All monies paid by developers in accordance with this section shall
be deposited into said fund.
(4) The Chief Financial Officer of the Township is hereby directed to
establish and maintain the fund and to make disbursements upon
the request of the Township Engineer for designated pedestrian
safety improvements.
A. General requirements.
(1) Sidewalks shall be constructed on both sides of all streets within a
development and entirely around the perimeter of all culs-de-sac
except in the R-2 and R-3 Zones, where no sidewalks shall be
required. Where the development abuts an existing street, the
sidewalk shall be constructed only on that side. Sidewalks shall
also be constructed at any other places, such as pedestrian
walkways or access points to open space, as shown on or required
at the approval of the final plat.
(2) The requirements of the standard specifications regarding curing
precautions must be strictly observed.
B. Location. Sidewalks within street rights-of-way shall generally be
located with the sidewalk edge farthest from the roadway placed one
foot from the property line. Sidewalks not within street rights-of-way
shall be located to provide for the most likely routes of pedestrian
§ 244-203 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-205
1:1111
travel. In cases where the topography dictates or a proposed
development provides for the extension of an existing street or abuts
an existing street, where sidewalks have already been installed in a
location other than as specified above or where such variations in
sidewalk locations are needed to preserve trees or natural features, the
municipal agency may approve alternate sidewalk locations in order to
provide for the preservation of physical features or the continuation of
the existing sidewalks.
C. Sidewalk construction.
(1) Sidewalks shall be four feet wide and four inches thick, except
crossing driveways, where the thickness shall be increased to six
inches for residential uses and all drives to parking areas of less
than 100 spaces, and to eight inches for all other uses. Where the
municipal agency determines that a sidewalk may be subject to
unusually heavy pedestrian traffic, it may require that its width be
increased to maximum of eight feet. All sidewalk construction shall
be in accordance with the applicable requirements of the standard
specifications. Concrete shall be Class C, air-entrained. Preformed
bituminous cellular joint fillers 1/2 inch thick shall be placed at
intervals not exceeding 20 feet. Dummy (formed) joints shall be cut
into the concrete sidewalk between the expansion joints at equal
intervals not exceeding the width of the sidewalk.
(2) The sidewalk subgrade shall be compacted prior to the placement
of any sidewalk. Any unsuitable material encountered in the
subgrade shall be removed and replaced with suitable material
acceptable to the Township Engineer. All six-inch or eight-inch
sidewalk areas crossing driveways shall be reinforced at the
midpoint or one-third points, respectively, of the sidewalk section.
Reinforcing shall be welded wire fabric approved by the Township
Engineer.
D. Apron construction. Reinforced concrete aprons shall be constructed at
all driveways between the concrete curb (or combination curb and
gutter) and the concrete sidewalk. Such aprons shall be six inches thick
for residential uses and all drives to parking areas of less than 100
spaces, and eight inches for all other uses, and shall be reinforced with
welded wire fabric approved by the Township Engineer, located at the
midpoint or one-third points, respectively, of the apron section.
Concrete shall be Class C, air-entrained. The width of the apron at the
curbline shall be not less than the width of the driveway plus 10 feet or
a minimum of 20 feet, whichever is greater.
E. Driveway depressions. At each driveway without curb return radii, the
concrete curb or combination curb and gutter shall be depressed to
form a driveway opening. The depression shall be equal in length to the
width of the driveway plus two feet. At driveways with curb return radii,
the curb depression shall accommodate the exterior limits of the radii.
The depression shall be smoothly formed to maintain a lowered curb
§ 244-205 JACKSON CODE § 244-205
1:1112
face across the depression of at least one inch, but not more than two
inches. The bottom of the curb shall be lowered to maintain full curb
depth across the depression.
F. Alternate sidewalk or apron types and/or locations.
(1) In areas where alternate sidewalk or apron types and/or locations
are proposed or desired, either for decorative purposes or because
of physical restrictions or existing conditions, a detail of the type
and/or location of sidewalk and apron proposed shall be submitted
for approval with the preliminary and/or final plat.
(2) Continuous slip-formed sidewalks may be permitted if such is
considered to be desirable by the Township Engineer. The use of
continuous slip-formed sidewalks may only be permitted if the
applicant submits, for review and approval, details and
specifications concerning the equipment, materials and methods
proposed for use and if the Township Engineer has inspected the
installation and tested and approved a suitable sample section of
such sidewalk. In the event that the Township Engineer does not
approve the sample section of continuous slip-formed sidewalk, the
developer shall remove the sample section and replace it with a
type of sidewalk permitted by this chapter or such other alternate
as may be approved by the municipal agency.
G. Curb ramps for the physically handicapped.
(1) Curb ramps for the physically handicapped shall be constructed on
all street curb returns and, where appropriate, in parking areas. In
general, two curb ramps shall be constructed at each corner. (See
Exhibit 109-8 at the end of this chapter.) A single ramp at the
center of the corner is acceptable when site conditions preclude
the use of the two-ramp system. (See Exhibit 109-9 at the end of
this chapter.)
(2) Curb ramps for the physically handicapped shall be constructed in
accordance with the standards shown in Exhibits 109-8 and
109-9.175 If there is a grass or landscaped area between the curb
and the sidewalk, side ramps need not be provided. Curb ramps
shall be provided at all four corners of full intersections and at the
two corners plus a location across the street from both of the ramps
at T-intersections.
(3) The developer shall submit a detailed intersection grading plan for
approval by the Township Engineer prior to installation of the
curbs, sidewalks and curb ramps at the intersection.
(4) Curb ramps shall be constructed with a rough broom finish in
accordance with New Jersey Department of Transportation
175. Editor's Note: Exhibits 109-8 and 109-9 are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 244-205 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-205
1:1113
§ 244-206. Bikeways. [Added 6-8-1998 by Ord. No. 15-98]
If required, bikeways shall be designed and constructed in accordance
with Subchapter 4 (Streets and Parking) of N.J.A.C. 5:21 (Residential Site
improvements Standards), as amended.
§ 244-207. Signs.
specifications and shall be flush with the street pavement at the
gutter line.
A. General requirements.
(1) No sign shall be erected, altered, constructed, reconstructed,
placed, replaced or otherwise displayed which is not in accordance
with the standards and requirements established in this section.
Unless otherwise specified in this section, the erection, alteration,
construction, reconstruction, placement, replacement or display of
any sign, except "No Trespassing" and "No Hunting," shall require
a sign permit.
(2) No sign shall be placed on or affixed or attached to a building or
structure or erected independently for any purpose other than to
identify a permitted business, occupant, service, office, address,
process, use or product offered, sold, conducted, manufactured or
assembled on the same premises. A sign may include the name of
the business, a brief general description of principal products or
services offered or sold, phone numbers and Web sites, but may not
include specific brand names unless they are a part of the
registered trade name of the establishment. No sign displaying the
colors of red, green or yellow shall be permitted within 200 feet of a
traffic signal. [Amended 11-8-2004 by Ord. No. 39-04;
12-28-2010 by Ord. No. 45-10]
(3) No sign or structure supporting the same shall be attached to
natural objects, trees, stumps, fences, fence posts, utility poles or
towers or other signs but shall be freestanding or affixed or
attached to buildings or structures or placed upon or supported by
the ground independent of any other structure in an approved
manner. "No Trespassing" and "No Hunting" signs shall be
excluded from this requirement.
(4) No sign shall be located within five feet of any property line.
(5) No freestanding sign or sign affixed or attached to a building shall
be higher at any point than the roofline of said building or 25,
whichever is less.
(6) All signs and their supporting structures, braces, locks, guys and
anchors shall be constructed of durable materials, maintained in
good condition, and shall not be allowed to become dilapidated,
§ 244-205 JACKSON CODE § 244-207
1:1114
unsightly, aesthetically displeasing, offensive or structurally
unsafe.
(7) Signs with two exposures shall be measured for area by using the
face of only one side of the sign.
(8) Signs, whether permanent or temporary, other than signs of the
municipal, county, state or federal government or official traffic
control devices, shall not be erected, altered, constructed,
reconstructed, placed, replaced or otherwise displayed within or
overhang a sight easement or right-of-way of any street or
easement of a public or private utility, nor shall any sign be located
so as to constitute a traffic hazard.
(9) Any illuminated sign within 100 feet of any residential use or
zoning district shall be shielded in such a manner so as to prevent
direct rays of light and glare from being cast onto any residential
premises.
(10) Floodlights and spotlights shall not be permitted except for the
purpose of emergency lighting. Lighted signs shall be illuminated
internally or with fixtures attached to the sign and directed to face
the sign with adequate shielding to prevent nuisance glare.
[Amended 11-8-2004 by Ord. No. 39-04]
(11)No sign shall be left illuminated during any period when the
premises on which it is located are not open to the public, or so
otherwise not open for business, unless it is determined by the
Planning Board that an illuminated sign is necessary for the
protection of the property from theft or vandalism and will not
interfere with the health, safety or welfare of the general public.
(12)No portion of any sign shall be located within or suspended over a
pedestrian walkway or bicycle passageway unless 10 feet above
grade level.
(13) Directional signs with areas less than two square feet are exempt
from location and area regulations, provided that they do not
constitute a hazard to the traveling public or are not placed in or
overhang a sight easement or right-of-way of any street or
easement of a public or private utility.
(14) Any location where business goods are no longer sold, produced or
assembled or where services or entertainment are no longer
offered or provided shall have 30 days to remove all signs
remaining or derelict on the premises. Where due written
notification has been given by the Township and compliance has
not been made within the required thirty-day period, the Township
shall cause removal of such signs, with the cost of such removal
attached to the property.
§ 244-207 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-207
1:1115
(15)No roof sign shall be erected, altered, constructed, reconstructed,
placed, replaced or otherwise displayed in any zoning district
within the Township.176
(16) Signs with any lighting or control mechanisms which may cause
radio or television reception interference shall not be permitted.
(17) Any sign erected, altered, constructed, reconstructed, placed,
replaced or otherwise displayed so as to obstruct or be attached to
any fire escape, window, door or opening used as a means of
ingress or egress, or for fire-fighting purposes, or placed so as to
interfere with any opening required for legal ventilation shall not
be permitted.
(18)No sign shall be erected, altered, constructed, reconstructed,
placed, replaced or otherwise displayed that violates any of the
municipal regulations with respect to health, required light, air,
open space or safety, as defined in the Township Building Codes.
(19)No sign shall be erected, altered, constructed, reconstructed,
placed, replaced or otherwise displayed which bears or contains
words, letters, statements, figures, designs, symbols, logos or
gestures of an obscene, indecent or immoral nature, or which will
offend public morals or decency.
(20)No sign shall be erected, altered, constructed, reconstructed,
placed, replaced or otherwise displayed which is animated in any
way, which emits smoke, visible or invisible vapors or gasses,
sounds or odor which violates the requirements of § 244-160.
Changeable copy signs shall not be permitted, nor shall LED reader
board signs. [Amended 11-8-2004 by Ord. No. 39-04]
(21)No sign shall be erected, altered, constructed, reconstructed,
placed, replaced or otherwise displayed which consists of banners,
posters, flags, pennants, propellers, ribbons, streamers, strings of
lights (except seasonal decoration), spinners or other windactivated
devices, except as to the following: [Amended
11-12-2014 by Ord. No. 18-14]
(a) Businesses and community groups may place nonpermanent
displays, which consist of signs, banners, posters, flags,
pennants, or ribbons that advertise a specific event and/or
sale, for a limited period of time not to exceed 21 days;
[Amended 10-27-2015 by Ord. No. 25-15]
(b) Any display posted under this section cannot be posted earlier
than 14 days prior to the event or sale and must be taken down
no later than five days after the event or sale;
176. Editor's Note: Original § 109-182A(16), regarding permitted sign area for two or more
business uses in the same building, and A(17), regarding commercial buildings on two or
more streets, of the 1972 Code, which immediately followed this subsection, were
repealed 11-8-2004 by Ord. No. 39-04.
§ 244-207 JACKSON CODE § 244-207
1:1116
(c) No permit or permit fee shall be required for any business or
community group that displays a temporary sign, banner,
poster, flag, pennant, or ribbon defined under this subsection
that meets the following criteria:
[1] It is supported by uprights or braces in or upon the ground
surface;
[2] It is not served by an electrical circuit directly connected
to the sign;
[3] It is not greater than 25 square feet in surface area (one
side); and
[4] It is not more than six feet above the ground (mounted
height).
(d) The Township Construction Official will have the authority to
require the removal of any sign that creates an unsafe
condition or otherwise to require correction of any such
condition.
(22)No sign shall be erected, altered, constructed, reconstructed,
placed, replaced or otherwise displayed that, by its size, location,
color, shape, lighting, message or nature, may be confused with or
obstruct the view of an official traffic sign or traffic control device
by pedestrians or operators of bicycles or motor vehicles.
(23)No sign shall be erected, altered, constructed, reconstructed,
placed, replaced or otherwise displayed on or attached to a motor
vehicle, trailer or other portable device which is so located or
placed as to be visible from a public street and intended, as
determined by its location and the duration of its stay, to function
as a sign.
(24)No sign shall be erected, altered, constructed, reconstructed,
placed, replaced or otherwise displayed that uses admonitions,
including but not limited to "Stop," "Go," "Slow," "Danger,"
"Caution," etc., which may be confused with, resembles or is an
imitation of an official traffic sign or signal.
(25) Any sign erected, altered, constructed, placed or otherwise
displayed prior to the adoption of this section, which does not
conform to the requirements and provisions herein set forth, shall
not be rebuilt, altered, reconstructed, replaced or otherwise
displayed by changing the height, location, area, face or message of
same.177
177. Editor's Note: Original § 109-182A(28) of the 1972 Code, regarding properties containing
one or more nonresidential uses, which immediately followed this subsection, was
repealed 11-8-2004 by Ord. No. 39-04.
§ 244-207 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-207
1:1117
(26)No sign shall be located closer than the following minimum
distances to the street right-of-way:
Sign Area
(square feet)
Minimum Distance
(feet)
Less than 25 20
26 to 75 25
76 or more 30
(27) Each site plan and subdivision application shall include a sign plan
showing the specific design, location, size (dimensions and square
footage), height, materials of construction, color scheme and
illumination in compliance with the provisions required herein. For
facade or wall signs, the applicant shall submit a building elevation
plan, prepared by a registered architect or professional engineer
licensed to practice in the State of New Jersey, accurately
illustrating the wall dimensions, including the height and other
building features of the site on which the sign is to be located. All
new planned unit developments, shopping centers and office parks
shall present an integrated sign design scheme in conjunction with
site plans. All tenants in the shopping center, planned unit
development or office park will be required to comply with the
design standards set forth in the approved sign plan. [Amended
11-8-2004 by Ord. No. 39-04]
(28) In cases where a sign is not part of a sign plan of a site plan or
subdivision application, the applicant for a sign permit shall
submit:
(a) A property survey prepared by a land surveyor licensed to
practice in the State of New Jersey, upon which the location of
the proposed sign is indicated;
(b) A sketch of the proposed sign, indicating the size (dimensions
and square footage), height, design, color scheme, materials of
construction and illumination; and
(c) For facade or wall signs, a building elevation plan, accurately
illustrating the wall dimensions, including the height, and
other building features, of the site on which the proposed sign
is to be located.
(29) All signs shall comply with all applicable county, state and federal
sign regulations.
(30) The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to signs not
visible from public roads within the RC Zone.
(31) Maintenance. All signs shall be periodically maintained by the
owner of said sign, including painting, repairing and cleaning as
§ 244-207 JACKSON CODE § 244-207
1:1118
necessary. Any sign that, because of improper maintenance, is
deemed to be in a state of disrepair, such that the sign is no longer
functional, visible or becomes dangerous to the safety of others,
shall be repaired by the owner of said sign within 14 days of notice
requiring said repair. Otherwise the sign shall be removed at the
expense of the property owner. [Added 11-8-2004 by Ord. No.
39-04]
B. Sign requirements.
(1) Awning or marquee signs. Awnings or marquees containing signs
shall be permitted to extend no closer than five feet to the street
right-of-way line.
(2) Canopy signs.
(a) In the case of a shopping center wherein walkways are roofed
over with a permanently installed rigid canopy or other
structural device or in the Historic Village Commercial Zone,
not more than one sign may be hung vertically from the
underside of said canopy for each store or occupant in the
shipping center and it shall not exceed four square feet in area
and shall not be less than 10 feet above the finished grade or
sidewalk beneath it. [Amended 11-8-2004 by Ord. No.
39-04]
(b) Signs attached to the front of a canopy shall not exceed 50% of
the area of the canopy.
(c) A canopy sign may be illuminated but shall not be flashing,
animated or moving in any way.
(d) No canopy sign shall extend above or beyond the end of the
canopy to which it is attached.
(3) Construction signs. One nonilluminated sign, not exceeding 40
square feet in area and a minimum of eight feet in height, denoting
the names of the architect, engineer, planner, landscape architect,
contractor or other participants in construction and the owners and
future occupants, may be placed on the property where the work is
under construction.
(4) Directional signs.
(a) Directional signs shall not exceed four square feet in area, with
lettering not exceeding six inches in height.
(b) Such sign shall not be placed within five feet of a street rightof-
way line or any property line but may be located within the
minimum required sign setback of 20 feet.
§ 244-207 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-207
1:1119
(c) Where directional signs are placed within a sight triangle area,
they shall not exceed 30 inches in height from the finished
grade directly below the sign to the top of the sign.
(5) Freestanding signs. [Amended 11-8-2004 by Ord. No. 39-04]
(a) Freestanding signs shall be permitted for retail, service and
similar activities in the HC, RC, and LM Zones.
(b) Commercial buildings located at the intersection of two or
more streets, or that have frontage on two or more streets,
may be permitted a total of two freestanding signs or two
ground signs, one on each of two street frontages. In no case
shall there be more than two freestanding or two ground signs.
(c) Freestanding signs shall not exceed 16 feet in height or the
height of the roofline of the building containing the uses the
sign advertises, whichever is lower. The height of freestanding
signs shall be measured from the finished grade directly below
the sign to the top of the sign. The base of the columns, poles
or uprights supporting the freestanding sign shall be
landscaped as to minimize the visual effect and impact of said
supports. The bottom of the sign shall be at least seven feet
above grade.
(d) The locations of freestanding signs shall be in accordance with
the required minimum distances to the street right-of-way,
based on the sign area established in Subsection A(26).
(e) Each principal use or shopping center located in the HC, RC
and LM Zones shall be permitted one freestanding sign along
the principal street frontage so long as the property has at
least 50 feet of uninterrupted street frontage. Freestanding
signs shall not exceed an area equivalent to 1/2 square foot for
each foot of linear building frontage on the principal street or
75 square feet, whichever is smaller.
(f) In the case of a shopping center or more than one business use
sharing a parking area or more than one business situated on a
single lot, a multiple occupancy/tenancy sign shall be
permitted subject to the following conditions:
[1] The size of the sign shall be in accordance with Subsection
B(5)(e) above.
[2] A minimum of 15% of the sign must identify the name of
the site or the address of the property.
[3] The tenant/occupant names must be uniform in style and
color.
[4] Lettering shall be a minimum of six inches in height.
§ 244-207 JACKSON CODE § 244-207
1:1120
(6) Ground signs. [Amended 11-8-2004 by Ord. No. 39-04]
(a) Ground mounted signs (or "monument signs") shall be
permitted for professional office uses, commercial office uses,
institutional uses (religious, education, government agencies),
industrial parks or retail/service uses in the ROS, O/R, HVC,
NC, LM, I, PVC, RGC and HC [as an alternative to the
freestanding signs in § 244-207B(5) above] Zones.
(b) Ground signs shall not exceed six feet in height, measured
from the finished grade directly below the sign to the top of the
sign.
(c) The base of all ground signs shall be accented by landscaping
such as shrubs, ground cover and flowers.
(d) The ground sign may include no more than four colors.
(e) In the case of a group of offices sharing a parking area, a group
of professional tenants/occupants sharing a building, or in the
case of a retail shopping center, the names of the offices or
tenants may be listed on the sign, provided the top 15% of the
sign is reserved for displaying the name of the complex or the
address. The tenant or occupant names must be uniform in
style and color.
(f) The locations of the ground signs shall be in accordance with
the required minimum distances to the street right-of-way,
based on sign area, established in Subsection A(26).
Additionally, the sign must be outside the sight triangle
easement areas and may not pose a threat to public health and
safety.
(g) The maximum size for a single ground sign for a retail store, a
shopping center, an office building, a group of offices, an
institutional use or an industrial use is 30 square feet.
(h) Buildings located at the intersection of two or more streets, or
that have frontage on two or more streets, may be permitted a
total of two ground signs, one on each of two street frontages.
In no case shall there be more than two ground signs.
(7) Wall signs. [Amended 11-8-2004 by Ord. No. 39-04]
(a) Each principal nonresidential building may have one wall sign
not to exceed 15% of the principal facade area or 80 square
feet, whichever is smaller, except as otherwise specifically
restricted in other subsections. In the case of a shopping
center, each tenant/occupant with direct access to the outside
may have one wall sign not to exceed 15% of the principal
facade area of the occupied space or 80 square feet, whichever
is smaller.
§ 244-207 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-207
1:1121
(b) Wall signs within a development or shopping center should be
consistent in color and style. It is the responsibility of the
property owner or property manager to inform tenants of this
requirement.
(c) A wall sign may be illuminated, but shall not be flashing,
animated or moving in any way.
(d) A wall sign may not have more than four colors.
(e) No wall sign shall extend above or beyond the end of the wall
to which it is attached.
(f) No wall sign shall block, interrupt or otherwise obscure in
whole or in part any major architectural feature or detail of the
wall.
(g) A wall sign positioned between two floors of a building shall
not exceed 2/3 of the vertical distance between the windows.
(h) Gas station and similar canopy signs shall comply with the wall
sign requirements.
(8) Holiday decoration signs. One nonilluminated holiday decoration
sign, not exceeding 20 square feet in area, shall be permitted on a
site where decorations customarily and commonly associated with
any national, state, local or religious holiday are offered for sale.
(9) Home occupation signs. All home occupation signs shall be in
accordance with the requirements set forth in § 244-6 of this
chapter and Subsection A(26).
(10) Miscellaneous signs. The erection of signs such as "No
Trespassing" or "No Hunting" signs shall be permitted, provided
that these signs do not exceed two square feet in area.
(11) Nameplate signs. One nameplate sign, as defined in § 244-6 of this
chapter, shall be permitted per lot and shall not be illuminated by a
total of more than 25 watts.
(12) Political signs.
(a) Political signs may be placed within 20 feet of but not less than
five feet from any street right-of-way or property line.
(b) No political sign shall be placed in any street triangle or line of
sight area.
(c) No political sign shall be affixed to any natural objects, trees,
fences, fence posts, utility poles or towers or other signs.
(d) All political signs shall be removed within 30 days after the
election.
§ 244-207 JACKSON CODE § 244-207
1:1122
(13) Office-research park and industrial park signs. [Amended
11-8-2004 by Ord. No. 39-04]
(a) One ground sign not to exceed 30 square feet in area shall be
permitted to identify the name of the office-research park or
industrial park. The sign must be located in accordance with
Subsection A(26). The height of the sign shall not exceed six
feet.
(b) Within the office-research or industrial park, one ground sign
shall be permitted for each establishment and shall be located
on the lot thereof The ground sign for the individual
establishment shall not exceed 30 square feet in area and shall
not be located closer than 25 feet from the curb or street line.
Ground signs should be designed and located in such a way
that they will not be visible from the streets outside the office
or industrial park. Ground signs are prohibited in required
sight triangle easements. The height of the sign shall not
exceed six feet.
(c) In addition to one ground sign, each establishment shall be
permitted one wall sign not to exceed 5% of the facade of the
building upon which the sign will be placed or 40 square feet,
whichever is less.
(d) In the case of an office park or industrial park, an additional
directory sign will be permitted on the interior of the site to
assist visitors in navigating the site. The directory sign shall
not exceed 20 square feet and shall be located as not to cause a
traffic hazard. Directory signs that include a map of the site
may not exceed a total of 30 square feet.
(e) A sign plan for the office research or industrial park shall be
submitted in accordance with the requirements of Subsection
A(27). The sign plan shall be based upon an integrated sign
design scheme and shall be designed to be in harmony and
consistent with each other as well as with the architecture and
building materials of the principal structures and the
landscape plan.
(14) Private sale or special event signs.
(a) One nonilluminated private sale or special event sign, as
defined in § 244-6 of this chapter, shall be permitted per lot and
shall not exceed four square feet in area.
(b) Private sale or special event signs may be placed within 20 feet
of but not less than five feet from any street right-of-way or
property line.
§ 244-207 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-207
1:1123
(c) No private sale or special event sign shall be affixed to any
natural objects, trees, fences, fence posts, utility poles or
towers or other signs.
(d) No temporary sign for a special event or private sale shall
remain in place for more than 30 days out of a calendar year.
[Added 11-8-2004 by Ord. No. 39-04178]
(e) Businesses are permitted to display temporary signs for a
special event and/or private sale up to 10 days prior to the start
date without obtaining a permit or paying a permit fee; any
display must be taken down no later than five days after the
conclusion of the special event or private sale, if the sign meets
the following criteria: [Added 11-12-2014 by Ord. No.
18-14]
[1] It is supported by uprights or braces in or upon the ground
surface;
[2] It is not served by an electrical circuit directly connected
to the sign;
[3] It is not greater than 25 square feet in surface area (one
side); and
[4] It is not more than six feet above the ground (mounted
height).
(15) Real estate sign.
(a) One nonilluminated real estate sign per street frontage shall
be permitted.
(b) A real estate sign shall not exceed 12 square feet in area or
four feet in height in all residential zoning districts.
(c) A real estate sign shall not exceed 32 square feet in area or
eight feet in height in all other zoning districts.
(d) No real estate sign shall be permitted less than 10 feet from
any property line or within any sight triangle or easement.
(e) All real estate signs shall be removed at the expense of the
advertiser within 15 days after the termination or completion
of the matter of business being advertised.
(16) Street numbers. Street numbers between three inches and six
inches in height and visible from the street shall be required for
each establishment or residence.
178. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed original § 109-182B(15) of the 1972 Code,
regarding projecting signs, which immediately followed this subsection.
§ 244-207 JACKSON CODE § 244-207
1:1124
(17) Subdivision/site development signs. One nonilluminated sign
advertising premises under development shall be permitted and
shall not exceed 40 square feet in area or eight feet in height.
(18) Traffic signs. Any traffic sign erected by the Township of Jackson,
County of Ocean or State of New Jersey, or other sign required to
be erected by law, shall be permitted and shall not require the
issuance of a sign permit.
(19)Window sign. No window sign, whether permanent or temporary,
shall exceed 25% of the total window area within which it is
located.
C. Signs not requiring a sign permit. The following signs may be erected,
altered, constructed, reconstructed, placed, replaced or otherwise
displayed without a sign permit:
(1) Government flags.
(2) Historic markers.
(3) Signs not exceeding two square feet in area.
(4) Political signs.
(5) Private sale or special event signs.
(6) Real estate and other "For Sale" signs.
D. Prohibited signs. The following signs shall not be erected, altered,
constructed, reconstructed, placed, replaced or otherwise displayed
within the Township of Jackson:
(1) Animated or moving sign.
(2) Billboard sign (off-premises sign, outdoor advertising sign).
(3) Flashing sign.
(4) Portable sign.
(5) Roof sign.
(6) Snipe sign.
(7) Exposed neon signs. [Added 11-8-2004 by Ord. No. 39-04]
E. Nonconforming signs. [Added 11-8-2004 by Ord. No. 39-04]
(1) Intent. It is the intent and purpose of this subsection that as soon as
legally possible, all existing signs not conforming to the provisions
of this section be eliminated or brought into conformity with the
provisions of this section.
§ 244-207 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-207
1:1125
§ 244-208. Solid waste storage.
Solid wastes from all uses other than single- or two-family homes, if stored
outdoors, shall be placed in metal receptacles within a screened refuse area
subject to the following minimum standards:
(2) Legal nonconforming signs. Any sign located within the Township
of Jackson which does not conform with the provisions of this
section, but which did conform with the applicable laws and
ordinances relating to signs at the time it was erected, shall be
deemed a legal nonconforming sign and may continue in use until
said sign loses its legal nonconforming status as defined in
§ 244-207E(3) below.
(3) Loss of legal nonconforming status. A legal nonconforming sign
shall immediately lose its legal nonconforming status if:
(a) The sign is altered in any way in structure or size. Change of
copy in a box sign does not constitute a structural change.
(b) The sign is replaced.
(c) The sign is deemed to be a hazard.
(d) Damage to the sign has occurred such that repair or
restoration would exceed 1/3 of the replacement value as of the
date of said damage.
A. The screened refuse area shall not be located within any front yard
area.
B. The refuse storage area shall be surrounded on three sides by a solid
uniform fence or wall not less than five feet nor more than eight feet in
height. Such fence shall be exempt from the provisions of any ordinance
regulating the height of fences.
C. A five-foot-minimum-width landscaping area shall be provided along the
fence or wall enclosing the refuse storage area. The landscaping to be
provided shall be shown on the preliminary and final site development
plan submitted to the municipal agency for review and decision.
D. The opening in the enclosed refuse area shall be located to minimize
the view of refuse from adjoining properties or public streets.
E. If located within or adjacent to a parking area or access drive, the
enclosed refuse areas shall be separated from such parking area or
access drive by curbing.
F. The enclosed refuse area shall not be located so as to interfere with
traffic circulation, the parking of vehicles, the maneuverability and
parking of vehicles making materials delivery or pickup, nor shall any
solid waste storage area be part of, restrict or occupy any parking aisle
or stall.
§ 244-207 JACKSON CODE § 244-208
1:1126
§ 244-209. Stormwater management. [Added 4-10-2006 by Ord. No.
08-06179]
G. All refuse shall be deposited in containers maintained within the refuse
area. No containers shall be maintained anywhere on a site except in a
refuse area meeting these requirements. All refuse containers shall
have covers to effectively contain solid waste stored therein.
H. If outdoor storage of solid waste is not proposed, the site plan
submission shall detail the methods proposed for accommodating solid
waste within the structure. The municipal agency may require that a
suitable area be set aside, but not improved, for a future solid waste
storage area meeting these requirements even if indoor
accommodations for solid waste are proposed.
I. No refuse storage area shall be placed within 10 feet of any public
right-of-way or any property line, and all refuse storage areas shall
conform to the provisions for refuse storage areas in accordance with
Chapter 216, Garbage, Rubbish and Waste Material, of the Code of the
Township of Jackson.
J. There shall be provided at least one outdoor solid waste storage area of
at least 100 square feet in area for each 20 dwelling units. Solid waste
storage areas shall not be located further than 300 feet from the
entrance of any dwelling unit which is intended to be served.
K. For every solid waste storage area, at least one area shall be designated
adjacent thereto for the collection of recyclable materials.
L. No on-site incineration or disposal of solid waste or garbage shall be
permitted.
M. The use of commercial dumpsters or similar-type large receptacles for
the storage of solid waste for single-family or two-family dwellings is
prohibited.
A. Scope and purpose.
(1) Policy statement. Flood control, groundwater recharge and
pollutant reduction through nonstructural or low-impact
techniques shall be explored before relying on structural BMPs.
Structural BMPs should be integrated with nonstructural
stormwater management strategies and proper maintenance plans.
Nonstructural strategies include both environmentally sensitive
site design and source controls that prevent pollutants from being
placed on the site or from being exposed to stormwater. Source
control plans should be developed based upon physical site
conditions and the origin, nature and the anticipated quantity or
179. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed original § 109-184, Storm drainage facilities:
nonresidential development, of the 1972 Code, as amended, and original § 109-184.1,
Stormwater drainage facilities: residential development, of the 1972 Code, added 2-9-1998
by Ord. No. 5-98, as amended.
§ 244-208 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-209
1:1127
amount of potential pollutants. Multiple stormwater management
BMPs may be necessary to achieve the established performance
standards for water quality, quantity and groundwater recharge.
(2) Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to establish minimum
stormwater management requirements and controls for "major
development," as defined in Subsection B.
(3) Applicability.
(a) This section shall be applicable to all site plans and
subdivisions for the following major developments that require
preliminary or final site plan or subdivision review:
[1] Nonresidential major developments; and
[2] Aspects of residential major developments that are not
preempted by the Residential Site Improvement Standards
at N.J.A.C. 5:21.
(b) This section shall also be applicable to all major developments
undertaken in Jackson Township.
(4) Compatibility with other permit and ordinance requirements.
Development approvals issued for subdivisions and site plans
pursuant to this section are to be considered an integral part of
development approvals under the subdivision and site plan review
process and do not relieve the applicant of the responsibility to
secure required permits or approvals for activities regulated by any
other applicable code, rule, act or ordinance. In their interpretation
and application, the provisions of this section shall be held to be the
minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health,
safety and general welfare. This section is not intended to interfere
with, abrogate or annul any other ordinances, rule or regulation,
statute or other provision of law except that, where any provision of
this section imposes restrictions different from those imposed by
any other ordinance, rule or regulation or other provision of law,
the more restrictive provisions or higher standards shall control.
B. Definitions. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in
this section shall be interpreted so as to give them the meanings they
have in common usage and to give this section its most reasonable
application. The definitions below are the same as or based on the
corresponding definitions in the Stormwater Management Rules at
N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.2.
COMPACTION — The increase in soil bulk density.
CORE — A pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic uses
serving the surrounding municipality, generally including housing and
access to public transportation.
§ 244-209 JACKSON CODE § 244-209
1:1128
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — An agency designated by the County
Board of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal stormwater
management plans and implementing ordinance(s). The county review
agency may either be:
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection.
DESIGNATED CENTER — A state development and redevelopment plan
center as designated by the State Planning Commission such as urban,
regional, town, village or hamlet.
DESIGN ENGINEER — A person professionally qualified and duly
licensed in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may
include, but not necessarily be limited to, development of project
requirements, creation and development of project design and
preparation of drawings and specifications.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more
parcels, the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural
alteration, relocation or enlargement of any building or structure, any
mining excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of
any building or other structure, or land or extension of use of land,
by any person, for which permission is required under the Municipal
Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. In the case of development
of agricultural lands, development means: any activity that requires a
state permit; any activity reviewed by the County Agricultural Board
(CAB) and the State Agricultural Development Committee (SADC), and
municipal review of any activity not exempted by the Right to Farm Act,
N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq.
DRAINAGE AREA — A geographic area within which stormwater,
sediments or dissolved materials drain to a particular receiving water
body or to a particular point along a receiving water body.
EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD — A neighborhood designated by
the Urban Coordinating Council in consultation and conjunction with
the New Jersey Redevelopment Authority pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-69.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREAS — An area or feature which is
of significant environmental value, including but not limited to: stream
corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat of endangered or
threatened species; large areas of contiguous open space or upland
forest; steep slopes; and wellhead protection and groundwater
recharge areas. Habitats of endangered or threatened species are
identified using the Department's Landscape Project as approved by the
Department's Endangered and Nongame Species Program.
(1) A county planning agency; or
A county water resource association created under N.J.S.A.
58:16A-55.5, if the ordinance or resolution delegates authority to
approve, conditionally approve or disapprove municipal
stormwater management plans and implementing ordinances.
(2)
§ 244-209 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-209
1:1129
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments
by water, wind, ice or gravity.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer
of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
INFILTRATION — The process by which water seeps into the soil from
precipitation.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Any development that provides for
ultimately disturbing one or more acres of land. "Disturbance," for the
purpose of this rule, is the placement of impervious surface or exposure
and/or movement of soil or bedrock or clearing, cutting or removing of
vegetation.
MUNICIPALITY — Any city, borough, town, Township or village.
NODE — An area designated by the State Planning Commission
concentrating facilities and activities which are not organized in a
compact form.
NUTRIENT — A chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen or
phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the development of
organisms.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, Township of Jackson or political subdivision of this state
subject to municipal jurisdiction pursuant to the Municipal Land Use
Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue,
filter backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge,
munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes,
radioactive substance [except those regulated under the Atomic Energy
Act of 1954, as amended (42 U.S.C. § 2011 et seq.)], thermal waste,
wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial,
municipal, agricultural and construction waste or runoff or other
residue discharged directly or indirectly to the land, groundwaters or
surface waters of the state or to a domestic treatment works. Pollutant
includes both hazardous and nonhazardous pollutants.
RECHARGE — The amount of water from precipitation that infiltrates
into the ground and is not evapotranspired.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, mineral or organic, that is in suspension,
is being transported or has been moved from its site of origin by air,
water or gravity as a product of erosion.
SITE — The lot or lots upon which a major development is to occur or
has occurred.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin.
STATE DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT PLAN
METROPOLITAN PLANNING AREA (PA1) — An area delineated on the
State Plan Policy Map and adopted by the State Planning Commission
§ 244-209 JACKSON CODE § 244-209
1:1130
that is intended to be the focus for much of the state's future
redevelopment and revitalization efforts.
STATE PLAN POLICY MAP — The geographic application of the State
Development and Redevelopment Plan's goals and statewide policies,
and the official map of these goals and policies.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain
and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the
subsurface or is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or
drainage facilities or conveyed by snow removal equipment.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — An excavation or
embankment and related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A
stormwater management basin may either be normally dry (that is, a
detention basin or infiltration basin), retain water in a permanent pool
(a retention basin) or be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (most
constructed stormwater wetlands).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Any structural or
nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program or other
method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated
pollutants or to induce or control the infiltration or groundwater
recharge of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal nonstormwater
discharges into stormwater conveyances.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Water flow on the surface of the ground or
in storm sewers resulting from precipitation.
TIDAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — A flood hazard area, which may
be influenced by stormwater runoff from inland areas, but which is
primarily caused by the Atlantic Ocean.
URBAN COORDINATING COUNCIL EMPOWERMENT
NEIGHBORHOOD — A neighborhood given priority access to state
resources through the New Jersey Redevelopment Authority.
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONE — A zone designated by the New Jersey
Enterprise Zone Authority pursuant to the New Jersey Urban
Enterprise Zones Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27H-60 et seq.
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA — Previously developed portions of
areas:
Delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPM) as the
Metropolitan Planning Area (PA1), Designated Centers, Cores or
Nodes;
(1)
(2) Designated as CAFRA Centers, Cores or Nodes;
(3) Designated as Urban Enterprise Zones; and
Designated as Urban Coordinating Council Empowerment
Neighborhoods.
(4)
§ 244-209 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-209
1:1131
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs,
streams, wetlands and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether
natural or artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or
subject to its jurisdiction.
WETLANDS or WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient
to support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a
prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions, commonly known as "hydrophytic vegetation."
C. General standards.
(1) Design and performance standards for stormwater management
measures.
(a) Stormwater management measures for major development
shall be developed to meet the erosion control, groundwater
recharge, stormwater runoff quantity and stormwater runoff
quality standards in Subsection D. To the maximum extent
practicable, these standards shall be met by incorporating
nonstructural stormwater management strategies into the
design. If these strategies alone are not sufficient to meet
these standards, structural stormwater management measures
necessary to meet these standards shall be incorporated into
the design.
(b) The standards in this section apply only to new major
development and are intended to minimize the impact of
stormwater runoff on water quality and water quantity in
receiving water bodies and maintain groundwater recharge.
The standards do not apply to new major development to the
extent that alternative design and performance standards are
applicable under a regional stormwater management plan or
water quality management plan adopted in accordance with
Department rules.
D. Stormwater management requirements for major development.
(1) The development shall incorporate a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
a major development in accordance with Subsection J.
(2) Stormwater management measures shall avoid adverse impacts of
concentrated flow on habitat for threatened and endangered
species as documented in the Department' Landscape Project or
Natural Heritage Database established under N.J.S.A.
13:1B-15.147 through 13:1B-15.150, particularly Helonias bullata
(swamp pink) and/or Clemmys muhlenbergi (bog turtle).
§ 244-209 JACKSON CODE § 244-209
1:1132
(3) The following linear development projects are exempt from the
groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity and stormwater
runoff quality requirements of Subsection D(6) and (7):
(a) The construction of an underground utility line, provided that
the disturbed areas are revegetated upon completion;
(b) The construction of an aboveground utility line, provided that
the existing conditions are maintained to the maximum extent
practicable; and
(c) The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a
sidewalk or trail with a maximum width of 14 feet, provided
that the access is made of permeable material.
(4) A waiver from strict compliance from the groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity and stormwater runoff quality
requirements of Subsection D(6) and (7) may be obtained for the
enlargement of an existing public roadway or railroad or the
construction or enlargement of a public pedestrian access,
provided that the following conditions are met:
(a) The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the
project that cannot be accomplished by any other means;
(b) The applicant demonstrates, through an alternatives analysis,
that through the use of nonstructural and structural
stormwater management strategies and measures, the option
selected complies with the requirements of Subsection D(6)
and (7) to the maximum extent practicable;
(c) The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the
requirements of Subsection D(6) and (7), existing structures
currently in use, such as homes and buildings, would need to
be condemned; and
(d) The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other
rights to areas, including the potential to obtain through
condemnation lands not falling under Subsection D(4)(c) above
within the upstream drainage area of the receiving stream,
that would provide additional opportunities to mitigate the
requirements of Subsection D(6) and (7) that were not
achievable on site.
(5) Nonstructural stormwater management strategies.
(a) To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in
Subsection D(6) and (7) shall be met by incorporating
nonstructural stormwater management strategies set forth at
Subsection D(5) into the design. The applicant shall identify
the nonstructural measures incorporated into the design of the
project. If the applicant contends that it is not feasible for
§ 244-209 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-209
1:1133
engineering, environmental or safety reasons to incorporate
any nonstructural stormwater management measures
identified in Subsection D(5)(b) below into the design of a
particular project, the applicant shall identify the strategy
considered and provide a basis for the contention.
(b) Nonstructural stormwater management strategies
incorporated into site design shall:
[1] Project areas that provide water quality benefits or areas
particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss.
[2] Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect
the flow of runoff over impervious surfaces.
[3] Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and
vegetation.
[4] Minimize the decrease in the time of concentration from
preconstruction to post construction. "Time of
concentration" is defined as the time it takes for runoff to
travel from the hydraulically most distant point of the
watershed to the point of interest within a watershed;
[5] Minimize land disturbance, including clearing and
grading.
[6] Minimize soil compaction.
[7] Provide low-maintenance landscaping that encourages
retention and planting of native vegetation and minimizes
the use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides.
[8] Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas.
[9] Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the
use or exposure of pollutants at the site in order to prevent
or minimize the release of those pollutants into
stormwater runoff. Such source controls include, but are
not limited to:
[a] Site design features that help to prevent accumulation
of trash and debris in drainage systems, including
features that satisfy Subsection D(5)(c) below;
[b] Site design features that help to prevent discharge of
trash and debris from drainage systems;
[c] Site design features that help to prevent and/or
contain spills or other harmful accumulations of
pollutants at industrial or commercial developments;
and
§ 244-209 JACKSON CODE § 244-209
1:1134
[d] When establishing vegetation after land disturbance,
applying fertilizer in accordance with the
requirements established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and
implementing rules.
(c) Site design features identified under Subsection D(5)(b)[9][b]
above shall comply with the following standard to control
passage of solid and floatable materials through storm drain
inlets. For purposes of this subsection, "solid and floatable
materials" means sediment, debris, trash and other floating,
suspended or settleable solids. For exemptions to this
standard, see Subsection D(5)(c)[3] below.
[1] Design engineers shall use either of the following grates
whenever they use a grate in pavement or another ground
surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a
storm drain or surface water body under that grate:
[a] The New Jersey Department of Transportation
(NJDOT) bicycle-safe grate, which is described in
Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT Bicycle Compatible
Roadways and Bikeways Planning and Design
Guidelines (April 1996); or
[b] A different grate, if each individual clear space in that
grate has an area of no more than seven square inches
or is no greater than 0.5 inches across the smallest
dimension. Examples of grates subject to this
standard include grates in grate inlets, the grate
portion (non-curb-opening portion) of combination
inlets, grates on storm sewer manholes, ditch grates,
trench grates and grates of spacer bars in slotted
drains. Examples of ground surfaces include surfaces
of roads (including bridges), driveways, parking areas,
bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open
channels and stormwater basin floors.
[2] Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the
clear space in that curb opening (or each individual clear
space, if the curb opening has two or more clear spaces)
shall have an area of no more than seven square inches or
be no greater than two inches across the smallest
dimension.
[3] This standard does not apply:
[a] Where the review agency determines that this
standard would cause inadequate hydraulic
performance that could not practicably be overcome
by using additional or larger storm drain inlets that
meet these standards;
§ 244-209 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-209
1:1135
[b] Where flows from the water quality design storm as
specified in Subsection D(7)(a) are conveyed through
any device (e.g., end of pipe netting facility,
manufactured treatment device or a catch basin hood)
that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery of
all solid and floatable materials that could not pass
through one of the following:
[i] A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2
inches wide (this option does not apply for outfall
netting facilities); or
[ii] A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inches.
[c] Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that
has parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the
bars to the elevation of the water quality design storm
as specified in Subsection D(7)(a); or
[d] Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey
Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c),
that action to meet this standard is an undertaking
that constitutes an encroachment or will damage or
destroy the New Jersey Register listed historic
property.
(d) Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater
management measure to meet the performance standards in
Subsection D(6) and (7) shall be dedicated to a government
agency, subjected to a conservation restriction filed with the
appropriate County Clerk's office or subject to an approved
equivalent restriction that ensures that measure or an
equivalent stormwater management measure approved by the
reviewing agency is maintained in perpetuity.
(e) Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management
strategies is available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be
obtained from the address identified in Subsection G or found
on the Department's website at www.njstormwater.org.
(6) Erosion control, groundwater recharge and runoff quantity
standards.
(a) This subsection contains minimum design and performance
standards to control erosion, encourage and control infiltration
and groundwater recharge and control stormwater runoff
quantity impacts of major development.
[1] The minimum design and performance standards for
erosion control are those established under the Soil
§ 244-209 JACKSON CODE § 244-209
1:1136
Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.,
and implementing rules.
[2] The minimum design and performance standards for
groundwater recharge are as follows:
[a] The design engineer shall, using the assumptions and
factors for stormwater runoff and groundwater
recharge calculations in Subsection E, either:
[i] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the site and its stormwater
management measures maintain 100% of the
average annual preconstruction groundwater
recharge volume for the site; or
[ii] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the increase of stormwater runoff
volume from preconstruction to post construction
for the two-year storm is infiltrated.
[b] This groundwater recharge requirement does not
apply to projects within an urban redevelopment area
or to projects subject to Subsection D(6)(a)[2][c]
below.
[c] The following types of stormwater shall not be
recharged:
[i] Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading.
High pollutant loading areas are areas in
industrial and commercial developments where
solvents and/or petroleum products are loaded/
unloaded, stored or applied; areas where
pesticides are loaded/unloaded or stored; areas
where hazardous materials are expected to be
present in greater than "reportable quantities" as
defined by the United States Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR 302.4; areas
where recharge would be inconsistent with
Department-approved remedial action work plan
or landfill closure plan; and areas with high risks
for spills of toxic materials, such as gas stations
and vehicle maintenance facilities; and
[ii] Industrial stormwater exposed to source material.
"Source material" means any material(s) or
machinery, located at an industrial facility, that is
directly or indirectly related to process,
manufacturing or other industrial activities,
which could be a source of pollutants in any
industrial stormwater discharge to groundwater.
§ 244-209 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-209
1:1137
Source materials include, but are not limited to,
raw materials; intermediate products; final
products; waste materials; by-products; industrial
machinery and fuels; and lubricants, solvents and
detergents that are related to process,
manufacturing or other industrial activities that
are exposed to stormwater.
[d] The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact
on the groundwater table and design the site so as to
avoid adverse hydraulic impacts. Potential adverse
hydraulic impacts include, but are not limited to,
exacerbating a naturally or seasonally high water
table so as to cause surficial ponding, flooding of
basements or interference with the proper operation
of subsurface sewage disposal systems and other
subsurface structures in the vicinity or downgradient
of the groundwater recharge area.
[3] In order to control stormwater runoff quantity impacts, the
design engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors
for stormwater runoff calculations in Subsection E,
complete one of the following:
[a] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that for stormwater leaving the site, postconstruction
runoff hydrographs for the two-, ten- and
one-hundred-year storm events do not exceed, at any
point in time, the preconstruction runoff hydrographs
for the same storm events;
[b] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that there is no increase, as compared to the
preconstruction condition, in the peak runoff rates of
stormwater leaving the site for the two-, ten- and onehundred-
year storm events and that the increased
volume or change in timing of stormwater runoff will
not increase flood damage at or downstream of the
site. This analysis shall include the analysis of impacts
of existing land uses and projected land uses assuming
full development under existing zoning and land use
ordinances in the drainage area;
[c] Design stormwater management measures so that the
post-construction peak runoff rates for the two-, tenand
one-hundred-year storm events are 50%, 75% and
80%, respectively, of the preconstruction peak runoff
rates. The percentages apply only to the postconstruction
stormwater runoff that is attributable to
the portion of the site on which the proposed
development or project is to be constructed. The
§ 244-209 JACKSON CODE § 244-209
1:1138
percentages shall not be applied to post-construction
stormwater runoff into tidal flood hazard areas if the
increased volume of stormwater runoff will not
increase flood damages below the point of discharge;
or
[d] In tidal flood hazard areas, stormwater runoff quantity
analysis in accordance with Subsection D(6)(a)[3][a],
[b] and [c] above shall only be applied if the increased
volume of stormwater runoff could increase flood
damages below the point of discharge.
(b) Any application for a new agricultural development that meets
the definition of major development at Subsection B shall be
submitted to the appropriate Soil Conservation District for
review and approval in accordance with the requirements of
this section and any applicable Soil Conservation District
guidelines for stormwater runoff quantity and erosion control.
For the purposes of this subsection, "agricultural development"
means land uses normally associated with the production of
food, fiber and livestock for sale. Such uses do not include the
development of land for the processing or sale of food and the
manufacturing of agriculturally related products.
(7) Stormwater runoff quality standards.
(a) Stormwater management measures shall be designed to
reduce the post-construction load of total suspended solids
(TSS) in stormwater runoff by 80% of the anticipated load from
the developed site, expressed as an annual average.
Stormwater management measures shall only be required for
water quality control if an additional 1/4 acre of impervious
surface is being proposed on a development site. The
requirement to reduce TSS does not apply to any stormwater
runoff in a discharge regulated under a numeric effluent
limitation for TSS imposed under the New Jersey Pollution
Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules, N.J.A.C. 7:14A,
or in a discharge specifically exempt under a NJPDES permit
from this requirement. The water quality design storm is 1.25
inches of rainfall in two hours. Water quality calculations shall
take into account the distribution of rain from the water quality
design storm, as reflected in Table 1. The calculation of the
volume of runoff may take into account the implementation of
nonstructural and structural stormwater management
measures.
§ 244-209 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-209
1:1139
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
0 0.0000 65 0.8917
5 0.0083 70 0.9917
10 0.0166 75 1.0500
15 0.0250 80 1.0840
20 0.0500 85 1.1170
25 0.0750 90 1.1500
30 0.1000 95 1.1750
35 0.1330 100 1.2000
40 0.1660 105 1.2250
45 0.2000 110 1.2334
50 0.2583 115 1.2417
55 0.3583 120 1.2500
60 0.6250
(b) For purpose of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 below
presents the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs
designed in accordance with the New Jersey Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be
obtained from the address identified in Subsection G, or found
on the Department's website at www.njstormwater.org. The
BMP Manual and other sources of technical guidance are listed
in Subsection G. TSS reduction shall be calculated based on
the removal rates for the BMPs in Table 2 below. Alternative
removal rates and methods of calculating removal rates may be
used if the design engineer provides documentation
demonstrating the capability of these alternative rates and
methods to the review agency. A copy of any approved
alternative rate or method of calculating the removal rate shall
be provided to the Department at the following address:
Division of Watershed Management, New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, PO Box 418, Trenton, New Jersey
08625-0418.
(c) If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the
required eighty-percent TSS reduction for a site, the applicant
shall utilize the following formula to calculate TSS reduction:
R = A + B - (AXB)/100
§ 244-209 JACKSON CODE § 244-209
1:1140
Where:
R = total TSS percent load removal from application of
both BMPs, and
A = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first
BMP
B = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the
second BMP
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice TSS Percent Removal Rate
Bioretention systems 90%
Constructed stormwater
wetland
90%
Extended detention basin 40% to 60%
Infiltration structure 80%
Manufactured treatment
device
See Subsection F(3)
Sand filter 80%
Vegetative filter strip 60% to 80%
Wet pond 50% to 90%
(d) If there is more than one on-site drainage area, the eightypercent
TSS removal rate shall apply to each drainage area,
unless the runoff from the subareas converge on site, in which
case the removal rate can be demonstrated through a
calculation using a weighted average.
(e) Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to
reduce, to the maximum extent feasible, the post-construction
nutrient load of the anticipated load from the developed site in
stormwater runoff generated from the water quality design
storm. In achieving reduction of nutrients to the maximum
extent feasible, the design of the site shall include
nonstructural strategies and structural measures that optimize
nutrient removal while still achieving the performance
standards in Subsection D(6) and (7).
(f) Additional information and examples are contained in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual.
(g) In accordance with the definition of "FW1" at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.4,
stormwater management measures shall be designed to
prevent any increase in stormwater runoff to waters classified
as FW1.
(h) Special water resource protection areas shall be established
along all waters designated Category One at N.J.A.C. 7:9B, and
§ 244-209 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-209
1:1141
perennial or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream
of the Category One waters as shown on the USGS Quadrangle
Maps or in the County Soil Surveys, within the associated
HUC14 drainage area. These areas shall be established for
the protection of water quality, aesthetic value, exceptional
ecological significance, exceptional recreational significance,
exceptional water supply significance and exceptional fisheries
significance of those established Category One waters. These
areas shall be designated and protected as follows:
[1] The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special water
resource protection area in accordance with one of the
following:
[a] A three-hundred-foot special water resource
protection area shall be provided on each side of the
waterway, measured perpendicular to the waterway
from the top of the bank outwards or from the center
line of the waterway where the bank is not defined,
consisting of existing vegetation or vegetation allowed
to follow natural succession.
[b] Encroachment within the designated special water
resource protection area under Subsection
D(7)(h)[1][a] above shall only be allowed where
previous development or disturbance has occurred
(for example, active agricultural use, parking area or
maintained lawn area). The encroachment shall only
be allowed where applicant demonstrates that the
functional value and overall condition of the special
water resource protection area will be maintained to
the maximum extent practicable. In no case shall the
remaining special water resource protection area be
reduced to less than 150 feet as measured
perpendicular to the top of bank of the waterway or
center line of the waterway where the bank is
undefined. All encroachments proposed under this
subsection shall be subject to review and approval by
the Department.
[2] All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow
through the special water resource protection area and
shall comply with the Standard for Off-Site Stability in the
Standards For Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New
Jersey, established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.
[3] If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through
the special water resource protection area cannot comply
with the Standard For Off-Site Stability in the Standards
for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey,
§ 244-209 JACKSON CODE § 244-209
1:1142
established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., then the stabilization
measures in accordance with the requirements of the
above standards may be placed within the special water
resource protection area, provided that:
[a] Stabilization measures shall not be placed within 150
feet of the Category One waterway;
[b] Stormwater associated with discharges allowed by
this section shall achieve a ninety-five-percent TSS
post-construction removal rate;
[c] Temperature shall be addressed to ensure no impact
on the receiving waterway;
[d] The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource
protection area will be maintained to the maximum
extent practicable;
[e] A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with
the appropriate Department staff and Soil
Conservation District staff to identify necessary
stabilization measures; and
[f] All encroachments proposed under this section shall
be subject to review and approval by the Department.
[4] A stream corridor protection plan may be developed by a
regional stormwater management planning committee as
an element of a regional stormwater management plan or
by a municipality through an adopted municipal
stormwater management plan. If a stream corridor
protection plan for a waterway subject to Subsection
D(7)(h) has been approved by the Department of
Environmental Protection, then the provisions of the plan
shall be the applicable special water resource protection
area requirements for that waterway. A stream corridor
protection plan for a waterway subject to Subsection
D(7)(h) shall maintain or enhance the current functional
value and overall condition of the special water resource
protection area as defined in Subsection D(7)(h)[1][a]
above. In no case shall a stream corridor protection plan
allow the reduction of the special water resource
protection area to less than 150 feet as measured
perpendicular to the waterway subject to this subsection.
[5] Subsection D(7)(h) does not apply to the construction of
one individual single-family dwelling that is not part of a
larger development on a lot receiving preliminary or final
§ 244-209 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-209
1:1143
subdivision approval on or before February 2, 2004,
provided that the construction begins on or before
February 2, 2009.
E. Calculation of stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge.
(1) Stormwater runoff shall be calculated in accordance with the
following:
(a) The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the
following methods:
[1] The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service
(NRCS) methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation
and Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as described in the
NRCS National Engineering Handbook Section 4 —
Hydrology and Technical Release 55 — Urban Hydrology
for Small Watersheds; or
[2] The Rational Method for peak flow and the Modified
Rational Method for hydrograph computations.
(b) For the purpose of calculating runoff coefficients and
groundwater recharge, there is a presumption that the
preconstruction condition of a site or portion thereof is a
wooded land use with good hydrologic condition. The term
"runoff coefficient" applies to both the NRCS methodology at
Subsection E(1)(a)[1] and the Rational and Modified Rational
Methods at Subsection E(1)(a)[2]. A runoff coefficient or a
groundwater recharge land cover for an existing condition may
be used on all or a portion of the site if the design engineer
verifies that the hydrologic condition has existed on the site or
portion of the site for at least five years without interruption
prior to the time of application. If more than one land cover
have existed on the site during the five years immediately prior
to the time of application, the land cover with the lowest runoff
potential shall be used for the computations. In addition, there
is the presumption that the site is in good hydrologic condition
(if the land use type is pasture, lawn, or park), with good cover
(if the land use type is woods) or with good hydrologic
condition and conservation treatment (if the land use type is
cultivation).
(c) In computing preconstruction stormwater runoff, the design
engineer shall account for all significant land features and
structures, such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows
or culverts, that may reduce preconstruction stormwater
runoff rates and volumes.
(d) In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms, the
design engineer shall consider the relative stormwater runoff
rates and/or volumes of previous and impervious surfaces
§ 244-209 JACKSON CODE § 244-209
1:1144
separately to accurately compute the rates and volume of
stormwater runoff from the site. To calculate runoff from
unconnected impervious cover, urban impervious area
modifications as described in the NRCS Technical Release 55
— Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds and other methods
may be employed.
(e) If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater
management measure is below the flood hazard design flood
elevation as defined at N.J.A.C. 7:13, the design engineer shall
take into account the effects of tailwater in the design of
structural stormwater management measures.
(2) Groundwater recharge may be calculated in accordance with the
following:
(a) The New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32 A Method
for Evaluating Ground-Water Recharge Areas in New Jersey,
incorporated herein by reference as amended and
supplemented. Information regarding the methodology is
available from the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual at http://www.state.nj.us/dep/njgs/; or at
New Jersey Geological Survey, 29 Arctic Parkway, P.O. Box 427,
Trenton, New Jersey 08625-0427; (609) 984-6587.
F. Standards for structural stormwater management measures.
(1) Standards for structural stormwater management measures are as
follows:
(a) Structural stormwater management measures shall be
designed to take into account the existing site conditions,
including, for example, environmentally critical areas;
wetlands; flood-prone areas; slopes; depth to seasonal high
water table; soil type, permeability and texture; drainage area
and drainage patterns; and the presence of solution-prone
carbonate rocks (limestone).
(b) Structural stormwater management measures shall be
designed to minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance and
repairs and ensure proper functioning. Trash racks shall be
installed at the intake to the outlet structure as appropriate
and shall have parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the
bars to the elevation of the water quality design storm. For
elevations higher than the water quality design storm, the
parallel bars at the outlet structure shall be spaced no greater
than 1/3 the width of the diameter of the orifice or 1/3 the
width of the weir, with a minimum spacing between bars of one
inch and a maximum spacing between bars of six inches. In
addition, the design of trash racks must comply with the
requirements of Subsection H(2).
§ 244-209 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-209
1:1145
(c) Structural stormwater management measures shall be
designed, constructed and installed to be strong, durable and
corrosion resistant. Measures that are consistent with the
relevant portions of the Residential Site Improvement
Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3, 5:21-7.4 and 5:21-7.5 shall be
deemed to meet this requirement.
(d) At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management
basin, the orifice size shall be a minimum of 2 1/2 inches in
diameter.
(e) Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the
minimum safety standards for stormwater management basins
at Subsection H.
(2) Stormwater management measure guidelines are available in the
New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Other
stormwater management measures may be utilized, provided the
design engineer demonstrates that the proposed measure and its
design will accomplish the required water quantity, groundwater
recharge and water quality design and performance standards
established by Subsection D of this section.
(3) Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the
requirements of Subsection D of this section, provided the pollutant
removal rates are verified by the New Jersey Corporation for
Advanced Technology and certified by the Department.
G. Sources for technical guidance.
(1) Technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be
found in the documents listed in Subsection G(1)(a) and (b) below,
which are available from Maps and Publications, New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection, 428 East State Street,
P.O. Box 420, Trenton, New Jersey 08625; telephone (609)
777-1038.
(a) Guidelines for stormwater management measures are
contained in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual, as amended. Information is provided on
stormwater management measures such as bioretention
systems, constructed stormwater wetlands, dry wells,
extended detention basins, infiltration structures,
manufactured treatment devices, previous paving, sand filters,
vegetative filter strips and wet ponds.
(b) The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Manual, as
amended.
(2) Additional technical guidance for stormwater management
measures can be obtained from the following:
§ 244-209 JACKSON CODE § 244-209
1:1146
(a) The Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New
Jersey promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee
and incorporated into N.J.A.C. 2:90. Copies of these standards
may be obtained by contacting the State Soil Conservation
Committee or any of the Soil Conservation Districts listed in
N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)3. The location, address and telephone
number of each Soil Conservation District may be obtained
from the State Soil Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330,
Trenton, New Jersey 08625; (609) 292-5540;
(b) The Rutgers Cooperative Extension Service, 732-932-9306;
and
(c) The Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)3.
The location, address and telephone number of each Soil
Conservation District may be obtained from the State Soil
Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey
08625; (609) 292-5540.
H. Safety standards for stormwater management basins.
(1) This subsection sets forth requirements to protect public safety
through the proper design and operation of stormwater
management basins. This subsection applies to any new
stormwater management basin.
(2) Requirements for trash racks, overflow grates and escape
provisions.
(a) A "trash rack" is a device designed to catch trash and debris
and prevent the clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks shall
be installed at the intake to the outlet from the stormwater
management basin to ensure proper functioning of the basin
outlets in accordance with the following:
[1] The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater
than six-inch spacing between the bars.
[2] The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely
affect the hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe or
structure.
[3] The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is
not to exceed 2.5 feet per second under the full range of
stage and discharge. Velocity is to be computed on the
basis of the net area of opening through the rack.
[4] The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable and corrosion resistant and shall be
designed to withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300
pounds per square foot.
§ 244-209 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-209
1:1147
(b) An overflow grate is designed to prevent obstruction of the
overflow structure. If an outlet structure has an overflow grate,
such grate shall meet the following requirements:
[1] The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure
but removable for emergencies and maintenance.
[2] The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two
inches across the smallest dimension.
[3] The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable and corrosion resistant and shall be
designed to withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300
pounds per square foot.
(c) For purposes of this Subsection H(2)(c), "escape provisions"
means the permanent installation of ladders, steps, rungs or
other features that provide easily accessible means of egress
from stormwater management basins. Stormwater
management basins shall include escape provisions as follows:
[1] If a stormwater management basin has an outlet structure,
escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the
structure. With the prior approval of the reviewing agency
identified in Subsection H(3), a freestanding outlet
structure may be exempted from this requirement.
[2] Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
stormwater management basins having a permanent pool
of water deeper than 2 1/2 feet. Such safety ledges shall be
comprised of two steps. Each step shall be four feet to six
feet in width. One step shall be located approximately 2 1/
2 feet below the permanent water surface, and the second
step shall be located one to 1 1/2 above the permanent
water surface. See Subsection H(4) for an illustration of
safety ledges in a stormwater management basin.
[3] In new stormwater management basins, the maximum
interior slope for an earthen dam, embankment or berm
shall not be steeper than three horizontal to one vertical.
(3) Variance or exemption from safety standards. A variance or
exemption from the safety standards for stormwater management
basins may be granted only upon a written finding by the
appropriate reviewing agency (municipality, county or Department)
that the variance or exemption will not constitute a threat to public
safety.
(4) Illustration of safety ledges in a new stormwater management
basin.
§ 244-209 JACKSON CODE § 244-209
1:1148
I. Requirements for a site development stormwater plan.
(1) Submission of site development stormwater plan.
(a) Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a
development subject to this section, the applicant shall submit
all of the required components of the checklist for the site
development stormwater plan at Subsection I(3) below as part
of the submission of the applicant's application for subdivision
or site plan approval.
(b) The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the
standards set forth in this section.
(c) The applicant shall submit copies of the materials listed in the
checklist for site development stormwater plans in accordance
with Subsection I(3) of this section, in a number as required by
the local land use board checklist.
(2) Site development stormwater plan approval. The applicant's site
development project shall be reviewed as a part of the subdivision
or site plan review process by the municipal board or official from
§ 244-209 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-209
1:1149
which municipal approval is sought. That municipal board or
official shall consult the engineer retained by the Planning and/or
Zoning Board (as appropriate) to determine if all of the checklist
requirements have been satisfied and to determine if the project
meets the standards set forth in this section.
(3) Checklist requirements. The following information shall be
required:
(a) Topographic base map. The reviewing engineer may require
upstream tributary drainage system information as necessary.
A topographic base map of the site shall be submitted which
extends a minimum of 200 feet beyond the limits of the
proposed development, at a scale of one inch equals 200 feet or
greater, showing not greater than two-foot contour intervals.
The map as appropriate may indicate the following: existing
surface water drainage, shorelines, steep slopes, soils, erodible
soils, perennial or intermittent streams that drain into or
upstream of the Category One waters, wetlands and
floodplains, along with their appropriate buffer strips,
marshlands and other wetlands, pervious or vegetative
surfaces, existing man-made structures, roads, bearing and
distances of property lines and significant natural and manmade
features not otherwise shown.
(b) Environmental site analysis: a written and graphic description
of the natural and man-made features of the site and its
environs. This description should include a discussion of soil
conditions, slopes, wetlands, waterways and vegetation on the
site. Particular attention should be given to unique, unusual or
environmentally sensitive features and to those that provide
particular opportunities or constraints for development.
(c) Project description and site plan(s): a map (or maps) at the
scale of the topographical base map indicating the location of
existing and proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities,
structural facilities for stormwater management and sediment
control and other permanent structures. The map(s) shall also
clearly show areas where alterations occur in the natural
terrain and cover, including lawns and other landscaping, and
seasonal high groundwater elevations. A written description of
the site plan and justification of proposed changes in natural
conditions may also be provided.
(d) Land use planning and source control plan. This plan shall
provide a demonstration of how the goals and standards of
Subsections C through F are being met. The focus of this plan
shall be to describe how the site is being developed to meet the
objective of controlling groundwater recharge, stormwater
quality and stormwater quantity problems at the source by
land management and source controls whenever possible.
§ 244-209 JACKSON CODE § 244-209
1:1150
(e) Stormwater management facilities map. The following
information, illustrated on a map of the same scale as the
topographic base map, shall be included:
[1] Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface
contours, land area to be occupied by the stormwater
management facilities and the type of vegetation thereon
and details of the proposed plan to control and dispose of
stormwater.
[2] Details of all stormwater management facility designs,
during and after construction, including discharge
provisions, discharge capacity for each outlet at different
levels of detention and emergency spillway provisions with
maximum discharge capacity of each spillway.
(f) Calculations.
[1] Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design
calculations for the predevelopment and post-development
conditions for the design storms specified in Subsection D
of this section.
[2] When the proposed stormwater management control
measures (e.g., infiltration basins) depends on the
hydrologic properties of soils, then a soils report shall be
submitted. The soils report shall be based on on-site
boring logs or soil pit profiles. The number and location of
required soil borings or soil pits shall be determined based
on what is needed to determine the suitability and
distribution of soils present at the location of the control
measure.
(g) Maintenance and repair plan. The design and planning of the
stormwater management facility shall meet the maintenance
requirements of Subsection J.
(h) Waiver from submission requirements. The municipal official
or board reviewing an application under this section may, in
consultation with the Municipal Engineer, waive submission of
any of the requirements in Subsection I(3)(a) through (f) of this
section when it can be demonstrated that the information
requested is impossible to obtain or it would create a hardship
on the applicant to obtain and its absence will not materially
affect the review process.
J. Maintenance and repair.
(1) Applicability. Projects subject to review as in Subsection A(3) of this
section shall comply with the requirements of Subsection J(2) and
(3).
§ 244-209 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-209
1:1151
(2) General maintenance.
(a) The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the
design of a major development.
(b) The maintenance plan shall contain specific preventative
maintenance tasks and schedules; cost estimates, including
estimated cost of sediment, debris or trash removal; and the
name, address and telephone number of the person or persons
responsible for preventative and corrective maintenance
(including replacement). Maintenance guidelines for
stormwater management measures are available in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. If the
maintenance plan identifies a person other than the developer
(for example, a public agency or homeowners' association) as
having the responsibility for maintenance, the plan shall
include documentation of such person's agreement to assume
this responsibility or of the developer's obligation to dedicate a
stormwater management facility to such person under an
applicable ordinance or regulation.
(c) Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or
transferred to the owner or tenant of an individual property in
a residential development or project unless such owner or
tenant owns or leases the entire residential development or
project.
(d) If the person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection J(2)(b) above is not a public agency, the
maintenance plan and any future revisions based on
Subsection J(2)(g) below shall be recorded upon the deed of
record for each property on which the maintenance described
in the maintenance plan must be undertaken.
(e) Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to
maintain the function of the stormwater management measure,
including repairs or replacement to the structure; removal of
sediment, debris or trash; restoration of eroded areas; snow
and ice removal; fence repair or replacement; restoration of
vegetation; and repair or replacement of nonvegetated linings.
(f) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection J(2)(b) above shall maintain a detailed log of all
preventative and corrective maintenance for the structural
stormwater management measures incorporated into the
design of the development, including a record of all inspections
and copies of all maintenance-related work orders.
(g) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection J(2)(b) above shall evaluate the effectiveness of the
§ 244-209 JACKSON CODE § 244-209
1:1152
maintenance plan at least once per year and adjust the plan
and the deed as needed.
(h) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection J(2)(b) above shall retain and make available, upon
request by any public entity with administrative, health,
environmental or safety authority over the site, the
maintenance plan and the documentation required by
Subsection J(2)(f) and (g) above.
(i) The requirements of Subsection J(2)(c) and (d) do not apply to
stormwater management facilities that are dedicated to and
accepted by the municipality or another governmental agency.
(j) In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes
a danger to public safety or public health, or if it is in need of
maintenance or repair, the municipality shall so notify the
responsible person in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the
responsible person shall have 14 days to effect maintenance
and repair of the facility in a manner that is approved by the
Municipal Engineer or his designee. The municipality, in its
discretion, may extend the time allowed for effecting
maintenance and repair for good cause. If the responsible
person fails or refuses to perform such maintenance and
repair, the municipality or county may immediately proceed to
do so and shall bill the cost thereof to the responsible person.
(k) Prior to granting final approval to any project subject to review
under this section, the applicant shall enter into an agreement
with the municipality to ensure the continued operation and
maintenance of the detention facility. This agreement shall be
in a form satisfactory to the Township Attorney and may
include but may not necessarily be limited to personal
guaranties, deed restrictions, covenants and bonds. The
agreement shall specify the maintenance responsibility and
standards in accordance with the Ocean County Stormwater
Management Facilities Maintenance Manual during and after
the completion of the work, and upon approval and shall be
recorded in the office of the County Clerk. A copy of the
recorded agreement shall be filed with the Township.
(l) Whenever the Township accepts dedication of properties to be
maintained for stormwater management basin purposes which
will result in the Township having to expend funds in the future
for the maintenance of such properties, the Township shall,
unless otherwise determined by the Township Committee,
require that the property owner dedicating such property post
with the Township funds which will defray the estimated costs
of future maintenance. The property owner shall, prior to
acceptance by the Township, post such funds with the
Township in an amount determined by the Township Engineer
§ 244-209 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-209
1:1153
§ 244-210. Street construction: nonresidential development.
[Amended 6-8-1998 by Ord. No. 15-98]
in accordance with the formula set forth in § 244-12K of the
Code of the Township of Jackson, to be placed in an interestbearing
escrow maintenance account, upon which funds shall
be drawn for the maintenance of such detention or retention
facility. Nothing herein shall be construed to relieve the
property owner of the responsibility to maintain the system
prior to the acceptance of said dedication. Prior to acceptance
of any detention or retention facility, same shall be certified by
the Township Engineer to have been constructed in accordance
with the requirements and specifications of the approvals
granted by the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment of the
Township of Jackson.
(3) Nothing in this section shall preclude the municipality in which the
major development is located from requiring the posting of a
performance or maintenance guarantee in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.
K. Violations and penalties. Any person who erects, constructs, alters,
repairs, converts, maintains or uses any building, structure or land in
violation of this section shall be subject to the following penalties: fines
not to exceed $5,000 and/or 30 days in jail.
L. When effective. This section shall take effect immediately upon the
approval by the county review agency, or 60 days from the receipt of the
ordinance by the county review agency if the county review agency
should fail to act.
A. General requirements. Roadways and all appurtenances, including
subgrade, subbase, base courses and pavements, shall be constructed
in accordance with the applicable requirements of the standard
specifications, as modified herein. All subsurface utilities, including
service connections (terminating at least two feet behind sidewalk) to
each lot, and all storm drains shall be installed in all roadway areas
prior to the construction of final pavement surfaces.
B. Pavement structure design.
(1) The pavement structure design for each particular development
utilizing a bituminous concrete flexible pavement shall be the
responsibility of the developer or his engineer. The pavement
design shall be based upon traffic loading projections and field
sampling and laboratory analysis of the subgrade soils to be
encountered in roadway areas in the development and shall follow
current design recommendations of the Asphalt Institute or such
other generally recognized standards as may be acceptable to the
Township Engineer.
§ 244-209 JACKSON CODE § 244-210
1:1154
(2) As minimum requirements, flexible bituminous concrete pavements
shall have an equivalent structural depth of at least 10 inches for
local streets and minor collector streets, having a minimum
wearing surface of not less than 1 1/2 inches of pavement, Type
FABC-1, a minimum bituminous stabilized base course of not less
than 2 1/2 inches and a dense graded aggregate base course to
provide the remaining six-inch depth; and an equivalent structural
depth of at least 13 inches for other street classifications, having a
minimum wearing surface of not less than two inches of pavement,
Type FABC-1, a minimum bituminous stabilized base course of not
less than three inches and a dense graded aggregate base to
provide the remaining eight-inch depth. Bituminous stabilized base
may be substituted for aggregate base on a one-to-three ratio
(stabilized base to aggregate base), all in accordance with the
applicable requirements of the standard specifications, and subject
to approval of the Township Engineer. Improvements to roads
under the jurisdiction of the County of Ocean or the State of New
Jersey shall be constructed in accordance with the applicable
county or state standards.
C. Subgrades. All subgrades shall be prepared in accordance with the
applicable requirements of the standard specifications for bituminous
concrete pavements. Prior to the construction of any subbase, base or
pavement course, all soft or unyielding portions of the subgrade which
do not attain the required stability will be removed and replaced with
the suitable material, and the whole surface of the subgrade shall be
compacted. The provision of a uniform roadway subgrade meeting the
requirements of the standard specifications shall be the full
responsibility of the developer. In certain cases, special treatment may
be required because of the character or nature of the subsoil. Such
special treatment may include lime or cement stabilization, wet
excavation or construction of underdrainage fields. Any proposal by the
developer to stabilize subgrade shall be subject to the approval of the
Township Engineer.
D. Subbase and/or aggregate base courses. Where granular subbase
courses are included in the pavement design section proposed by the
developer, they shall be constructed in accordance with the applicable
requirements of the standard specifications. Bituminous concrete
pavements (and stabilized bases) may be constructed on subgrade
without subbase or aggregate base courses, provided that the subgrade
can be satisfactorily prepared as hereinbefore described. Dense graded
aggregate base courses shall comply with the requirements of the
Standard Specifications for Soil Aggregate, Type 5, Class A, or Type 2,
Class A or B. Any subbase course of aggregate base course to be
utilized with any type of pavement shall have a minimum thickness of
four inches.
E. Bituminous base courses.
§ 244-210 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-210
1:1155
§ 244-211. Street design: nonresidential development. [Amended
6-8-1998 by Ord. No. 15-98]
(1) Bituminous base courses for use with bituminous concrete
pavements shall consist of plant-mixed bituminous stabilized base
course (stone mix or gravel mix) in accordance with the
requirements of the standard specifications.
(2) Prior to placement of any bituminous stabilized base course, the
finished surface of any underlying subbase or aggregate base shall
receive a prime coat in accordance with the requirements of the
standard specifications.
F. Bituminous pavements. Bituminous pavements shall consist of a
bituminous concrete surface course, Type FABC-1, in accordance with
the requirements of the standard specifications. The bituminous
pavement wearing surface should generally not be installed until just
prior to the time the streets are prepared for final acceptance. Prior to
the installation of a bituminous concrete surface, the bituminous base
course shall be inspected by the Township Engineer. Any areas of the
base course in need of repair shall be removed and replaced at the
direction of the Township Engineer. If the Township Engineer directs, a
leveling course of FABC material shall be placed on any uneven or
below-grade base courses prior to the placement of finished pavement.
No pavement surfaces shall be placed unless permission to do so has
been granted by the Township Engineer.
G. Alternate pavement types. In areas where alternate pavement types are
proposed or desired either for decorative purposes, because of physical
restrictions or existing conditions or because of limitations or shortages
in certain types of construction materials, a detail of the type and/or
location of alternate pavement types proposed shall be submitted for
approval with the preliminary and/or final plat. The use of alternate
pavement types may only be permitted if the applicant submits for
review and approval details and specifications concerning the
equipment, materials and methods proposed for use and if the
Township Engineer has inspected the installation of and tested and
approved a suitable sample section of such pavement. In the event that
the Township Engineer does not approve the sample section of
pavement, the developer shall remove the same section and replace it
with a type of pavement permitted by this chapter or such other
alternate as may be approved by the municipal agency.
A. Street extensions. The arrangement of streets within a development
shall provide for the extension and/or realignment of existing streets,
except that local streets should only be extended when such extension
is necessary and the municipal agency concurs that such extension will
promote safety and conform to the street standards contained
elsewhere in this chapter.
§ 244-210 JACKSON CODE § 244-211
1:1156
B. Street widening. Where developments abut existing roadways,
sufficient right-of-way shall be reserved to provide the rights-of-way
width proposed for the functional classification of the street in question.
C. Design of local streets. Local streets shall be designed in accordance
with the Schedule of Street Design Standards180 and the following
requirements:
(1) Local streets shall be arranged so that there exists a minimum
possibility of their use by traffic which does not have its origin or
destination at the lots to which the local streets provide access.
(2) Culs-de-sac (dead-end streets) shall have a center line length, from
the intersecting street center line to the center point of the
turnaround of the cul-de-sac, of not less than 100 feet nor longer
than 1,200 feet and shall not provide access to more than 25 lots.
They shall provide an end turnaround with a pavement radius of
not less than 40 feet and a property-line radius of not less than 50
feet, which shall have its center point at or to the left of the center
line of the street when viewed toward the closed end. In the event
that it is contemplated that a dead-end street shall be extended in
the future, a temporary turnaround, meeting the aforementioned
design criteria, shall be required.
(3) Loop streets should provide access to not more than 45 lots, except
that where access is provided by a combination of a short loop
street and cul-de-sac, the maximum shall be 60 lots, provided that
the length of the loop street alone will not exceed 3,000 feet. Loop
streets shall have both of their termini located on the same street.
(4) P-loops, which are loop streets with a single access point, should
have an entrance not exceeding 700 feet in distance from the loop
intersection. There shall also be provided an emergency vehicular
and pedestrian right-of-way of 15 feet minimum width from the
loop and providing access to a street which is not a part of the Ploop.
The loop of a P-loop shall have a street length not exceeding
3,000 feet. P-loops shall provide access to no more than 60 lots, and
the entrance street shall be designed in accordance with the design
standards for minor collector streets.
(5) Artificial modifications in street rights-of-way for the purpose of
increasing lot frontage shall be prohibited. Such prohibited
modification shall include but shall not be limited to widening the
right-of-way of a continuous street through the use of semicircular
projections.
D. Classification of streets. In any development, it shall be the duty of the
municipal agency to approve classification of proposed streets
according to their use. In making its decisions, the municipal agency
180. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Street Design Standards is included at the end of this
chapter.
§ 244-211 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-211
1:1157
shall refer to the Township Master Plan and shall consider conditions
within the development and the surrounding areas and shall use as a
guide the following street classifications and criteria:
(1) Local street. A local street is a street serving only single- family
residences and, where feasible, should be either a cul-de-sac or a
loop street meeting the requirements hereinabove set forth. A
street which serves traffic having origins and destinations other
than within the lots which abut the street shall not be considered a
local street. The maximum traffic normally expected on a local
street shall be 400 vehicles per day.
(2) Minor collector street. A minor collector is generally a street
gathering traffic from local streets and feeding it into a system of
major collectors, minor arterial and major arterial highways. Even
if laid out as a local street, a street should be considered a minor
collector street if it provides access or could provide access to more
than 60 lots or, in the case of a cul-de-sac, more than 25 lots, or
could be utilized by traffic other than residential in nature. Minor
collector streets should generally not be expected to carry traffic
exceeding 1,000 vehicles per day. The design speed of local or
minor collectors, for alignment and sight distance purposes, should
be 40 miles per hour.
(3) Major collector street. A major collector street is generally a street
gathering traffic from local streets or minor collector streets and
feeding it into a system of arterial highways. Even if laid out as a
local or minor collector street, a street should be considered a
major collector street if it provides access or could provide access
to more than 150 lots or would be utilized by traffic other than
residential in nature. Major collector streets should generally not
be expected to carry traffic exceeding 2,500 vehicles per day. The
design speed of major collector streets, for alignment and sight
distance purposes, should be 50 miles per hour.
(4) Minor arterial. A minor arterial is a street gathering traffic from
more than one local, minor or major collector street and leading it
to a system of other minor arterials or major arterial streets. Minor
arterials shall have a design speed, for alignment and sight
distance purposes, of 60 miles per hour and should generally be
designed to carry traffic volume approaching 5,000 vehicles per
day.
(5) Major arterial. A major arterial is a street designed to provide an
inter/intramunicipal link with other roads in the functional system.
Major arterials are typified by direct access on a restricted basis,
channelized and signalized intersections, where warranted, and a
prohibition of parking. Major arterials shall have a minimum design
speed, for alignment and sight distance purposes, of 60 miles per
hour and should generally be designed to carry traffic volume
approaching 10,000 vehicles per day.
§ 244-211 JACKSON CODE § 244-211
1:1158
(6) Interstate highway. Interstate highways are roadways intended to
provide regional movement of people, goods and services between
other highways, major arterials and minor arterials. Interstate
highways are characterized by limited access, grade separations
and no traffic stops. Interstate highways should have a design
speed of 60 miles per hour and should be designed to carry traffic
exceeding 10,000 vehicles per day.
(7) Classification criteria. Street classifications will be approved by the
municipal agency in accordance with the foregoing definitions, in
accordance with the provisions of the Township Master Plan, in
accordance with the provisions of applicable county and state
regulations or plans or, in the absence of specific information from
the above, in accordance with its own best judgment concerning
the use to which the various streets in any development will be put.
E. Lots abutting major collectors, minor arterials or major arterials. In any
subdivision abutting or being traversed by a major collector street,
minor arterial or major arterial, one of the following conditions shall be
required by the municipal agency:
(1) A marginal street meeting the classifications herein for a local
street shall be provided along each major collector, minor arterial
or major arterial and shall be separated from the major collector,
minor arterial or major arterial by a landscaped strip at least 25
feet in width.
(2) The frontage of all lots abutting the major collector, minor arterial
or major arterial shall be reversed so that the lots will front on an
internal local street; a natural wooded or landscaped buffer strip at
least 50 feet in width will be provided on the abutting lots along the
right-of-way of the major collector, minor arterial or major arterial.
The area of such buffer strip shall not be considered part of the
required minimum lot size.
(3) All lots abutting major collector streets may, in lieu of the above, be
provided with suitable driveway turnarounds eliminating any
necessity for vehicles to back into the collector street.
(4) Other means of providing a satisfactory buffer separating through
and local traffic shall be provided as may be deemed proper by the
municipal agency.
(5) Dwellings on corner lots shall have their driveway access on the
roadway designed and intended to carry the lesser amount of
traffic.
F. Street design standards. Street design standards shall be appropriate
to the expected use of the street, soil, topographical and other physical
conditions and to the maintenance of the purposes of this chapter but
shall not be less than those set forth in the Schedule of Street Design
Standards. (See Exhibit 109-10 at the end of this chapter.)
§ 244-211 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-211
1:1159
G. Street intersections. Street intersections shall be designed according to
the following standards:
(1) No more than two streets shall cross the same point. Street
intersections shall be at right angles wherever possible, and
intersections of less than 70°, measured at the center line of
streets, shall not be permitted.
(2) Streets should not enter the same side of local, minor or major
collector streets at intervals of less than 500 feet, minor arterials at
intervals of less than 1,200 feet or major arterials at intervals of
less 2,500 feet. Streets which enter collectors, minor arterials or
major arterials from opposite sides shall be directly opposite to
each other or must be separated by at least 300 feet between their
center lines measured along the center line of an intersected
collector or 500 feet along the center line of a minor arterial or 800
feet along the center line of a major arterial.
(3) Approaches of any major collector, minor arterial or major arterial
street to any intersection of another major collector, minor arterial
or major arterial street shall be tangent or having a center line
radius greater than 5,000 feet for at least 500 feet from the
intersection.
(4) Where a minor or major collector, major thoroughfare or major
arterial street intersects with a major collector, major thoroughfare
or a major arterial street, the right-of-way of each minor collector
shall be widened by 10 feet [five feet for each side] for a distance of
300 feet in all directions from the intersection of the center lines,
and the right-of-way of each major collector, minor arterial and
major arterial shall be widened by 20 feet [10 feet for each side] for
500 feet in all directions from the intersection of the center lines.
(5) Approaches of any local street or minor collector to any other street
shall:
(a) Be tangent (straight) for a distance of at least 50 feet from the
intersection; or
(b) Have a center-line radius greater than 1,000 feet for at least
150 feet from the intersection; and
(c) Have a clear sight of a point three feet high in the intersection
for a distance of not less than 400 feet.
H. Street layout.
(1) Curved local streets and minor collectors are preferred to
discourage speed and monotony. The maximum straight-line
distance should not exceed 1,000 feet.
(2) The municipal agency in all cases may, and in the case of
subdivisions having 50 or more lots shall, require provisions for
§ 244-211 JACKSON CODE § 244-211
1:1160
§ 244-212. Residential streets. [Added 6-8-1998 by Ord. No. 15-98]
Streets in residential developments shall be designed in accordance with
Subchapter 4 (Streets and Parking) of N.J.A.C. 5:21 (Residential Site
Improvement Standards), as amended.
§ 244-213. Streetlighting: installation. [Amended 8-26-1996 by Ord.
No. 19-96; 9-11-2000 by Ord. No. 23-00]
Streetlights shall be of a type approved by resolution of the Township
Committee and by the electric utility company servicing the proposed
development and approved by the Township Planning Board and located
continuing circulation patterns onto adjacent properties and, for
this purpose, may require the provision of stub streets abutting
adjacent properties.
(3) Subdivisions containing more than 100 lots should have at least
two access points from collector streets or arterial highways.
I. Street names. Street names and development names shall not
duplicate, nearly duplicate or be phonetically similar to the names of
any existing streets or developments in Jackson Township or contiguous
areas of other communities. Any continuation of an existing street shall
have the same street name.
J. Limit of improvements. The developer shall complete all improvements
to the limits of the development, unless other provisions have been
made and approved by the municipal agency. In those instances where
completion of certain improvements would not be possible until the
development of adjacent land takes place, alternate temporary
improvements may be constructed subject to the approval of the
municipal agency, and cash or a certified check representing the
difference between the value of the temporary improvements and the
required improvements may be accepted by the Township Committee to
be credited toward the completion of such improvements at such time
as the adjacent land develops.
K. Streets serving other than single-family detached homes. The right-ofway
width and other standards for internal roads and alleys in
multifamily, commercial and industrial developments may be
determined by the Board on an individual basis and shall, in all cases,
be of sufficient width and design to safely accommodate maximum
traffic, parking and loading needs and maximum access for fire-fighting
equipment and shall generally conform to the requirements herein.
L. Reserve strips. There shall be no reserve strips or areas controlling
access to streets except where control and disposal of the land
comprising such strips or areas have been placed in the hands of the
Township Committee under conditions approved by the municipal
agency.
§ 244-211 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-213
1:1161
so as to provide an average maintained lighting level of 0.4 horizontal
footcandle with a uniformity ratio of 6 to 1 on all local, local collector and
minor collector streets and 0.6 horizontal footcandle with a uniformity ratio
of 4 to 1 on all major collector, minor arterial and principal arterial streets.
The developer shall pay the full cost for initial installation of any streetlights
and in accordance with § 244-214 herein, the operation and maintenance
costs until such time as the municipality assumes payment for the operation
and maintenance costs of such streetlighting.
§ 244-214. Streetlighting: transfer to municipality. [Added
9-11-2000 by Ord. No. 23-00]
If a municipal agency includes as a condition of approval of an application
for development the installation of streetlighting on a dedicated public
street connected to a public utility, then, upon notification in writing by
the developer to the municipal agency and the Township Committee that
streetlighting on such dedicated public street has been installed and
accepted for service by the public utility and that certificates of occupancy
have been issued for not less than 50% of the dwelling units and not less
than 50% of the floor area of any nonresidential uses on such dedicated
public street or portion thereof, the municipality shall, within 30 days
following receipt of said notice, make appropriate arrangements with the
public utility and assume the payment of the cost of the streetlighting on
said dedicated public street on a continuing basis. Compliance with the
provisions of this section shall not be deemed acceptance of the street by
Jackson Township.
§ 244-215. Street signs. [Amended 6-8-1998 by Ord. No. 15-98]
A. Nonresidential development.
(1) Street name signs shall be reflectorized four-way-type (two-head)
all-aluminum construction, known as a "tomcat," vandalproof street
name sign or equivalent, with the following features:
(a) The construction of the tomcat vandalproof street name sign
shall be as manufactured with all extrusions to be made of
6063-T5 aluminum alloy with a solid three-fourths-inchdiameter
metal threaded center staff, consisting of a
compression spring and locking nut for mounting inside the
wall of the post.
(b) Lettering on the street name signs shall be at least six inches
for uppercase letters and 4 1/2 inches for lowercase letters,
with supplementary lettering to indicate the type of street
(e.g., street, avenue, road, etc.), which shall be in smaller
lettering at least three inches in height. Conventional
abbreviations are acceptable, except for the street name itself.
[Amended 4-28-2003 by Ord. No. 10-03]
§ 244-213 JACKSON CODE § 244-215
1:1162
§ 244-216. Swimming pools.
(c) The reflectorized legend and background shall be of a
contrasting color and should have a white message and border
on a green background. The sign faces shall be of a highintensity
type, fabricated from Scotchlite brand reflective
sheeting, high-intensity grade, as manufactured by 3M, or an
approved equal. All numbers and letters shall be of a heatsealed
type.
(d) The posts shall be of galvanized-steel type or approved equal
and shall be of a length of 12 feet, installed in a concrete base.
(2) Street signs shall be properly installed at each street intersection.
Street signs shall be placed, two per intersection, on the near righthand
corner, as viewed from both directions, on the street, which is
expected to carry the greatest traffic through the intersection.
Mounting shall be in accordance with the standard procedures of
the Township or with requirements adopted by the Township
Committee. At signalized intersections, street signs shall be
suspended over the intersection. Street signs shall be placed
before any certificate of occupancy for houses on the subject street
is issued. [Amended 4-28-2003 by Ord. No. 10-03]
B. Residential development. Street and traffic signs for all residential
development shall be installed in compliance with Subchapter 4
(Streets and Parking) of N.J.A.C. 5:21 (Residential Site Improvement
Standards), as amended.
(1) Lettering on the street name signs shall be at least six inches for
uppercase letters and 4 1/2 inches for lowercase letters, with
supplementary lettering to indicate the type of street (e.g., street;
avenue, road, etc.), which shall be in smaller lettering at least three
inches in height. Conventional abbreviations are acceptable, except
for the street name itself. [Added 4-28-2003 by Ord. No. 10-03]
A. Commercial or private club swimming pools.
(1) Location of club or bathhouse. All commercial or private club
swimming pools shall provide a suitable club- or bathhouse
building. The club- or bathhouse for an outdoor commercial or
private club swimming pool shall be set back not less than 100 feet
from the front property line and not closer than 50 feet to the side
and rear property lines. However, no club- or bathhouse shall be
required for a hotel or a motel.
(2) Pool location. An outdoor commercial or private club swimming
pool shall be located not less than 25 feet from the side or rear of
the clubhouse, bathhouse, motel or hotel on the building lot and not
less than 100 feet from the front property line and not less than 50
feet from the side and rear property lines.
§ 244-215 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-216
1:1163
(3) Off-street parking.
(a) Ample parking spaces shall be provided in an area or areas
located not less than 100 feet from the front property line and
no less than 50 feet from the side or rear residential property
lines.
(b) For a private club with a membership of up to 100 members,
not less than 80 car spaces shall be provided. For each
additional 25 members or a fraction thereof, not less than 20
additional car spaces shall be provided.
(c) For a commercial pool with up to 100 lockers or clothes
baskets, there shall be provided not less than 40 car spaces,
and for each additional 25 lockers or clothes baskets, not less
than 10 additional car spaces, and, in addition thereto, two car
spaces for each three family lockers.
(4) Size of pool.
(a) A swimming pool for a private club, limited to a maximum of
100 members, shall have a minimum size of 1,800 square feet,
and for each additional 25 members or fraction thereof, the
pool shall be enlarged by 450 square feet.
(b) For a commercial swimming pool limited to a total of 100
lockers or baskets for bathers' clothing, the minimum size of
the pool shall be 2,000 square feet, and for every additional 25
lockers or baskets or fraction thereof, the pool shall be
enlarged by 500 square feet.
(5) Swimming section. The diving section shall be greater than 5 1/2
feet in depth, and the nondiving section shall be less than 5 1/2 feet
in depth. The area reserved around each diving board or platform
provided for diving purposes shall be not less than 300 square feet.
(6) Pump location. The pump of a filtration or pumping system of a
commercial swimming pool or private club pool shall be located not
less than 50 feet from any side or rear property line.
(7) Deck area or walks surrounding the swimming pools. The area
devoted to decks or walkways surrounding the swimming pools
shall be a minimum of 10 feet in width and shall not be a grass
surface.
(8) Lounging and spectator area. In addition to the decks or walks
surrounding the swimming pool, an area shall be provided for
lounging or spectator use. The area devoted to lounging or
spectator use shall be a minimum of 1 1/2 times the water surface
areas of all swimming pools. The surface of the lounging and
spectator areas shall not be grass.
§ 244-216 JACKSON CODE § 244-216
1:1164
(9) Club- and bathhouse facilities. The club- and bathhouse shall be
equipped with separate facilities for men and women. These
facilities shall include adequate dressing rooms, lockers, showers
and toilets.
(10)Wading pool. A swimming pool for private club or commercial use
shall provide a separate wading pool.
(11) Pool enclosure. To provide safety and a degree of privacy, an
outdoor swimming pool for private club or commercial use shall be
surrounded entirely by a suitably strong tight fence. All supporting
structures shall be on the inside of the fence, and the top of such
support shall be at least one inch lower than the top of the fence.
(12) Lighting. A complete system of artificial lighting shall be provided
for a swimming pool, including lounging and parking areas, which
is operated by a private club or for commercial use. Arrangement
and design of lights shall be such that all parts of the pool and its
appurtenances shall be clearly visible to attendants. All lighting
fixtures shall be shielded so as to prevent any direct beam from
falling upon any adjoining property. All on-site and underwater
lighting shall be designed, installed and grounded so as not to
create a hazard to bathers.
(13) Noise. No sound-amplifying system shall be operated or other
activities permitted at any swimming pool for commercial or
private club use which shall cause undue noise or constitute a
nuisance to the surrounding neighbors.
B. Private, residential swimming pools.
(1) Types of pools.
(a) Permanent underground.
(b) Permanent aboveground: aboveground pools equipped with
fences built above the top level of the pool.
(c) Temporary aboveground: aboveground pools not equipped
with fences built above the top of the pool.
(2) Lighting. All lighting fixtures for a private swimming pool shall be
installed so as to comply with all applicable safety regulations and
shall be shielded so as to prevent any direct beam of light from
shining on any adjoining property.
(3) Electric lines. No overhead electric lines shall be carried across any
swimming pool or wading area.
(4) An application for a permit to construct a private swimming pool
shall include a plot plan or survey of the property clearly showing
the location of the proposed pool with setback distances from the
property lines and distances from buildings and structures on the
§ 244-216 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-216
1:1165
property. The plan shall be adequate for the Construction Official
to clearly identify the proposed pool location in the field.
(5) Pools that are less than 24 inches deep or having a surface area
less than 250 square feet, except when such pools are permanently
equipped with a water-recirculating system or involve structural
materials, shall not require a permit.
(6) If required by the Construction Official, the application for an inground
swimming pool shall include a grading plan showing
existing and proposed grades and the proposed flow of surface
drainage. This plan shall also show the location of the proposed
pool and any appurtenances and be signed and sealed by a
professional engineer licensed to practice in the State of New
Jersey.
(7) Pump location.
(a) A pump of a filtration or pumping station for a private
residential swimming pool shall be situated a minimum of 15
feet from the rear lot line.
(b) The location of a pump of a filtration or pumping station for a
private residential swimming pool shall meet the minimum
required side yard setback distances for principle buildings, as
specified in this chapter, for the zoning district within which
the property is located.
(8) Enclosure.
(a) In-ground pools shall be surrounded entirely by a fence, with
no openings greater than a two-inch square, and shall be
capable of holding a live load of 250 pounds between posts
located not more than eight feet apart; however, the residence
may serve as part of the enclosure. The fence shall be located
not less than six feet from the closest edge of the pool. Fences
shall be at least four feet high above grade and no more than
six feet in height, and, if made of wire, they must be of the
chain-link type. All supporting structures shall be on the inside
of the fence, and the top of such support shall be at least one
inch lower than the top of the fence.
(b) Permanent aboveground pools constructed with an attached
deck and fence being at least four feet in height above ground
level and capable of holding a live load of 250 pounds between
posts located not more than eight feet apart need no additional
fencing.
(c) Temporary aboveground pools, when not in use, must be
emptied or covered with a suitable protective covering,
securely fastened or locked in place unless enclosed by a fence
meeting the requirements for a permanent underground pool.
§ 244-216 JACKSON CODE § 244-216
1:1166
§ 244-217. Traffic control devices.
The developer shall, prior to final acceptance, install all traffic control
devices required within any development or, with the consent of the
Township Committee, may pay to the Township Treasurer a nonrefundable
sum, in cash or certified check, in the amount set by the Township Engineer,
equal to the cost of all necessary traffic control devices not installed by
the developer. Traffic control devices shall include but are not limited to
signs, traffic lines, lights, reflectors and channelizing markers. The number,
type, legend, placement and size of all traffic control devices shall be
in accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices by
the United States Department of Transportation and the requirements of
municipal, county and state regulations and shall be according to an
approved plan submitted at the time of final plat approval. Construction
details of all proposed traffic control devices shall be in accordance with
standards prepared by the Township Engineer and approved by the
Township Committee.
§ 244-218. Traffic impact assessment.
A traffic impact assessment shall be submitted by the applicant for all
preliminary major subdivisions involving the creation of 25 or more lots, all
preliminary major site plans proposing 20,000 square feet or more of gross
floor building area, except as specifically waived in whole or in part by the
municipal agency. A traffic impact study shall include the following:
(9) Gate. Any opening or openings in the fence to afford entry to the
pool shall be equipped with a gate similar to the fence and shall
extend from not more than two inches above the ground to the
height of the fence. The gate shall be of a self-closing type, opening
outwardly only, and shall be equipped with a lock and key or
padlock and chain and shall be kept locked, except when the pool is
in use.
A. A description of the proposed project, which shall include:
(1) The purpose and scope of the project;
(2) The suitability of the site for the intended project; and
(3) The estimated resident population, if applicable.
B. An inventory and description of existing traffic conditions within the
area impacted by the proposed development.
C. Impacts.
(1) An assessment of the traffic impacts of the project.
(2) A description of the steps to be taken to minimize adverse traffic
impacts during project construction and operation, both at the
project site and within impacted areas. Such description shall be
§ 244-216 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-218
1:1167
§ 244-219. Utility installations.
§ 244-220. Water supply.
accompanied by the necessary maps, documents and other
explanatory data that may be needed to clarify and explain the
action to be taken.
D. Licenses, permits and other approvals. The applicant shall list all
known licenses, permits and other approvals required by law for the
construction and operation of the proposed project. This list shall
include approvals required by the Township, as well as agencies of the
county, state and federal governments. Where approvals have been
granted, copies of said approvals shall be attached. Where approvals
are pending, a note shall be made to that effect.
A. All utility lines and necessary appurtenances, including but not limited
to electric transmission and electric, gas and water distribution,
communications, streetlighting and cable television, shall be installed
underground within easements or dedicated public rights-of-way. The
developer shall arrange with the serving utility for the underground
installation of the utility's supply lines and service connections in
accordance with the provisions of the applicable standard terms and
conditions of its tariff, as the same are then on file with the State of New
Jersey Board of Public Utility Commissioners; provided, however, that
lots which abut existing easements or public rights-of-way where
overhead utility lines have theretofore been installed may be supplied
with service from such overhead lines if no new utility poles are
required. In any event, new building service connections for all
multifamily developments, shopping centers, office-research or
industrial parks and planned retirement communities and for any
industrial, commercial or office development shall be installed
underground. Wherever the utility is not installed in the public right-ofway,
an appropriate utility easement, not less than 25 feet in width,
shall be provided.
B. Utility areas within residential development shall comply with
Subchapter 4 (Streets and Parking) of N.J.A.C. 5:21 (Residential Site
Improvement Standards), as amended. [Added 6-8-1998 by Ord. No.
15-98]
A. All private development utilizing public sewerage collection shall be
required to utilize a public water supply. [Added 12-23-2002 by Ord.
No. 50-02]
B. The design and construction approval of all public and individual water
supply systems, or extensions of existing systems, shall be under the
jurisdiction of the owner of the utility or the Jackson Township Board of
Health (and the State of New Jersey), respectively. Prior to the approval
of any final plat, the full approval of any public water system must have
been obtained from the appropriate agency and filed with the municipal
§ 244-218 JACKSON CODE § 244-220
1:1168
§ 244-221. Storage of recyclable materials.
Materials designated in Chapter 216, Article IV, Recycling, of the Code
of the Township of Jackson shall be separated from other solid waste by
the generator thereof and a storage area for recyclable material shall be
provided.
agency, or the final approval will be conditioned upon full approval from
the appropriate agency.
A. Every owner, tenant, lessee or occupant of every building or use within
the corporate limits of the Township of Jackson shall provide or cause to
be provided a suitable storage area to accommodate a one-to-four-week
accumulation of mandated recyclables, including but not limited to
aluminum cans, ferrous containers (including tin, steel and bimetal
cans), glass containers, newspapers and plastic containers.
B. For each subdivision application for 50 or more single-family units, the
applicant shall provide a suitable area within each dwelling unit to
accommodate a four-week accumulation of mandated recyclables,
including but not limited to aluminum cans, ferrous containers
(including tin, steel and bimetal cans), glass containers, newspapers
and plastic containers. The storage area may be located in but shall not
be limited to the laundry room, garage, basement, kitchen or a
backyard location not more than 50 feet from the dwelling unit.
C. For each subdivision or site plan application for 25 or more multifamily
units, the applicant shall provide a suitable storage area within each
dwelling unit to accommodate a four-week accumulation of mandated
recyclables, including but not limited to aluminum cans, ferrous
containers (including tin, steel and bimetal cans), glass containers,
newspapers and plastic containers. The storage area may be located in
the laundry room, garage or kitchen. Unless recyclables are collected
on a weekly basis from each dwelling unit, one or more common storage
areas must be provided at convenient locations within the development.
D. For each site plan application for commercial and industrial
developments that utilize 1,000 square feet or more of land, the
applicant shall provide the municipal agency with estimates of the
quantity of mandated recyclable materials, including but not limited to
aluminum cans, ferrous containers (including tin, steel and bimetal
cans), glass containers, newspapers and plastic containers, that will be
generated by the development weekly. A separated storage area must
be provided to accommodate a one-to-four-week accumulation of
recyclable material. The municipal agency may require the location of
one or more common storage areas at convenient locations within the
development.
§ 244-220 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-221
1:1169

ARTICLE XIII
Affordable Housing
[Added 4-26-1993 by Ord. No. 15-93; amended 3-17-1994 by Ord.
No. 6-94; 4-6-2004 by Ord. No. 13-04; 9-12-2006 by Ord. No. 21-06;
11-21-2017 by Ord. No. 23-17]
§ 244-222. Intent.
§ 244-223. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AFFORDABLE — A sales price or rent level that is within the means of a
low- or moderate-income household as defined within N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.4, and,
in the case of an ownership unit, that the sales price for the unit conforms
to the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.6, as may be amended and
supplemented, and, in the case of a rental unit, that the rent for the
unit conforms to the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.12, as may be
amended and supplemented.
A. It is the intent of this article to regulate the development and
management of low- and moderate-income housing units constructed in
compliance with the Housing Element of the Master Plan of the
Township of Jackson.
B. Applicability. The provisions of this article shall apply:
(1) To all affordable housing developments and affordable housing
units that currently exist within Jackson Township;
(2) To all affordable housing developments and affordable housing
units that are proposed to be created pursuant to the Jackson
Township Housing Plan Element and Fair Share Plan;
(3) To all unanticipated future developments that will provide
affordable housing for low- and moderate-income households; and
(4) To any property in Jackson Township that is currently zoned for
nonresidential uses and that is subsequently rezoned for
multifamily residential purposes, and to all approvals for
multifamily residential development granted by the Jackson
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, including
approvals of use or density variances, site plans, or subdivisions,
and redevelopment projects subject to a redevelopment plan
adopted by the Township governing body governing the
development and redevelopment of designated areas in need of
rehabilitation or areas in need of redevelopment in the Township,
including substantial revisions to previously approved
developments, where such rezoning, approval or revision results in
or increases the number of residential units by five or more units.
§ 244-222 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-223
1:1171
AFFORDABLE HOUSING ADMINISTRATOR (AH ADMINISTRATOR) — The
entity responsible for administering the affordability controls of some or
all units in the affordable housing program for the Township of Jackson
to ensure that the restricted units under administration are affirmatively
marketed and sold or rented, as applicable, to only low- and moderateincome
households.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development included in
or approved pursuant to the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan or
otherwise intended to address the Township's fair share obligation, and
includes, but is not limited to, an inclusionary development, a municipal
construction project or a one-hundred-percent affordable housing
development.
AGE-RESTRICTED UNIT — A housing unit designed to meet the needs
of, and exclusively for, the residents of an age-restricted segment of the
population such that:
DEVELOPER'S AFFORDABLE HOUSING PLAN — A plan submitted by the
developer and approved by the affordable housing administrator which shall
identify the manner in which the developer plans to develop, price, market
and restrict the low- and moderate-income dwelling units in accordance
with this article.
EXEMPT SALES — Includes the transfer of ownership between husband
and wife and transfers of ownership between former spouses as a result of a
judicial decree of divorce or a judicial separation, but not including sales to
third parties; the transfer of ownership between family members as a result
of inheritance; the transfer of ownership through an executor's deed to a
Class A beneficiary and a transfer of ownership by court order.
FAIR MARKET VALUE — The unrestricted price of a low- or moderateincome
housing unit if sold at a current real estate market rate.
INCLUSIONARY DEVELOPMENT — A residential housing development in
which a percentage of the housing units are reserved for low- and moderateincome
households. This term includes, but is not limited to: new
construction, the conversion of a nonresidential structure to residential use
and the creation of new affordable units through the gut rehabilitation or
reconstruction of a vacant residential structure.
LOW-INCOME HOUSING — Housing affordable according to Council on
Affordable Housing (COAH) standards for home ownership and rental costs
All the residents of the development wherein the unit is situated are 62
years of age or older; or
A.
At least 80% of the units are occupied by one person who is 55 years of
age or older; or
B.
The development has been designated by the Secretary of the United
States Department of Housing and Urban Development as "housing for
older persons" as defined in Section 807(b)(2) of the Fair Housing Act,
42 U.S.C. § 3607.
C.
§ 244-223 JACKSON CODE § 244-223
1:1172
and occupied or reserved for occupancy by households with a gross
household income equal to 50% or less of the median gross household
income for households of the same size within the housing region in which
the house is located and subject to affordability controls.
MODERATE-INCOME HOUSING — Housing affordable according to
Council on Affordable Housing (COAH) standards for home ownership and
rental costs and occupied or reserved for occupancy by households with a
gross household income of more than 50% but less than 80% of the median
gross household income for households of the same size within the housing
region in which the house is located and subject to affordability control.
MUNICIPAL HOUSING LIAISON — The employee charged by the governing
body with the responsibility for oversight and administration of the
affordable housing program for the Township of Jackson.
PRICE DIFFERENTIAL — The difference between the controlled unit sale
price and the fair market value as determined at the date of the proposed
contract of sale after reasonable real estate broker fees have been paid.
REPAYMENT CLAUSE — Obligation of a seller exercising the repayment
option to pay 95% of the price differential to a municipality at closing for
use within the municipal housing plan.
REPAYMENT OPTION — The option of a seller of a low- or moderate-income
unit to sell a unit pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:92-12.7 at a fair market value
subject to compliance with the terms of the repayment clause.
SET-ASIDE — The percentage of housing units devoted to low- and
moderate-income households within an inclusionary development.
UNIT COMPLETION — The receipt of any temporary or final certificate of
occupancy.
VERY-LOW-INCOME HOUSING — Housing affordable according to the
Council on Affordable Housing (COAH) standards for home ownership and
rental costs and occupied or reserved for occupancy by households with
a gross household income of 30% or less of the median gross household
income for households of the same size within the housing region in which
the house is located and subject to affordability controls.
§ 244-224. Affordable housing sites.
A. Low- and moderate-income housing required.
(1) Developers of the affordable housing (AH) sites, as designated on
the Zoning Map of the Township of Jackson, Ocean County, New
Jersey, shall be required to set aside the number of affordable units
specified in any existing valid approval and in accordance with the
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan.
(2) In addition to the set-aside requirements above, the developers of
affordable housing (AH) sites shall be subject to the requirements
of the underlying zoning of the respective site set forth in Article X.
§ 244-223 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-224
1:1173
B. Fee required. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for an
affordable housing unit, the developer of affordable housing sites shall
pay a fee to the Township to offset the costs of the services of the
affordable housing (AH) administrator. Said fee shall be the prevailing
fees charged by the Affordable Housing Management Service of the
New Jersey Department of Community Affairs for such services.
C. Administration of affordable housing program.
(1) Jackson Township is ultimately responsible for administering the
affordable housing program, including affordability controls and
the affirmative marketing plan in accordance with the regulations
of the Council on Affordable Housing pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93 et
seq. and the New Jersey Uniform Housing Affordability Controls
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26 et seq.
(2) Establishment of Municipal Housing Liaison position and
compensation; powers and duties.
(a) Establishment of position of Municipal Housing Liaison. There
is hereby established the position of Municipal Housing Liaison
for the Township of Jackson.
(b) Subject to the approval of the Council on Affordable Housing
(COAH) or the court, the Municipal Housing Liaison shall be
appointed by the governing body and may be a full- or parttime
municipal employee.
(c) The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be responsible for
oversight and administration of the affordable housing
program for the Township of Jackson, including the following
responsibilities which may not be contracted out, exclusive of
Subsection C(2)(c)[6], which may be contracted out:
[1] Serving as the Township of Jackson's primary point of
contact for all inquiries from the state, affordable housing
providers, affordable housing administrators, and
interested households.
[2] Monitoring the status of all restricted units in the
Township of Jackson's Fair Share Plan;
[3] Compiling, verifying, and submitting annual reports as
required by COAH or the court;
[4] Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers
and affordable housing administrators, as applicable;
[5] Attending continuing education opportunities on
affordability controls, compliance monitoring, and
affirmative marketing as offered or approved by COAH or
the court;
§ 244-224 JACKSON CODE § 244-224
1:1174
[6] If applicable, serving as the affordable housing
administrator for some or all of the restricted units in the
Township of Jackson as described in Subsection C(3)
below.
(d) Jackson Township will contract with or authorize a consultant,
authority, government, or any other agency charged by the
governing body, which entity shall have the responsibility for
administering the affordable housing program of the Township
of Jackson, except for those responsibilities that may not be
contracted out pursuant to Subsection C(2)(c) above. If the
Township of Jackson contracts with one or more affordable
housing administrator(s) to administer some or all of the
affordable housing program, including the affordability
controls and/or the affirmative marketing plan, the Municipal
Housing Liaison shall supervise the contracting affordable
housing administrator.
(e) Compensation. Compensation shall be fixed by the governing
body at the time of the appointment of the Municipal Housing
Liaison.
(3) Affordable housing administrator (AH administrator). The
Township of Jackson intends to contract with an affordable housing
administrator to administer the sale and rental of all new affordable
housing. The AH administrator will oversee and administer income
qualification of low- and moderate-income households; place
income-eligible households in low- and moderate-income units
upon initial occupancy; place income-eligible households in lowand
moderate-income units as they become available during the
period of affordability controls and enforce the terms of the
required deed restrictions and mortgage loans. The AH
administrator will specifically administer and implement:
(a) An administrative plan and program, and related monitoring
and reporting requirements as outlined in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15
et seq. and N.J.A.C. 5:93 et seq.
(b) A plan for certifying and verifying the income of low- and
moderate-income households per N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.16.
(c) Procedures to assure that low- and moderate-income units are
initially sold or rented to eligible households and are thereafter
similarly resold and rerented during the period while there are
affordability controls as per N.J.A.C. 5:80-26 et seq.
(d) The requirement that all newly constructed low- and moderateincome
sale or rental units contain deed restrictions with
appropriate mortgage liens as set forth in the appendixes in
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26 et seq.
§ 244-224 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-224
1:1175
§ 244-225. Low- and moderate-income housing requirements.
(e) The several sales/purchase options authorized under N.J.A.C.
5:80-26 et seq., except that the Township retains the right to
determine by resolution whether or not to prohibit, as
authorized under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26 et seq., the exercise of the
repayment option.
(f) The regulations determining:
[1] Whether installed capital improvements will authorize an
increase in the maximum sales price; and
[2] Which items of property may be included in the sales price
as per N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.9.
(4) Jackson Township may delegate the administration of duties named
in § 244-225E to the Department of Community Affairs Affordable
Housing Management Service (AHMS), a nonprofit organization or
another qualified entity. Such delegation must be approved by the
Jackson Township Committee.
A. Building permits. No building permit(s) shall be issued for any
development within an affordable housing (AH) site without the
submission and approval of a developer's affordable housing plan by the
AH administrator.
B. Bedroom distribution.
(1) Non-age-restricted AH sites. Affordable housing units within AH
sites that are not restricted to senior citizens shall have the
following distribution of bedroom types:
(a) At a minimum, 30% of all low- and moderate-income units shall
be two-bedroom units;
(b) At a minimum, 20% of low- and moderate-income units shall be
three-bedroom units; and
(c) No more than 20% of all low- and moderate-income units may
be one-bedroom and efficiency units.
(d) The remainder, if any, may be allocated as two-bedroom or
three-bedroom units at the discretion of the developer.
(2) Age-restricted AH sites. Low- and moderate-income units restricted
to senior citizens may utilize a modified bedroom distribution. At a
minimum, the number of bedrooms shall equal the number of
senior citizen low- and moderate-income units within the
inclusionary development. The standards can be met by creating all
one-bedroom units or by creating a two-bedroom unit for each
efficiency unit.
§ 244-224 JACKSON CODE § 244-225
1:1176
C. Unit location.
(1) Affordable housing units shall be situated on the development tract
in locations no less desirable than market-priced dwelling units
within the development and shall be equally accessible to common
open space, community facilities and shopping facilities.
(2) Rental units may be concentrated for ownership and management
unit reasons.
(3) The exterior design of the low- and moderate-income housing units
shall be harmonious in scale, texture, and materials with the
market-priced units on the tract.
(4) Deed restrictions. Developers of housing units for low- and
moderate-income households shall enter into a written agreement,
binding on all successors-in-interest, in accordance with current
COAH regulations or court requirements for resale/rental control,
at the time of sale, resale, rental or rerental, regardless of the
availability of federal, state, county or Township subsidy programs.
(5) In inclusionary developments, to the extent possible, low- and
moderate-income units shall be integrated with the market units.
D. Phasing. Approval of the developer's affordable housing plan shall be
contingent upon the development, whether developed in one stage or in
two or more stages, meeting the following phasing schedule:
Minimum Percentage of Lowand
Moderate-Income Units
Completed
Percentage of Marketing
Housing Units Completed
0% 25%
10% 25%, plus 1 unit
50% 50%
75% 75%
100% 90%
— 100%
E. Occupancy selection.
(1) The AH administrator shall designate an application period during
which applications to purchase or rent affordable housing units will
be accepted.
(2) Applications shall be accepted only if submitted on an application
form prepared and/or approved by the AH administrator.
Applications shall be completely filled out and notarized. Knowingly
or intentionally making any false statement on a form shall be
grounds for disqualifying an applicant even if the applicant is
otherwise eligible. The following information shall be required:
§ 244-225 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-225
1:1177
(a) A copy of IRS Form 1040A or 1040EZ (tax computation form)
for each of the three years prior to the date of the application.
(b) A letter from all employers stating present annual income or
four consecutive pay stubs dated within 120 days of the
interview date.
(c) A letter or appropriate reporting form verifying benefits,
including but not limited to social security or pension.
(d) A letter or appropriate reporting form verifying any other
sources of income claimed by the applicant household.
(e) Reports that verify income from assets to be submitted by
banks or other financial institutions managing trust funds,
money market accounts, stocks or bonds.
(f) Reports that verify assets that do not earn regular income,
such as real estate and savings with delayed earnings
provisions.
(3) The AH administrator shall determine whether the applicant meets
the income and other requirements established in these
regulations. The review process for a prospective purchaser shall
involve a credit background report; to be an eligible applicant, the
applicant shall have an acceptable credit history such that there is
a realistic possibility that he will be approved for a mortgage.
(4) The AH administrator will determine which eligible applicants shall
be offered the opportunity to purchase or rent affordable housing
units. Selection from among the eligible applicants shall be on a
random basis, subject only to that size of household priority
schedule established in Subsection E(6) below.
(5) In the event that an application is determined by the AH
administrator to be ineligible for a low- or moderate-income unit,
the applicant may request reconsideration by the AH administrator.
Such request shall be made in writing within 10 days of receipt of
notice of ineligibility by the applicant. The AH administrator shall
make a new eligibility determination and provide the applicant with
specific findings as to the basis for such eligibility determination.
(6) Occupancy standards.
(a) In referring certified households to specific restricted units,
the administrative agent shall, to the extent feasible and
without causing an undue delay in the occupancy of a unit,
strive to:
[1] Provide an occupant for each bedroom;
[2] Provide children of different sexes with separate
bedrooms;
§ 244-225 JACKSON CODE § 244-225
1:1178
[3] Provide separate bedrooms for parents and children; and
[4] Prevent more than two persons from occupying a single
bedroom.
(7) Waiting list. The AH administrator may establish a waiting list for
the remaining eligible applicants. After all the units are occupied,
the AH administrator may choose to accept new applications. If an
applicant is deemed eligible, the applicant shall be placed on the
waiting list at the bottom of the particular priority classification for
which the applicant qualifies. The AH administrator shall
periodically recertify the applicants on the waiting list to ensure
that the list remains current and that the applicants are still
qualified for the units to which they applied.
F. Control periods for restricted ownership units and enforcement
mechanisms.
(1) Control periods for restricted ownership units shall be in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5, as may be amended and
supplemented, and each restricted ownership unit shall remain
subject to the requirements of this article for a period of at least 30
years, until Jackson Township takes action to release the unit from
such requirements; prior to such action, a restricted ownership
unit must remain subject to the requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1,
as may be amended and supplemented.
(2) The affordability control period for a restricted ownership unit shall
commence on the date the initial certified household takes title to
the unit.
(3) Prior to the issuance of the initial certificate of occupancy for a
restricted ownership unit and upon each successive sale during the
period of restricted ownership, the AH administrator shall
determine the restricted price for the unit and shall also determine
the nonrestricted fair market value of the unit based on either an
appraisal or the unit's equalized assessed value without the
restrictions in place.
(4) At the time of the initial sale of the unit, the initial purchaser shall
execute and deliver to the AH administrator a recapture note
obligating the purchaser (as well as the purchaser's heirs,
successors and assigns) to repay, upon the first nonexempt sale
after the unit's release from the restrictions set forth in this article,
an amount equal to the difference between the unit's nonrestricted
fair market value and its restricted price, and the recapture note
shall be secured by a recapture lien evidenced by a duly recorded
mortgage on the unit.
(5) The affordability controls set forth in this article shall remain in
effect despite the entry and enforcement of any judgment of
foreclosure with respect to restricted ownership units.
§ 244-225 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-225
1:1179
(6) A restricted ownership unit shall be required to obtain a continuing
certificate of occupancy or a certified statement from the
Construction Official stating that the unit meets all code standards
upon the first transfer of title following the removal of the
restrictions provided under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5(a), as may be
amended and supplemented.
G. Price restrictions for restricted ownership units, homeowners'
association fees and resale prices.
(1) Price restrictions for restricted ownership units shall be in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and
supplemented, including:
(a) The initial purchase price for a restricted ownership unit shall
be approved by the AH administrator;
(b) The AH administrator shall approve all resale prices, in writing
and in advance of the resale, to assure compliance with the
foregoing standards;
(c) The master deeds of inclusionary developments shall provide
no distinction between the condominium or homeowners'
association fees and special assessments paid by low- and
moderate-income purchasers and those paid by market
purchasers; and
(d) The owners of restricted ownership units may apply to the AH
administrator to increase the maximum sales price for the unit
on the basis of anticipated capital improvements. Eligible
capital improvements shall be those that render the unit
suitable for a larger household or the addition of a bathroom.
H. Buyer income eligibility.
(1) Buyer income eligibility for restricted ownership units shall be in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and
supplemented, such that low-income ownership units shall be
reserved for households with a gross household income less than or
equal to 50% of median income and moderate-income ownership
units shall be reserved for households with a gross household
income less than 80% of median income.
(2) Notwithstanding the foregoing, however, the AH administrator
may, upon approval by the Township Committee, and subject to the
court's approval, permit moderate-income purchasers to buy lowincome
units in housing markets if the AH administrator
determines that there is an insufficient number of eligible lowincome
purchasers to permit prompt occupancy of the units. All
such low-income units to be sold to moderate-income households
shall retain the required pricing and pricing restrictions for lowincome
units.
§ 244-225 JACKSON CODE § 244-225
1:1180
(3) A certified household that purchases a restricted ownership unit
must occupy it as the certified household's principal residence and
shall not lease the unit; provided, however, that the AH
administrator may permit the owner of a restricted ownership unit,
upon application and a showing of hardship, to lease the restricted
unit to another certified household for a period not to exceed one
year.
(4) The AH administrator shall certify a household as eligible for a
restricted ownership unit when the household is a low-income
household or a moderate-income household, as applicable to the
unit, and the estimated monthly housing cost for the particular unit
(including principal, interest, taxes, homeowner and private
mortgage insurance and condominium or homeowners' association
fees, as applicable) does not exceed 33% of the household's eligible
monthly income.
I. Limitations on indebtedness secured by ownership unit, subordination.
(1) Prior to incurring any indebtedness to be secured by a restricted
ownership unit, the owner shall apply to the AH administrator for a
determination in writing that the proposed indebtedness complies
with the provisions of this section, and the AH administrator shall
issue such determination prior to the owner incurring such
indebtedness.
(2) With the exception of first purchase money mortgages, neither an
owner nor a lender shall at any time cause or permit the total
indebtedness secured by a restricted ownership unit to exceed 95%
of the maximum allowable resale price of the unit, as such price is
determined by the AH administrator in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.6(b).
J. Capital improvements to ownership units.
(1) The owners of restricted ownership units may apply to the AH
administrator to increase the maximum sales price for the unit on
the basis of capital improvements made since the purchase of the
unit. Eligible capital improvements shall be those that render the
unit suitable for a larger household or that add an additional
bathroom. In no event shall the maximum sales price of an
improved housing unit exceed the limits of affordability for the
larger household.
(2) Upon the resale of a restricted ownership unit, all items of property
that are permanently affixed to the unit or were included when the
unit was initially restricted (e.g., refrigerator, range, washer, dryer,
dishwasher, wall-to-wall carpeting) shall be included in the
maximum allowable resale price. Other items may be sold to the
purchaser at a reasonable price that has been approved by the AH
administrator at the time of the signing of the agreement to
purchase. The purchase of central air conditioning installed
§ 244-225 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-225
1:1181
subsequent to the initial sale of the unit and not included in the
base price may be made a condition of the unit resale provided the
price, which shall be subject to ten-year, straight-line depreciation,
has been approved by the AH administrator. Unless otherwise
approved by the AH administrator, the purchase of any property
other than central air conditioning shall not be made a condition
of the unit resale. The owner and the purchaser must personally
certify at the time of closing that no unapproved transfer of funds
for the purpose of selling and receiving property has taken place at
the time of or as a condition of resale.
K. Control periods for restricted rental units.
(1) Control periods for restricted rental units shall be in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.11, as may be amended and supplemented,
and each restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the
requirements of this article for a period of at least 30 years, until
Jackson Township takes action to release the unit from such
requirements. Prior to such action, a restricted rental unit must
remain subject to the requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be
amended and supplemented.
(2) Deeds of all real property that include restricted rental units shall
contain deed restriction language. The deed restriction shall have
priority over all mortgages on the property, and the deed
restriction shall be filed by the developer or seller with the records
office of Ocean County. A copy of the filed document shall be
provided to the AH administrator within 30 days of the receipt of a
certificate of occupancy.
(3) A restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the affordability
controls of this article despite the occurrence of any of the
following events:
(a) Sublease or assignment of the lease of the unit;
(b) Sale or other voluntary transfer of the ownership of the unit;
or
(c) The entry and enforcement of any judgment of foreclosure on
the property containing the unit.
L. Rent restrictions for rental units; leases.
(1) A written lease shall be required for all restricted rental units, and
tenants shall be responsible for security deposits and the full
amount of the rent as stated on the lease. A copy of the current
lease for each restricted rental unit shall be provided to the AH
administrator.
(2) No additional fees or charges shall be added to the approved rent
(except, in the case of units in an assisted living residence, to cover
§ 244-225 JACKSON CODE § 244-225
1:1182
the customary charges for food and services) without the express
written approval of the AH administrator.
(3) Application fees (including the charge for any credit check) shall
not exceed 5% of the monthly rent of the applicable restricted unit
and shall be payable to the AH administrator to be applied to the
costs of administering the controls applicable to the unit as set
forth in this article.
(4) No rent control ordinance or other pricing restriction shall be
applicable to either the market units or the affordable units in any
development in which at least 15% of the total number of dwelling
units are restricted rental units in compliance with this article.
M. Tenant income eligibility.
(1) Tenant income eligibility shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.13, as may be amended and supplemented, and shall be
determined as follows:
(a) Very-low-income rental units shall be reserved for households
with a gross household income less than or equal to 30% of
median income;
(b) Low-income rental units shall be reserved for households with
a gross household income less than or equal to 50% of median
income; and
(c) Moderate-income rental units shall be reserved for households
with a gross household income less than 80% of median
income.
(2) The AH administrator shall certify a household as eligible for a
restricted rental unit when the household is a very-low-income
household, low-income household or a moderate-income
household, as applicable to the unit, and the rent proposed for the
unit does not exceed 35% (40% for age-restricted units) of the
household's eligible monthly income as determined pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.16, as may be amended and supplemented;
provided, however, that this limit may be exceeded if one or more of
the following circumstances exists:
(a) The household currently pays more than 35% (40% for
households eligible for age-restricted units) of its gross
household income for rent, and the proposed rent will reduce
its housing costs;
(b) The household has consistently paid more than 35% (40% for
households eligible for age-restricted units) of eligible monthly
income for rent in the past and has proven its ability to pay;
(c) The household is currently in substandard or overcrowded
living conditions;
§ 244-225 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-225
1:1183
(d) The household documents the existence of assets with which
the household proposes to supplement the rent payments; or
(e) The household documents reliable anticipated third-party
assistance from an outside source such as a family member in a
form acceptable to the AH administrator and the owner of the
unit.
(3) The applicant shall file documentation sufficient to establish the
existence of the circumstances enumerated in this subsection with
the AH administrator, who shall counsel the household on
budgeting.
N. Maximum rents and sales prices.
(1) In establishing rents and sales prices of affordable housing units,
the AH administrator shall follow the procedures set forth in
UHAC, utilizing the regional income limits established by COAH or
a successor entity.
(2) The maximum rent for restricted rental units within each
affordable development shall be affordable to households earning
no more than 60% of median income, and the average rent for
restricted rental units shall be affordable to households earning no
more than 52% of median income.
(3) The developers and/or municipal sponsors of restricted rental units
shall establish at least one rent for each bedroom type for both lowincome
and moderate-income units, provided that at least 10% of
all low- and moderate-income rental units shall be affordable to
very-low-income households earning 30% or less of the regional
median household income.
(4) The maximum sales price of restricted ownership units within each
affordable development shall be affordable to households earning
no more than 70% of median income, and each affordable
development must achieve an affordability average of 55% for
restricted ownership units. In achieving this affordability average,
moderate-income ownership units must be available for at least
three different sales prices for each bedroom type, and low-income
ownership units must be available for at least two different sales
prices for each bedroom type.
(5) In determining the initial sales prices and rent levels for
compliance with the affordability average requirements for
restricted units other than assisted living facilities and agerestricted
developments, the following standards shall be used:
(a) A studio shall be affordable to a one-person household;
(b) A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a one-and-one-half
person household;
§ 244-225 JACKSON CODE § 244-225
1:1184
(c) A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a three-person
household;
(d) A three-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a four-and-one-half
person household; and
(e) A four-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a six-person
household.
(6) In determining the initial sales prices and rents for compliance with
the affordability average requirements for restricted units in
assisted living facilities and age-restricted developments, the
following standards shall be used:
(a) A studio shall be affordable to a one-person household;
(b) A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a one-and-one-half
person household; and
(c) A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a two-person
household or to two one-person households.
(7) The initial purchase price for all restricted ownership units shall be
calculated so that the monthly carrying cost of the unit, including
principal and interest (based on a mortgage loan equal to 95% of
the purchase price and the Federal Reserve H.15 rate of interest),
taxes, homeowner and private mortgage insurance and
condominium or homeowners' association fees do not exceed 28%
of the eligible monthly income of the appropriate size household as
determined under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4, as may be amended and
supplemented; provided, however, that the price shall be subject to
the affordability average requirement of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3, as may
be amended and supplemented.
(8) The initial rent for a restricted rental unit shall be calculated so as
not to exceed 30% of the eligible monthly income of the appropriate
size household, including an allowance for tenant-paid utilities, as
determined under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4, as may be amended and
supplemented; provided, however, that the rent shall be subject to
the affordability average requirement of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3, as may
be amended and supplemented.
(9) Income limits for all units that are part of the Township's Housing
Element and Fair Share Plan and for which income limits are not
already established through a federal program exempted from the
Uniform Housing Affordability Controls pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.1 shall be updated by the Township annually within 30 days
of the publication of determinations of median income by HUD as
follows:
(a) The income limit for a moderate-income unit for a household of
four shall be 80% of the HUD determination of the median
§ 244-225 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-225
1:1185
income for the Monmouth-Ocean, NJ HUD Metro FMR Area for
a family of four. The income limit for a low-income unit for a
household of four shall be 50% of the HUD determination of
the median income for the Monmouth-Ocean, NJ HUD Metro
FMR Area for a family of four. The income limit for a very-lowincome
unit for a household of four shall be 30% of the HUD
determination of the median income for the Monmouth-Ocean,
NJ HUD Metro FMR Area for a family of four. These income
limits shall be adjusted by household size based on multipliers
used by HUD to adjust median income by household size. In no
event shall the income limits be less than the previous year.
(b) The income limits are based on carrying out the process in
Subsection N(9)(a) based on HUD determination of median
income for the current fiscal year and shall be utilized by the
Township until new income limits are available.
(10) In establishing sale prices and rents of affordable housing units,
the administrative agent shall follow the procedures set forth in
UHAC, utilizing the regional income limits established by the
Council:
(a) The price of owner-occupied low- and moderate-income units
may increase annually based on the percentage increase in the
regional median income limit for each housing region
determined pursuant to Subsection N(9). In no event shall the
maximum resale price established by the administrative agent
be lower than the last recorded purchase price.
(b) The rents of very-low-, low- and moderate-income units may be
increased annually based on the permitted percentage
increase in the housing consumer price index for the southern
New Jersey area, upon its publication for the prior calendar
year. This increase shall not exceed 9% in any one year. Rents
for units constructed pursuant to low-income housing tax
credit regulations shall be indexed pursuant to the regulations
governing low-income housing tax credits.
O. Requirements for affordable housing. Developments which include
affordable housing units shall be subject to the following provisions:
(1) In accordance with N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.1 (P.L. 2008, C. 46), at least
13% of the affordable units provided within the Township shall be
reserved for very-low-income households, i.e., households earning
30% or less of the median income, and of that amount at least 50%
shall be reserved for very-low-income families (i.e., non-agerestricted
and not reserved for special needs populations). For
developments with eight or more affordable housing units on site,
at least 13% of all low- and moderate-income units shall be
affordable to households earning no more than 30% of median
§ 244-225 JACKSON CODE § 244-225
1:1186
income. A minimum of 50% of these units shall be reserved for
very-low-income families.
(2) Age restriction. The sales and rentals of not more than 25% of the
affordable housing units constructed within the Township may be
age-restricted to senior citizens as defined by and in accordance
with the Federal Fair Housing Act and as regulated by N.J.A.C.
5:92-14, provided that no more than 25% of the total affordable
housing units constructed within the Township shall be agerestricted.
A request to age restrict housing units may only be
granted after the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment has
received the consent of the Township Committee. In designing its
project, the applicant may propose constructing the senior-citizenrestricted
affordable units in the same building or buildings in
order to maximize the potential of preserving a more-tranquil
lifestyle for the senior citizen resident; and to the foregoing extent,
the requirement of integration of the affordable units with
conventional units is modified.
(3) Low/moderate split and bedroom distribution of affordable housing
units.
(a) The fair share obligation shall be divided equally between lowand
moderate-income units, except that where there is an odd
number of affordable housing units, the extra unit shall be a
low-income unit.
(b) In each affordable development, at least 50% of the restricted
units within each bedroom distribution shall be low-income
units.
(4) Utilities.
(a) Affordable units shall utilize the same type of heating source as
market units within an inclusionary development.
(b) Tenant-paid utilities included in the utility allowance shall be
set forth in the lease and shall be consistent with the utility
allowance approved by the DCA for its Section 8 program.
(5) Accessibility requirements.
(a) The first floor of all restricted townhouse dwelling units and all
restricted units in all other multistory buildings shall be
subject to the technical design standards of the Barrier Free
Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7, and the following:
[1] All restricted townhouse dwelling units and all restricted
units in other multistory buildings in which a restricted
dwelling unit is attached to at least one other dwelling unit
shall have the following features:
§ 244-225 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-225
1:1187
[a] An adaptable toilet and bathing facility on the first
floor; and
[b] An adaptable kitchen on the first floor; and
[c] An interior accessible route of travel on the first floor;
and
[d] An adaptable room that can be used as a bedroom,
with a door or the casing for the installation of a door,
on the first floor; and
[e] If not all of the foregoing requirements in this
subsection can be satisfied, then an interior accessible
route of travel must be provided between stories
within an individual unit, but if all of the foregoing
requirements in this subsection have been satisfied,
then an interior accessible route of travel shall not be
required between stories within an individual unit;
and
[f] An accessible entranceway as set forth at P.L. 2005, c.
350 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-311a et seq.), and the Barrier
Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7, or evidence that
Jackson Township has collected funds from the
developer sufficient to make 10% of the adaptable
entrances in the development accessible:
[i] Where a unit has been constructed with an
adaptable entrance, upon the request of a
disabled person who is purchasing or will reside
in the dwelling unit, an accessible entrance shall
be installed.
[ii] To this end, the builder of restricted units shall
deposit funds within the Jackson Township
Affordable Housing Trust Fund sufficient to install
accessible entrances in 10% of the affordable
units that have been constructed with adaptable
entrances.
[iii] The funds deposited under the terms of this
subsection shall be used by Jackson Township for
the sole purpose of making the adaptable
entrance of an affordable unit accessible when
requested to do so by a person with a disability
who occupies or intends to occupy the unit and
requires an accessible entrance.
[iv] The developer of the restricted units shall submit
a design plan and cost estimate to the
§ 244-225 JACKSON CODE § 244-225
1:1188
Construction Official of Jackson Township for the
conversion of adaptable to accessible entrances.
[v] Once the Construction Official has determined
that the design plan to convert the unit entrances
from adaptable to accessible meets the
requirements of the Barrier Free Subcode,
N.J.A.C. 5:23-7, and that the cost estimate of such
conversion is reasonable, payment shall be made
to the Jackson Township Affordable Housing Trust
Fund.
[2] Full compliance with the foregoing provisions shall not be
required where an entity can demonstrate that it is "site
impracticable" to meet the requirements. Determinations
of site impracticability shall be in compliance with the
Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.
P. Alternative living arrangements.
(1) The administration of an alternative living arrangement shall be in
compliance with N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.8 and the UHAC, with the following
exceptions:
(a) Affirmative marketing (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15); provided,
however, that the units or bedrooms may be affirmatively
marketed by the provider in accordance with an alternative
plan approved by the court;
(b) Affordability average and bedroom distribution (N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.3).
(2) With the exception of units established with capital funding
through a twenty-year operating contract with the Department of
Human Services, Division of Developmental Disabilities, alternative
living arrangements shall have at least thirty-year controls on
affordability in accordance with the UHAC, unless an alternative
commitment is approved by the court.
(3) The service provider for the alternative living arrangement shall
act as the administrative agent for the purposes of administering
the affirmative marketing and affordability requirements for the
alternative living arrangement.
Q. Enforcement of affordable housing regulations.
(1) Upon the occurrence of a breach of any of the regulations
governing the affordable unit by an owner, developer or tenant, the
municipality shall have all remedies provided at law or equity,
including but not limited to foreclosure, tenant eviction, municipal
fines, a requirement for household recertification, acceleration of
all sums due under a mortgage, recoupment of any funds from a
§ 244-225 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-225
1:1189
sale in the violation of the regulations, injunctive relief to prevent
further violation of the regulations, entry on the premises, and
specific performance.
(2) After providing written notice of a violation to an owner, developer
or tenant of a low- or moderate-income unit and advising the owner,
developer or tenant of the penalties for such violations, the
municipality may take the following action against the owner,
developer or tenant for any violation that remains uncured for a
period of 60 days after service of the written notice:
(a) The municipality may file a court action pursuant to N.J.S.A.
2A:58-11 alleging a violation, or violations, of the regulations
governing the affordable housing unit. If the owner, developer
or tenant is found by the court to have violated any provision of
the regulations governing affordable housing units, the owner,
developer or tenant shall be subject to one or more of the
following penalties, at the discretion of the court:
[1] Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-5, a fine of not more than $2,000
or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days, or
both. Each and every day that the violation continues or
exists shall be considered a separate and specific violation
of these provisions and not as a continuing offense.
[2] In the case of an owner who has rented his or her low- or
moderate-income unit in violation of the regulations
governing affordable housing units, payment into the
Jackson Township Affordable Housing Trust Fund of the
gross amount of rent illegally collected.
[3] In the case of an owner who has rented his or her low- or
moderate-income unit in violation of the regulations
governing affordable housing units, payment of an
innocent tenant's reasonable relocation costs, as
determined by the court.
(b) The municipality may file a court action in the Superior Court
seeking a judgment which would result in the termination of
the owner's equity or other interest in the unit, in the nature of
a mortgage foreclosure. Any judgment shall be enforceable as
if the same were a judgment of default of the first purchase
money mortgage and shall constitute a lien against the lowand
moderate-income unit.
(3) Such judgment shall be enforceable, at the option of the
municipality, by means of an execution sale by the Sheriff, at which
time the low- and moderate-income unit of the violating owner shall
be sold at a sale price which is not less than the amount necessary
to fully satisfy and pay off any first purchase money mortgage and
prior liens and the costs of the enforcement proceedings incurred
by the municipality, including attorneys' fees. The violating owner
§ 244-225 JACKSON CODE § 244-225
1:1190
shall have the right to possession terminated as well as the title
conveyed pursuant to the Sheriff's sale.
(4) The proceeds of the Sheriff's sale shall first be applied to satisfy the
first purchase money mortgage lien and any prior liens upon the
low- and moderate-income unit. The excess, if any, shall be applied
to reimburse the municipality for any and all costs and expenses
incurred in connection with either the court action resulting in the
judgment of violation or the Sheriff's sale. In the event that the
proceeds from the Sheriff's sale are insufficient to reimburse the
municipality in full as aforesaid, the violating owner shall be
personally responsible for and to the extent of such deficiency, in
addition to any and all costs incurred by the municipality in
connection with collecting such deficiency. In the event that a
surplus remains after satisfying all of the above, such surplus, if
any, shall be placed in escrow by the municipality for the owner and
shall be held in such escrow for a maximum period of two years or
until such earlier time as the owner shall make a claim with the
municipality for such. Failure of the owner to claim such balance
within the two-year period shall automatically result in a forfeiture
of such balance to the municipality. Any interest accrued or earned
on such balance while being held in escrow shall belong to and
shall be paid to the municipality, whether such balance shall be
paid to the owner or forfeited to the municipality.
(5) Foreclosure by the municipality due to violation of the regulations
governing affordable housing units shall not extinguish the
restrictions of the regulations governing affordable housing units
as the same apply to the low- and moderate-income unit. Title shall
be conveyed to the purchaser at the Sheriff's sale, subject to the
restrictions and provisions of the regulations governing the
affordable housing unit. The owner determined to be in violation of
the provisions of this plan and from whom title and possession were
taken by means of the Sheriff's sale shall not be entitled to any
right of redemption.
(6) If there are no bidders at the Sheriff's sale, or if insufficient
amounts are bid to satisfy the first purchase money mortgage and
any prior liens, the municipality may acquire title to the low- and
moderate-income unit by satisfying the first purchase money
mortgage and any prior liens and crediting the violating owner with
an amount equal to the difference between the first purchase
money mortgage and any prior liens and costs of the enforcement
proceedings, including legal fees and the maximum resale price for
which the low- and moderate-income unit could have been sold
under the terms of the regulations governing affordable housing
units. This excess shall be treated in the same manner as the excess
which would have been realized from an actual sale as previously
described.
§ 244-225 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-225
1:1191
§ 244-226. (Reserved)
(7) Failure of the low- and moderate-income unit to be either sold at
the Sheriff's sale or acquired by the municipality shall obligate the
owner to accept an offer to purchase from any qualified purchaser
which may be referred to the owner by the municipality, with such
offer to purchase being equal to the maximum resale price of the
low- and moderate-income unit as permitted by the regulations
governing affordable housing units.
(8) The owner shall remain fully obligated, responsible and liable for
complying with the terms and restrictions of governing affordable
housing units until such time as title is conveyed from the owner.
§ 244-225 JACKSON CODE § 244-226
1:1192
ARTICLE XIV
Wireless Telecommunications Towers and Facilities
[Added 12-27-2000 by Ord. No. 35-00]
§ 244-227. Purpose and intent.
A. The purpose of this article is to establish guidelines for the siting of
wireless telecommunications towers and antennas and ancillary
facilities. The goals of this article are to:
(1) Protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse
impacts of towers and antennas;
(2) Encourage the location of towers on Township-owned property
where appropriate or in other nonresidential areas;
(3) Minimize the total number of towers throughout the community;
(4) Strongly encourage the joint use of new and existing tower sites as
a primary option rather than construction of additional single-use
towers;
(5) Encourage the use of existing buildings, telecommunications
towers, light or utility poles, or water towers as opposed to
construction of new telecommunications towers;
(6) Encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the
extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the
community is minimal;
(7) Ensure that all telecommunications facilities, including towers,
antennas and ancillary facilities, are located and designed to
minimize the visual impact on the immediate surroundings and
throughout the community by encouraging users of towers and
antennas to configure them in a way that minimizes the adverse
visual impact of the towers and antennas through careful design,
siting, landscape screening, and innovative camouflaging
techniques;
(8) Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services
to provide such services to the community quickly, effectively, and
efficiently;
(9) Consider the public health and safety of telecommunications
towers; and
(10) Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure
through engineering and careful siting of tower structures.
B. In furtherance of these purposes, the Township of Jackson shall give
due consideration to the Township of Jackson's Master Plan, Zoning
Map, existing land uses, and environmentally sensitive areas in
approving sites for the location of towers and antennas.
§ 244-227 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-228
1:1193
§ 244-228. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following items shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE — Man-made trees, clock towers, bell
steeples, flag poles, and similar alternative-design mounting structures that
camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers.
ANCILLARY FACILITIES — The buildings, cabinets, vaults, closures and
equipment required for operation of telecommunications systems including
but not limited to repeaters, equipment housing, and ventilation and other
mechanical equipment.
ANTENNA — Any exterior apparatus designed for telephonic, radio, or
television communications through the sending and/or receiving of
electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies
(excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications signals or other
communications signals. Parabolic dish antennas under 30 inches used for
satellite communications shall not be included within this definition.
BACKHAUL NETWORK — The lines that connect a provider's towers/cell
sites to one or more cellular telephone switching offices, and/or long
distance providers, or the public switched telephone network.
BUFFER AREA — The area surrounding a telecommunications tower and
ancillary facilities which lies between the tower and adjacent lot lines and/
or land uses.
CARRIER — A company that provides wireless services.
CO-LOCATION — When two or more receiving and/or transmitting facilities
are placed together in the same location or on the same antenna support
structure.
FAA — The Federal Aviation Administration.
FALL ZONE — The area on the ground within a prescribed radius from
the base of a wireless telecommunications tower. The fall zone is the area
within which there is a potential hazard from falling debris (such as ice) or
collapsing material.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
FUNCTIONALLY EQUIVALENT SERVICES — Cellular radio, personal
communications service (PCS), enhanced specialized mobile radio,
specialized mobile radio and paging, commercial land mobile radio and
additional emerging technologies.
GUYED TOWER — A tower which is supported or braced through the use of
cable (guy wires) which are permanently anchored.
HEIGHT — When referring to a tower, the vertical distance measured from
the lowest finished grade at the base of the tower to the highest point on
the tower, even if said highest point is an antenna.
§ 244-228 JACKSON CODE § 244-228
1:1194
LATTICE TOWER — A type of mount that is self-supporting with multiple
legs and cross-bracing of structural steel.
MONOPOLE — The type of mount that is self-supporting with a single shaft
of wood, steel or concrete and a platform (or racks) for panel antennas
arrayed at the top.
MOUNT — The structure or surface upon which antennas are mounted,
including the following four types of mounts:
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY — A facility for the provision
of personal wireless services, as defined by the Telecommunications Act of
1996.
PREEXISTING TOWERS and PREEXISTING ANTENNAS — Any tower or
antenna for which a building permit has been properly issued prior to the
effective date of this article, including permitted towers or antennas that
have been approved but have not yet been constructed so long as such
approval is current and not expired.
RADIO FREQUENCY RADIATION (RFR) — For the purposes of this article,
the emissions from personal wireless service facilities or any
electromagnetic energy within the frequency range from 0.003 MHZ to
300,000 MHZ.
RADIO FREQUENCY (RF) ENGINEER — An engineer specializing in
electrical or microwave engineering, especially the study of radio
frequencies.
STEALTH DESIGN — A telecommunications facility that is designed or
located in such a way that the facility is not readily recognizable as
telecommunications equipment. (See "alternative tower structure.")
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY — A facility designed and used for the
purpose of transmitting, receiving and relaying voice and data signals from
various wireless communications devices including licensed transmission
towers, antennas and ancillary facilities. For purposes of this section,
amateur radio transmission facilities and facilities used exclusively for the
transmission of television and radio broadcasts are not telecommunications
facilities.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS OR TRANSMISSION TOWER — The monopole or
lattice framework designed to support transmitting and receiving antennas.
For purposes of this section, licensed amateur radio transmission facilities
and facilities used exclusively for the transmission of television and radio
signals are not transmission towers.
A. Roof-mounted: mounted on the roof of a building.
B. Side-mounted: mounted on the side of a building.
C. Ground-mounted: antenna support (tower) mounted on the ground.
D. Structure-mounted: mounted on a structure other than a building.
§ 244-228 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-228
1:1195
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS — Any personal wireless services as
defined in the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 which includes
FCC licensed commercial wireless telecommunications services including
cellular, personal communications services (PCS), specialized mobile radio
(SMR), enhanced specialized mobile radio (ESMR), paging and similar
services that currently exist or that may in the future be developed. It does
not include any amateur radio facility that is owned and operated by a
federally licensed amateur radio station operator or is used exclusively for
receive-only antennas, nor does it include noncellular telephone service.
§ 244-229. Applicability.
§ 244-230. General requirements.
A. New towers and antennas. All new telecommunications towers or
antennas in the Township of Jackson shall be subject to these
regulations.
B. Preexisting towers or antennas. Preexisting telecommunications towers
and preexisting antennas shall not be required to meet the
requirements of this article, other than the requirements of §§ 244-237
and 244-238 absent any enlargement or structural modification or the
addition of any antennas.
C. District height limitations. The requirements set forth in this article
shall govern the location of telecommunications towers that exceed,
and antennas that are installed at a height in excess of, the height
limitations specified for each zoning district that are subject to FAA
restrictions.
D. Public property. Antennas or towers located on property owned, leased
or otherwise controlled by the governing authority shall be encouraged,
provided a license or lease authorizing such antenna or tower has been
approved by resolution by the governing authority. Said approved
publicly owned sites utilized for the purpose of constructing towers
and/or antennas shall be treated as engaging in a conditional use under
this article.
E. Amateur radio station operators/receive-only antennas. This article
shall not govern any tower, or the installation of any antenna, that is
under 70 feet in height and is owned and operated by a federally
licensed amateur radio station operator or is used exclusively for
receive-only antennas.
F. Satellite dish antennas. This article shall not govern any parabolic dish
antennas that are less than 30 inches and that are used for transmission
or reception of radio signals associated with satellites.
A. Principal or accessory use. Telecommunications antennas and towers
may be considered either principal or accessory uses. Notwithstanding
any other Township land use regulation, a different existing structure
§ 244-228 JACKSON CODE § 244-230
1:1196
on the same lot shall not preclude the installation of an antenna or
tower on such lot. If a tower and its appurtenant structures constitute
the sole use of the lot, the tower shall be deemed to be the principal
use.
B. Lot size. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a
tower or antenna complies with zone development regulations,
including but not limited to setback requirements, lot coverage
requirements, and other such requirements, the dimensions of the
entire lot shall control, even though the antennas or towers may be
located on leased parcels within such lot.
C. State or federal requirements. All towers must meet or exceed current
standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC and any other agency of
the state or federal government with the authority to regulate towers
and antennas. In the Pinelands Area, all towers outside the RG-2, RG-3,
RG-4, PM-1, RGC-1 and RGC-2 Zones shall comply with the standards
for local communications facilities and N.J.A.C. 7:50-5.4(c) of the
Pinelands Comprehensive Management Plan. If such standards and
regulations are changed, then the owners of the towers and antennas
governed by this chapter shall bring such towers and antennas into
compliance with such revised standards and regulations within 90 days
of the effective date of such standards and regulations unless a
different compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling state or
federal agency. Failure to bring towers and antennas into compliance
with such revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds
for the removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense.
[Amended 7-9-2001 by Ord. No. 22-01]
D. Building codes; safety standards. To ensure the structural integrity of
towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in
compliance with manufacturer structural loading standards or greater
standards contained in applicable state or local building codes and the
applicable standards for towers that are published by the Electronic
Industries Association and Telecommunications Industry Association,
as amended from time to time. If, upon inspection, the Township of
Jackson concludes that a tower fails to comply with such codes and
standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then, upon
notice being provided to the owner of the tower, the owner shall have
30 days to bring such tower into compliance with such standards.
Failure to bring such tower into compliance within said 30 days shall
constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at the
owner's expense.
E. Nonessential services. Telecommunications towers and antennas shall
be regulated and permitted pursuant to this article and shall not be
regulated or permitted as essential services, public utilities or private
utilities.
§ 244-230 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-230
1:1197
§ 244-231. Use regulations.
F. Co-location required. The Township of Jackson mandates that carriers
co-locate antennas on towers or other structures whenever possible.
See § 244-233 for co-location requirements.
G. Conditional use. All telecommunications facilities in the Township of
Jackson shall be conditional uses in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67.
H. Site plan required. Site plan approval shall be required for all new
telecommunications facilities in the Township of Jackson including
modifications to or addition of new telecommunications facilities to
preexisting towers, buildings or other structures.
A. Conditional use. Wireless telecommunications facilities are permitted
as conditional uses:
(1) On lands owned by Jackson Township or the Jackson Township
Municipal Utilities Authority or any other public entity within the
Township of Jackson.
(2) On lands owned by Jackson Township or the Jackson Township
Municipal Utilities Authority or any other public entity within the
Township of Jackson. However, wireless telecommunications
facilities on such lands in the PA, FA-1, FA-2, FA-3, RD, RD-1, RD-9,
PV, PVC-1 and PVC-2 Zones shall be permitted only in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 7:50-5.4(c) and a comprehensive plan for such
facilities approved pursuant thereto by the Pinelands Commission.
[Amended 7-9-2001 by Ord. No. 22-01]
B. Conditional use standards. Wireless telecommunications facilities may
be permitted on the above referenced lands, provided that:
(1) The minimum lot size on which the telecommunications facility is to
be located is at least five acres in area.
(2) Outside the Pinelands Area. Telecommunications towers shall be
limited to monopoles without guys designed to ultimately
accommodate at least three carriers and shall meet the following
height and usage criteria: [Amended 7-9-2001 by Ord. No.
22-01]
(a) For a single carrier, up to 100 feet in height.
(b) For two carriers, up to 125 feet in height.
(c) For three or more carriers, up to 150 feet in height.
(3) In the Pinelands Area, telecommunications towers shall be limited
to monopoles without guys unless the applicant can demonstrate
that a different type of facility is necessary for the co-location of
additional antennas on the tower. A maximum height of 200 feet
shall be permitted, and all towers shall be designed so that their
§ 244-230 JACKSON CODE § 244-231
1:1198
§ 244-232. Site design standards.
The following site design standards shall apply to wireless
telecommunications facilities:
height may be increased to 200 feet if necessary to accommodate
the needs of other carriers in the future. [Added 7-9-2001 by
Ord. No. 22-01]
C. Factors considered in granting conditional use permits.
(1) In addition to the above standards, the Planning Board shall
consider the following factors in determining whether to issue a
conditional use permit:
(a) Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential
district boundaries;
(b) Nature and uses on adjacent and nearby properties;
(c) Surrounding topography;
(d) Surrounding tree coverage and foliage;
(e) Design of the tower, with particular reference to design
characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating
visual obtrusiveness including stealth designs which are
encouraged;
(f) Availability of suitable existing towers, alternative tower
structures, other structures or alternative technologies not
requiring the use of towers or structures;
(g) Availability of proposed tower to other potential carriers.
(2) This list is to be considered to be illustrative in nature and may not
include all factors to be considered.
A. New towers.
(1) Telecommunications towers may not be located closer than 500
feet to any residential zone. Antennas located in preexisting
buildings or structures are exempt from this requirement.
(2) Fall zone. A fall zone shall be established such that the tower is set
back 150% of the height of the tower from any adjoining lot line or
nonappurtenant building.
(3) Security fencing. Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing not
less than eight feet in height. Towers shall also be equipped with an
appropriate anti-climbing measure.
(4) Landscaping. The following requirements shall govern the
landscaping surrounding towers:
§ 244-231 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-232
1:1199
(a) Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant
materials that effectively screens the view of the tower
compound from property used for residences or planned
residences or any other area frequented by the public. The
standard buffer shall consist of a landscaped strip of at least 10
feet wide outside the perimeter of the compound. However, at
a minimum, the facility should be shielded from public view by
evergreen trees at least eight feet high at planting and planted
in staggered double rows 15 feet on center.
(b) In locations where the visual impact of the tower would be
minimal, the landscaping requirement may be reduced at the
sole discretion of the approving authority.
(c) Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site
shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some
cases, such as towers sited on large, wooded lots, natural
growth around the property perimeter may be a sufficient
buffer.
(5) Ancillary buildings. Any proposed building enclosing related
electronic equipment shall not be more than 10 feet in height nor
more than 200 square feet in area, and only one such building shall
be permitted on the lot for each provider of wireless
telecommunications services located on the site. Such buildings
must satisfy the minimum zoning district setback requirements for
accessory structures.
(6) Aesthetics. Towers and antennas shall meet the following
requirements:
(a) Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or,
subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a
neutral color so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness.
(b) At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related
structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors,
textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend them into
the natural setting and surrounding buildings.
(7) Lighting. No lighting is permitted except as follows, which shall be
subject to review and approval by the Planning Board as part of the
site plan application:
(a) The building enclosing electronic equipment may have one
light at the entrance to the building, provided that the light is
attached to the building, is focused downward and is switched
so that the light is turned on only when workers are at the
building; and
(b) No lighting is permitted on a tower except lighting that
specifically is required by the Federal Aviation Administration
§ 244-232 JACKSON CODE § 244-232
1:1200
(FAA), and any such required lighting shall be focused and
shielded to the greatest extent possible so as not to project
toward adjacent and nearby properties.
(8) Signs. No signs are permitted except those required by the Federal
Communications Commission, the Electronic Industries
Association (EIA) and/or the Telecommunications Industry
Association (TIA) or by law, such as warning and equipment
information signs, which may be attached to a fence or building
structure and shall not be larger than 18 inches by 18 inches.
B. Antennas mounted on existing structures or roof tops.
(1) Antennas on existing structures. Any antenna which is not attached
to a tower may be attached to any existing business, industrial,
office utility or institutional structure, provided:
(a) Side- and roof-mounted personal wireless service facilities
shall not project more than 10 feet above the height of an
existing building or structure nor project more than 10 feet
above the height limit of the zoning district within which the
facility is located. Personal wireless service facilities may
locate on a building or structure that is legally nonconforming
with respect to height, provided that the facilities do not
project above the existing building or structure height.
(b) The antenna compiles with applicable FCC and FAA
regulations.
(c) The antenna complies with all applicable building codes.
(d) Equipment structure.
[1] The equipment structure shall not contain more than 200
square feet of gross floor area or be more than 10 feet in
height. In addition, for buildings and structures which are
less than 48 feet in height, the related unmanned
equipment structure shall be located on the ground and
shall not be located on the roof of the structure.
[2] If the equipment structure is located on the roof of a
building, the area of the equipment structure and other
equipment and structures shall not occupy more than 10%
of the roof area.
[3] Equipment storage building, structures or cabinets shall
comply with all applicable building codes.
(2) Aesthetics. If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a
tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical
equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely
compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make
§ 244-232 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-232
1:1201
§ 244-233. Co-location.
the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as
possible.
C. Antennas on existing towers. An antenna may be attached to a
preexisting tower in a nonresidential zone and, to minimize adverse
visual impacts associated with the proliferation and clustering of
towers, co-location of antennas by more than one carrier on existing
towers shall take precedence over the construction of new towers,
provided such co-location is accomplished in a manner consistent with
the following:
(1) A tower which is modified or reconstructed to accommodate the colocation
of an additional antenna shall be of the same tower type as
the existing tower, unless reconstruction as a monopole is
proposed.
(2) An existing tower may be modified or rebuilt to a taller height, not
to exceed the maximum tower height established by this article.
(3) On-site location.
(a) A tower which is being rebuilt to accommodate the co-location
of an additional antenna may be moved on site within 50 feet of
its existing location. In the Pinelands Area, such relocation
shall be permitted only if the standards set forth in § 244-79 of
this chapter are met. [Amended 7-9-2001 by Ord. No.
22-01]
(b) After the tower is rebuilt to accommodate co-location, only one
tower may remain on the site.
A. The Township of Jackson requires that licensed carriers share personal
wireless service facilities and sites where feasible and appropriate,
thereby reducing the number of personal wireless service facilities that
are stand-alone facilities. All applicants for site plan approval for a
personal wireless service facility shall demonstrate a good faith effort
to co-locate with other carriers. Such good faith effort includes:
(1) A survey of all existing structures that may be feasible sites for colocating
personal wireless service facilities;
(2) Notification by certified mail of intent to seek site plan approval to
all the other licensed carriers for commercial mobile radio services
operating in the county;
(3) Sharing information necessary to determine if co-location is
feasible under the design configuration most accommodating to colocation;
and
(4) A copy of a proposed lease or affidavit of compliance with this
section.
§ 244-232 JACKSON CODE § 244-233
1:1202
§ 244-234. Location priorities. [Amended 7-9-2001 by Ord. No.
22-01]
Wireless telecommunications facilities outside the Pinelands Area shall be
located and approved in accordance with the following prioritized locations:
§ 244-235. Location priorities in Pinelands Area. [Added 7-9-2001
by Ord. No. 22-01]
Wireless telecommunications facilities in the Pinelands Area shall be
located and approved in a manner which is consistent with the Pinelands
Comprehensive Management Plan. The priorities set forth in § 244-234 shall
be used as a preference guide in the siting of new telecommunications
facilities in the PV, PVC-1, PVC-2, RG-2, RG-3, RG-4, PM-1, RGC-1 and
RGC-2 Zones. Within the remainder of the Pinelands Area, new
telecommunications facilities shall be sited only at the following locations:
B. In the event that co-location is found to be not technically feasible, a
written statement of the reasons for the infeasibility shall be submitted
to the Township. The Township may retain a technical expert in the field
of RF engineering to verify if co-location at the site is not feasible or is
feasible given the design configuration most accommodating to the colocation.
The cost for such a technical expert will be at the expense of
the applicant. The Township may deny approval to an applicant that has
not demonstrated a good faith effort to provide for co-location.
C. If the applicant intends to co-locate or to permit co-location, plans and
elevations, which show the ultimate appearance and operation of the
personal wireless service facility at full build-out shall be submitted.
A. The first priority shall be an existing tower owned by either a public or
private utility within or near the Township of Jackson.
B. The second priority shall be new towers on lands owned by the
Township of Jackson within the commercial zones or other lands owned
by the Township of Jackson or Jackson Township Municipal Utilities
Authority or other public entity.
C. The third priority shall be an existing building in a commercial zone.
D. The fourth priority shall be new towers on lands not owned by the
Township of Jackson or Jackson Township Municipal Utilities Authority
or other public entity located within the remaining zones.
A. On developed publicly owned lands within 500 feet of an existing
structure, provided that the tower facility will be located on previously
disturbed lands that have not subsequently been restored and that no
tower will be located on state, county or municipal conservation lands,
state recreation lands or county and municipal lands used for lowintensity
recreational purposes;
§ 244-233 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-235
1:1203
§ 244-236. Site plan submission requirements.
In addition to the site plan submission requirements and other applicable
requirements of Chapter 244, the following information shall be submitted
in conjunction with site plan approvals for all wireless telecommunications
facilities:
B. On the parcel of an approved resource extraction operation, provided
that the tower facility will be located on previously disturbed lands that
have not subsequently been restored;
C. At an existing first aid or fire station; or
D. On the parcel of an existing landfill, provided that the tower facility will
be located on previously disturbed lands that have not subsequently
been restored.
A. Comprehensive service plan. In order to provide proper evidence that
any proposed location of wireless telecommunications antennas (and
any supporting tower and/or ancillary building enclosing related
electronic equipment) has been planned to result in the fewest number
of towers within the Township of Jackson at the time full service is
provided by the applicant throughout the Township, the applicant shall
submit a "comprehensive service plan." Said comprehensive service
plan shall indicate how the applicant proposes to provide full service
throughout the Township and, to the greatest extent possible, said
service plan shall also indicate how the applicant's plan is coordinated
with the needs of all other providers of telecommunications services
within the Township of Jackson. The comprehensive service plan shall
indicate the following:
(1) Whether the applicant's subscribers can receive adequate service
from antennas located outside of the borders of the Township of
Jackson.
(2) How the proposed location of the antennas relates to the location of
any existing towers within and/or near the Township of Jackson.
(3) How the proposed location of the antennas relates to the
anticipated need for additional antennas and supporting towers
within and/or near the Township of Jackson by both the applicant
and by other providers of telecommunications services within the
Township of Jackson.
(4) How the proposed location of the antennas relates to the objective
of co-locating the antennas of different service carriers on the same
tower.
(5) How the proposed location of the antennas relates to the overall
objective of providing full telecommunications services within the
Township of Jackson while, at the same time, limiting the number of
towers to the fewest possible.
§ 244-235 JACKSON CODE § 244-236
1:1204
B. A scaled site plan clearly indicating the location, type and height of the
proposed tower, on-site land uses and zoning, adjacent land uses and
zoning (including when adjacent to other municipalities), and all
properties within the applicable fall zone, adjacent roadways, proposed
means of access, setbacks from property lines, elevation drawings of
the proposed tower and any other structure, topography, parking and
other information deemed by the approving authority to be necessary to
assess compliance with this article.
C. Legal description of the entire tract and leased parcel (if applicable).
D. The setback distance between the proposed tower and the nearest
residential unit and residentially zoned properties.
E. The separation distance from other towers and antennas.
F. A landscape plan showing specific landscape materials including, but
not limited to species type, size, spacing and existing vegetation to be
removed or retained.
G. Method of fencing and finished color and, if applicable, the method of
camouflage.
H. A description of compliance with all applicable federal, state or local
laws.
I. A notarized statement by the applicant as to whether construction of
the tower will accommodate co-location of additional antennas for
future users.
J. Identification of the entities providing the backhaul network for the
tower(s) described in the application and other telecommunications
sites owned or operated by the applicant in the Township.
K. A letter of commitment to lease excess space or other potential users at
prevailing market rates and conditions. The letter of commitment shall
be in form suitable for recording with the County Clerk prior to the
issuance of any permit and shall commit the tower owner(s), property
owner(s) and their successors in interest.
L. A visual impact study containing, at a minimum, a photographic
simulation showing the appearance of the proposed tower, antennas
and ancillary facilities from at least five points within a three-mile
radius. Such points shall be chosen by the carrier with review and
approval by the Planning Board planning consultant to ensure that
various potential views are represented.
M. An analysis of the peak RFR levels at the facility as a means of assessing
compliance with the FCC RF safety criteria. This analysis shall:
(1) Take into consideration all co-located radio transmitting antennas
and/or nearby antennas that could contribute to RFR levels at the
facility.
§ 244-236 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-236
1:1205
§ 244-237. Monitoring and maintenance.
§ 244-238. Abandonment or discontinuation of use.
(2) Be performed by an RF engineer, health physicist or similar
knowledgeable individual using FCC approved and certified test
equipment with a copy of the calibration certificate showing make,
model and serial number.
(3) Follow current methods recommended by the FCC for performing
such analyses for use with the type of modulation of the RF carrier.
N. For applications in the Pinelands Area, a description of the relationship
of the purposed tower to any comprehensive plan for local
communication facilities which has been approved by the Pinelands
Commission pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-5.4(c). [Added 7-9-2001 by
Ord. No. 22-01]
A. After the wireless telecommunications facility is operational, the
applicant shall submit, within 90 days of beginning operations, and at
annual intervals from the date of issuance of the building permit,
existing measurements of RFR from the wireless telecommunications
facility. Such measurements shall be signed and certified by an RF
engineer, stating that RFR measurements are accurate and meet FCC
guidelines as specified in the radio frequency standards section of this
article.
B. The applicant and coapplicant shall maintain the personal wireless
service facility in good condition. Such maintenance shall include, but
shall not be limited to, painting, structural integrity of the mount and
security barrier, and maintenance of the buffer areas and landscaping.
A. At such time that a licensed carrier plans to abandon or discontinue
operation of a personal wireless service facility, such carrier shall notify
the Township Clerk by certified United States mail of the proposed date
of abandonment or discontinuation of operations. Such notice shall be
given no less than 30 days prior to abandonment or discontinuation of
operations. In the event that a licensed carrier fails to give such notice,
the wireless telecommunications facility shall be considered abandoned
upon discontinuation of operations.
(1) If tower lighting was required by the FAA, the tower owner shall be
responsible for all violations and fines associated with its operation.
B. Upon abandonment or discontinuation of use, at the option of the
Township, the carrier shall physically remove the personal wireless
service facility within 90 days from the date of abandonment or
discontinuation of use. "Physically remove" shall include, but not be
limited to:
(1) Removal of antennas, mount, equipment shelters and security
barriers for the subject property.
§ 244-236 JACKSON CODE § 244-238
1:1206
(2) Proper disposal of the waste materials from the site in accordance
with local, county and state solid waste disposal regulations.
(3) Restoring the location of the personal wireless service facility to its
natural condition, except that any landscaping and grading shall
remain in the after-condition.
C. If a carrier fails to remove a personal wireless service facility in
accordance with this section, the Township shall have the authority to
enter the subject property and physically remove the facility. The
Planning Board will require the applicant to post a bond at the time of
approval to cover costs for the removal of the personal wireless service
facility in the event the Township must remove the facility.
§ 244-238 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-238
1:1207

ARTICLE XV
Mixed Use Neighborhood Centers
[Added 5-9-2017 by Ord. No. 06-17]
§ 244-239. Mixed Use Neighborhood Centers (MUNC).
In zones where a Mixed Use Neighborhood Center (MUNC) is a permitted
principal use, the following shall apply:
A. General requirements. The following general requirements for a Mixed
Use Neighborhood Center development shall apply:
(1) In all zones where Mixed Use Neighborhood Centers are a
permitted principal use and an applicant proposes the development
of a Mixed Use Neighborhood Center or addition to same, the
provisions of this section shall apply and supersede the remaining
zoning provisions of the particular zone;
(2) The minimum tract size of a Mixed Use Neighborhood Center shall
be 20 contiguous acres. This subsection shall not prohibit the
subdivision of property within a Mixed Use Neighborhood Center
into lots less than 20 acres, subject to the minimum lot area
requirements set forth in Subsection F below;
(3) Not more than 60% of the total number of dwelling units shall be
located in buildings of the same type;
(4) Not more than 10% of the total number of dwelling units, including
required affordable units, shall have three or more bedrooms;
(5) No detached single-family dwellings shall be permitted in a Mixed
Use Neighborhood Center;
(6) No dwelling unit in the Mixed Use Neighborhood Center shall have
four or more bedrooms;
(7) The initial Mixed Use Neighborhood Center approved under this
section shall provide for both a minimum of 1,365 dwelling units, of
which 20% or a minimum of 273 shall be affordable family rental
units, and a minimum of 273,000 square feet of required
commercial space consistent with Subsection H below; and
(8) A developer's agreement shall be required as a condition of any
approval of a Mixed Use Neighborhood Center.
B. Permitted principal uses of buildings and structures are as follows:
(1) Retail establishments, excluding the sale or rental of non-fossilfueled
motor vehicles;
(2) Business offices and services, including, but not limited to, real
estate and travel agencies, insurance, advertising, financial, and
printing and copying;
§ 244-239 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-239
1:1209
(3) Personal service establishments, including, but not limited to,
barbershops, tailors, beauty salons, dry cleaning (with no cleaning
done on premises), and pet grooming (with no boarding facilities);
(4) Health clubs, day spas, and fitness centers;
(5) Studios for dance, music, art, crafts, gymnastics, martial arts, and
photography;
(6) Professional offices for medical, health services, law, engineering,
architecture, and accounting;
(7) Establishments serving food or beverages (alcoholic and
nonalcoholic) to the general public, such as restaurants, cafes,
delicatessens, taverns, bars, pubs, microbreweries, nightclubs,
confectionery and ice cream shops, excluding drive-through
facilities, but including walk-up windows and outdoor dining,
provided adequate pedestrian access is maintained;
(8) Adult and child day-care facilities, and early learning centers;
(9) Banks and financial services, excluding businesses with check
cashing as primary or principal service;
(10) Indoor commercial recreation facilities, including bowling alleys,
skating rinks, swimming pools, and amusements and entertainment
for children;
(11) Bed-and-breakfast inns and homes;
(12) Hotels, motels, and extended-stay facilities limiting stays to 45
days or less;
(13) Private clubs and fraternal organizations;
(14) Art galleries, museums, and theaters (motion picture and stage,
but excluding adult entertainment venues);
(15) Multifamily dwellings, including multifamily dwelling units in
mixed-use buildings;
(16) Townhouses of four or more units per building;
(17) Live-work units and loft-style apartments in mixed-use buildings
only;
(18) Surface parking and parking structures;
(19) Municipal, county, state, and federal offices and buildings;
(20) Municipal, county, and state open space, parks and playgrounds;
(21) Police, fire and emergency substations;
(22) Transit facilities and shelters;
§ 244-239 JACKSON CODE § 244-239
1:1210
(23) Private open space, parks, playgrounds, plazas, squares,
courtyards, urban gardens, clubhouses, community buildings and
facilities for the use of residents and visitors of the Mixed Use
Neighborhood Center; and
(24) Essential services.
C. Permitted temporary uses are as follows:
(1) Outdoor art and craft shows, antique shows, flea markets or group
activities in accordance with the provisions of § 244-158;
(2) Municipally sponsored events and festivals;
(3) Street vending and kiosks subject to the requirements of § 310-1 et
seq.;
(4) Seasonal outdoor retail sales in accordance with the provisions of
§ 244-158.
D. Permitted accessory buildings and uses are as follows:
(1) Fences and walls subject to the design standards in § 244-239K(9)
below;
(2) Signs subject to the design standards in § 244-239K(7) below;
(3) Off-street parking and loading facilities in accordance with the
provisions of § 244-239K(6) below;
(4) Public restrooms;
(5) Parks, playgrounds, recreational facilities and buildings,
community buildings, and clubhouses;
(6) Detached garages;
(7) Production of electrical power through alternative sources,
including but not limited to natural gas;
(8) Minor solar or photovoltaic energy facilities or structures; and
(9) Automobile electrical charging stations.
E. Conditional uses.
(1) Farmers markets may be permitted as a conditional use in the
Mixed Use Neighborhood Center Zone, provided that the lot, use
and structures shall adhere to the minimum standards of the
particular zone and the following:
(a) No area for outdoor sales or storage shall be located within the
front yard area or closer to the rear and side property lines
than the required rear yard and side yard setbacks for
accessory buildings for the particular zone.
§ 244-239 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-239
1:1211
(b) The retailing of farm products raised off site and transported to
the property in question for sale is permitted.
(c) Parking shall be provided in accordance with the provisions set
forth at § 244-239K(6) below.
F. Area, yard and building requirements for a Mixed Use Neighborhood
Center (MUNC) shall be in accordance with the following table:
Minimum
Lot
Area
(square
feet)
Minimum
Lot
Width
(feet)
Minimum
Lot
Depth
(feet)
Minimum
Front
Yard
Setback
(feet)
Minimum
Side
Yard
Setback
(feet)
Minimum
Rear
Yard
Setback
(feet)
Maximum
Building
Height
(feet)
Maximum
Building
Coverage
(%)
Maximum
Lot
Coverage
(%)
Mixeduse
building
lots
10,000 100 100 5 0 20 65 75 100
Multifamily
residential
lots
4,250 50 85 15 25 30 65 65 80
Townhouse
(fee
simple)
lots
1,800 18 90 15 0 25 40 75 85
Freestanding
nonresidential
use lots
5,000 50 100 15 20 25 65 65 85
Freestanding
large
retail
establishment
lots
100,000 250 250 50 30 50 45 50 80
All other
nonresidential
permitted
use lots
5,000 50 100 15 — 25 45 60 75
G. Residential development linked to commercial development.
§ 244-239 JACKSON CODE § 244-239
1:1212
(1) The maximum number, and the timing of the construction and
occupancy, of dwelling units permitted in a Mixed Use
Neighborhood Center shall be determined by the amount of
qualifying commercial development, as defined and limited herein;
the total number of residential units to be constructed in a Mixed
Use Neighborhood Center shall not exceed 2,500 units;
(2) "Commercial development," as defined herein, shall mean the gross
floor area of a building or buildings, or portions thereof, within the
Mixed Use Neighborhood Center used for nonresidential, non-taxexempt
purposes;
(3) Except as otherwise excluded or limited herein pursuant to
Subsection H below, the developer of a Mixed Use Neighborhood
Center shall be permitted to develop one dwelling unit for every
200 square feet of qualifying commercial development;
(4) The total number of dwelling units within a Mixed Use
Neighborhood Center shall be determined at the time of the grant
of preliminary site approval by the Planning Board based upon the
amount of qualifying commercial development approved as part of
the same preliminary site plan approval; however, the total number
of residential units to be constructed in a Mixed Use Neighborhood
Center shall not exceed 2,500 units.
H. Limitations and exclusions. The amount of commercial development
used to determine the maximum number of dwelling units permitted
(qualifying commercial development) in a Mixed Use Neighborhood
Center pursuant to Subsection G(3) above shall be established based
upon the following limitations and exclusions from the total amount of
commercial development:
(1) A minimum of 15% of the amount of qualifying commercial
development used for determining the permitted number of
dwelling units pursuant to Subsection G(3) above shall be located
within mixed use buildings;
(2) Commercial floor area for a single grocery store/food market up to
50,000 square feet shall be considered qualifying commercial
development for the purposes of determining the maximum
number of dwelling units permitted in the Mixed Use
Neighborhood Center pursuant to Subsection G(3) above.
Commercial floor area of such grocery store/food market in excess
of 50,000 square feet is permitted, but shall not be considered
qualifying commercial development;
(3) The amount of qualifying commercial development used to
determine the maximum number of dwelling units permitted within
the Mixed Use Neighborhood Center pursuant to Subsection G(3)
above may include up to two ground-level single-use buildings or
users of up to 35,000 square feet each. Commercial floor area in
each of the two ground-level single-use buildings or users in excess
§ 244-239 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-239
1:1213
of 35,000 square feet shall be permitted, but shall not be
considered qualifying commercial development;
(4) Except as otherwise provided in Subsection H(2) and (3) above,
commercial floor area in excess of 15,000 square feet for any
ground-level single user not in a mixed-use building shall be
permitted, but excluded as qualifying commercial development in
determining the maximum number of dwelling units permitted
pursuant to Subsection G(3) above;
(5) The total amount of qualifying commercial development permitted
pursuant to Subsection H(2) and (3) above shall not constitute
more than 40% of the total amount of qualifying commercial
development used in determining the maximum number of
permitted dwelling units pursuant to Subsection G(3) above;
(6) Additional dwelling units may be added to a Mixed Use
Neighborhood Center at a rate of one dwelling unit per 200 square
feet of additional qualifying commercial development, subject to
the limitations and exclusions of this section and an amended
preliminary site plan approval;
(7) Large retail establishments and other freestanding single user
commercial buildings in excess of 15,000 square feet are generally
to be discouraged within the interior of Mixed Use Neighborhood
Centers. Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit or discourage the
development of large retail establishments and other large
freestanding single-use commercial buildings in excess of 15,000
square feet along the periphery of Mixed Use Neighborhood
Centers, provided such facilities have direct access to either Ocean
County Routes 526 (Commodore Boulevard) or 527 (Cedar Swamp
Road) and are reasonably connected to the Mixed Use
Neighborhood Center, and further provided such commercial
development shall not be considered qualifying commercial
development unless otherwise provided pursuant to Subsection
H(2), (3), or (4) above.
I. Phasing of residential units to commercial development required. The
occupancy of residential units within a Mixed Use Neighborhood
Center shall be subject to the following:
(1) At the time of preliminary approval, the specific commercial
development used to determine the total number of permitted
residential units (qualifying commercial development) pursuant to
Subsection G(3) above shall be clearly identified;
(2) The issuance of certificates of occupancy (COs) for residential units
in the Mixed Use Neighborhood Center shall be based upon the
issuance of certificates of approval for the required commercial
development in accordance with the following table:
§ 244-239 JACKSON CODE § 244-239
1:1214
Certificates of Approval
Issued
(percent of required
commercial space)
Eligible for Certificates of
Occupancy
(percent of approved units)
0 35
25 50
50 75
75 90
100 100
(3) The main civic space (Village Green) shall be complete prior to the
issuance of COs for any residential units in excess of the 500th
approved dwelling unit in the Mixed Use Neighborhood Center.
J. Affordable housing requirements.
(1) Every Mixed Use Neighborhood Center, or addition thereto, shall
have an affordable housing set-aside requirement as determined by
the Township's Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, consent
order approved the Court, or in accordance with the developer
agreement required as part of preliminary site plan approval;
(2) Twenty percent of the first 1,365 dwelling units in the initial Mixed
Use Neighborhood Center, or 273 shall be low- and moderateincome
family rental units. A minimum of 13% of the total number
of low- and moderate-income units shall be affordable to
households of very low income;
(3) Additional dwelling units beyond the first 1,365 in the initial Mixed
Use Neighborhood Center, dwelling units in additional new Mixed
Use Neighborhood Centers beyond the initial, and any expansion of
a Mixed Use Neighborhood Center shall provide an affordable
housing set-aside of 15% of the total number of dwelling units for
rental units and 20% for for-sale units. A minimum of 13% of all
low- and moderate-income units shall be affordable by very-lowincome
households;
(4) Required affordable units shall be reasonably integrated and
dispersed among the market rate rental or sale units in the Mixed
Use Neighborhood Center;
(5) All affordable units within the Mixed Use Neighborhood Center
shall be built and operated in accordance with prevailing Council
on Affordable Housing (COAH) regulations in effect at the time of
preliminary approval and the Uniform Housing Affordability
Controls (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.);
(6) An applicant for preliminary site plan approval shall submit for
approval as part of the submission for preliminary approval a
§ 244-239 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-239
1:1215
project affordable housing plan demonstrating compliance with the
Township's Housing Element and Fair Share Plan; prevailing COAH
regulations, and the Uniform Housing Affordability Controls.
K. Design and improvement standards. The following design and
improvement standards shall apply in a Mixed Use Neighborhood
Center, notwithstanding any conflict with the design and improvement
standards elsewhere in this chapter:
(1) Pedestrian ways, road, street and block design standards.
(a) All streets, alleys and pedestrian pathways shall connect to
other streets, and connect to existing and projected streets
outside the neighborhood.
(b) Modular masonry materials, such as brick, slate, stone and
concrete pavers, or cast-in-place paving materials, such as
poured concrete, and exposed aggregate concrete slabs, shall
be used on sidewalks, pedestrian ways, crosswalks, public or
semipublic plazas, courtyards and open spaces.
(c) No block shall have a length greater than 400 feet without an
alley or pedestrian pathway providing through access to
another street or alley. No block shall have a length of less than
150 feet, measured center line to center line of adjoining
streets.
(d) Curb interruptions are permitted only for alleys, driveways,
barrier-free access and other parking access points specified
herein.
(e) A hierarchy of streets shall be utilized, providing for the
respective needs of pedestrians, bicycles and automobiles. The
street hierarchy and circulation plan developed as part of the
approval of a mixed use neighborhood development shall
generally follow the classifications, dimensional requirements,
and design standards for same set forth in Appendix A181 or as
otherwise provided pursuant to the standards contained in
N.J.A.C. 5:21-4.1 through 5:21-4.5, utilizing the cumulative
average daily traffic (ADT) for both residential and
nonresidential traffic volumes. A bicycle/pedestrian circulation
component shall be included as part of the overall circulation
plan.
(f) A Mixed Use Neighborhood Center shall have a minimum of
three access roads providing separate ingress and egress on to
either Ocean County Route 526 or 527. No parallel parking
shall be permitted along any roadway segment ingressing a
Mixed Use Neighborhood Center within 100 feet of either
Ocean County Route 526 or 527.
181. Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 244-239 JACKSON CODE § 244-239
1:1216
(g) The circulation and roadway plan for the Mixed Use
Neighborhood Center shall include, to the maximum extent
practicable, provisions to accommodate public transportation,
including but not limited to bus stops, transit shelters, bicycle
racks, taxi stops, etc.
(2) General building design standards.
(a) The first (i.e., closest to sidewalk grade) level residential unit
shall be raised a minimum of two feet above average sidewalk
grade unless handicap access to such building is required.
(b) An encroachment of not more than eight feet may be permitted
into required front or rear yard setbacks for first floor
unenclosed front and rear porches, stoops, stairs, and
balconies. Stairs/steps may encroach into the required front
yard setback to within 12 inches of the property line. An
encroachment of not more than five feet may be permitted into
required setbacks for bay windows and cornices, provided the
length of the encroachment comprises less than 50% of the
length of the facade.
(c) Building elements, canopies, and marquees, along streets
serving predominately mixed residential and nonresidential
uses, may extend into required setbacks, provided a minimum
10 feet of vertical clearance is maintained over all pedestrian
ways.
(d) All wall-mounted mechanical, electrical, communication, and
service equipment, including, satellite dishes and vent pipes,
shall be screened from nearby streets by parapets, walls,
fences, landscaping, or other approved measures.
(e) All rooftop mechanical equipment and other appurtenances
shall be screened, to the maximum extent practicable, from the
view of all adjoining properties and building floors. The
following, when above the roofline, require screening: stair
wells, elevator shafts, air-conditioning units, large vents, heat
pumps, and mechanical equipment.
(f) Buildings on corner lots shall be considered significant
structures. If deemed appropriate by the approving board,
corner buildings may be designed with additional height and
architectural treatments, such as towers to emphasize their
location.
(g) Buildings located at gateways to the Village Green or a central
mixed use or commercial concentration shall mark the
transition to such areas using massing, additional height and/
or architectural embellishments to achieve the effect of entry
into the Village Green.
§ 244-239 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-239
1:1217
(3) Commercial and mixed use building design standards.
(a) Commercial buildings shall provide a shop front at sidewalk
level along the entire length of its frontage, with the exception
of lobbies and building services serving the residential
component of mixed-use buildings. The shop front shall be no
less than 60% glazed in clear glass and may be shaded by an
awning, which may overlap the sidewalk.
(b) Stories may not exceed 14 feet in height from finished floor to
finished ceiling, except for a first floor commercial function,
which shall be a minimum of 10 feet with a maximum of 25
feet; and the uppermost story of a building, which may not
exceed 16 feet. A single floor level exceeding 16 feet, or 25 feet
at ground level, shall be counted as two stories. A mezzanine
extending beyond 33% of the floor area shall be counted as an
additional story.
(c) Residential uses, except for lobbies, entryways and accessory
uses serving the residents of the mixed-use building, such as
community rooms and fitness facilities with shop front
treatment on the building elevation, are not permitted on the
ground floor of mixed-use buildings.
(d) Restaurants, coffee houses, and other similar uses may utilize a
portion of the sidewalk for outdoor dining. A minimum
clearance of 60 inches shall be reserved along the outside edge
of a sidewalk for pedestrian passage.
(e) In mixed-use buildings, an architectural distinction shall be
made between ground floor commercial uses and upper level
commercial or apartment uses. Storefronts and other ground
floor entrances shall be accentuated.
(f) Storefronts are an integral part of a building and shall be
integrally designed with the upper floors to be compatible with
the overall facade character. Ground floor retail, service, and
restaurant uses shall have large display windows. Buildings
with multiple storefronts shall be unified through the use of
architecturally compatible materials, colors, details, awnings,
signage, and lighting fixtures.
(4) Residential design standards.
(a) Townhouse- or other row-type dwellings with the minimum
setback shall have the front entry set to one side of the facade
to preserve the possibility of retrofitting a ramp for wheelchair
access.
(b) Townhouse-type lots shall have a street screen constructed
along the unbuilt parts of the frontage line. A minimum of 25%
of the townhouses on any townhouse block shall have front
§ 244-239 JACKSON CODE § 244-239
1:1218
porches. Such front porches may encroach into the front
setback and shall not count against lot coverage requirements.
(c) Townhouse-type lots shall have their rear lot lines coinciding
with an alley 24 feet wide containing a vehicular pavement
width of at least 10 feet one-way and 16 feet two-way.
(d) Off-street parking for townhouse-type lots shall be to the rear
of the building. Access shall be through a vehicular alley.
Nothing herein shall prohibit parking for townhouses onstreet,
in off-site off-street parking lots or garages located no
greater than 250 feet from the lot they are intended to serve.
(e) Front-loaded garages and side-loaded garages requiring
access in the front of the townhouse buildings they are
intended to serve are prohibited.
(5) Civic use, recreation and open space design standards.
(a) Civic use lands shall include, but not be limited to, parks,
squares, greens, plazas, greenways, and civic use lots and
buildings. Large area recreational uses such as regional parks
and playfields are discouraged and, if included, shall be
located only on the periphery of any Mixed Use Neighborhood
Center. Lands designated for civic use shall be developable for
the intended uses and largely unconstrained from
development.
(b) A minimum of 5% of the gross area of the Mixed Use
Neighborhood Center (excluding greenways, regional parks,
playfields, environmentally constrained lands, and stormwater
management facilities) or five acres (whichever is greater)
shall be allocated to civic use lands. A range of civic use lands,
including parks, squares, and playgrounds, shall be distributed
within residential neighborhoods and areas of nonresidential
and mixed use.
(c) Each Mixed Use Neighborhood Center shall contain at least
one main civic space (Village Green), to function as a focal
point for civic activities, no less than 40,000 square feet and no
greater than 140,000 square feet in contiguous area. No single
square or park shall be more than 30% of the required civic use
lands.
(d) The remaining required civic use lands, other than the main
civic space(s), shall be divided into lesser tracts and
distributed such that no part of the developed Mixed Use
Neighborhood Center is further than 1,200 feet from a park or
square.
§ 244-239 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-239
1:1219
(e) The Village Green, plazas, and squares shall have at least 50%
of their perimeter abutting public or semipublic lands or
streets.
(6) Parking and loading design standards. The following standards
shall supplement the standards set forth in §§ 244-196, 244-197
and 244-198, and in the event the standards of this subsection shall
conflict, the provisions of this subsection shall supersede:
(a) Vehicle access to a lot shall be from the rear of the property, a
secondary street or alleyway wherever practical;
(b) Shared access drives shall be required except where shared
access is not available or practical, and further provided that
access drives shall be provided alongside property lines to
facilitate and provide shared access to adjacent properties in
the event of future development;
(c) On-street parking shall be permitted in Mixed Use
Neighborhood Centers in accordance with the approved street
hierarchy and circulation plan and the street design standards
in Appendix A182;
(d) "Parking space," within a Mixed Use Neighborhood Center,
shall mean a storage area for the parking of a motor vehicle;
(e) Parking areas shall be interconnected, wherever practical, by
cross-access drives which promote fluid access to parking
areas on adjoining properties;
(f) Wherever practical, each lot shall provide cross-access
easements for its parking areas and access drives
guaranteeing access to adjacent lots. Interconnections shall be
strategically placed and easily identifiable to ensure safe and
convenient traffic flow between parking areas. In the event a
property is proposed for development, provisions for crossaccess
drives shall be established with appropriate easements
to facilitate interconnections as adjacent properties develop;
(g) With the exception of properties fronting on, and with direct
access to, Ocean County Routes 526 or 527, parking shall be
located on-street, in public parking areas, or in designated
parking areas to the rear of buildings, wherever practical. All
parking areas shall be adequately screened and landscaped
per Subsection K(6)(o) below;
(h) With the exception of properties fronting on, and with direct
access to, County Routes 526 or 527, parking shall not be
located between the street right-of-way and the front facade of
buildings;
182. Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 244-239 JACKSON CODE § 244-239
1:1220
(i) Provision of safe pedestrian access to and through parking lots
and connections to other pedestrian links shall be required,
including striping, enhanced pavement markings, lighting and
traffic calming features;
(j) Parking structures (garages) shall be visually screened from all
rights-of-way, public open space areas, and residential uses.
Such screening shall include a liner building for a minimum of
the first floor. Screening of upper floors may include
landscaping, walls, liner buildings, other architectural
elements or decorative features;
(k) Principal use parking structures shall be architecturally
integrated into surrounding development consistent with the
overall design and character of the immediate neighborhood
within which it is situated;
(l) Shared parking shall be encouraged. Nothing herein shall
prohibit the reservation of a limited number of parking spaces
for particular residential or nonresidential users or the
restriction of the hours of certain parking spaces for particular
residential or nonresidential users;
(m) Each application involving nonresidential development in
excess of 5,000 square feet shall submit a parking study to
support the proposed on-street and off-street parking required
to accommodate the development proposed. The parking study
shall contain, as a minimum, the following:
[1] A projection of peak parking demand utilizing the
methodology and factors provided in the most current
edition of the report entitled "Parking Generation," an
information report published by the Institute of
Transportation Engineers (ITE). In calculating peak
parking demand, an applicant may exclude nonresidential
space within liner buildings with perpendicular depth of
30 feet or less and individual retail users with unshared
street access of 500 square feet or less;
[2] A calculation of the number of parking spaces needed by
expanding the peak parking demand by 10% to assure a
reasonable number of vacant parking spaces to permit
adequate turnover of parking spaces;
[3] An identification of how the proposed parking is to remain
available to future occupants and users;
[4] The required number of parking spaces may be reduced by
up to 100% in the event of one, or a combination of, the
following:
§ 244-239 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-239
1:1221
[a] The proposed use is within 400 feet of an available
parking facility;
[b] Sufficient on-street parking is available within a fiftyfoot
radius of the property;
[c] Nonresidential space within liner buildings with
perpendicular depth of 30 feet or less and individual
retail uses of 500 square feet or less with direct street
access shall have no parking requirement; and
[d] The shared parking analysis in accordance with
Subsection K(6)(m)[5] below substantiates a
reduction.
[5] If shared parking is proposed, the applicant shall submit a
shared parking study documenting how adequate parking
is to be provided and maintained to satisfy the identified
parking demands. The study shall be prepared in
accordance with the procedures and methodology set forth
in the most current edition of a report entitled "Shared
Parking," published by the Urban Land Institute, or the
most current shared parking methodology published by
either the Urban Land Institute or the Institute of
Transportation Engineers. The shared parking study may
also adjust projected parking demand based upon an
analysis of captured parking utilizing the procedures
provided in the most current edition of the publication
entitled "Trip Generation Handbook," prepared by the
Institute of Transportation Engineers. The captured and
shared parking study shall include, as a minimum, the
following:
[a] A calculation of the projected peak parking demand
for each use that will be sharing available parking
supply;
[b] A calculation of the extent to which parking demand is
to be mitigated on site as a result of trips captured
from adjoining land uses and therefore occurring
without the use of a vehicle;
[c] A calculation of the peak parking demand for the
proposed development utilizing shared parking
procedures;
[d] An expansion of the peak parking demand by 10% to
assure an adequate number of spaces for the turnover
of parking spaces;
[e] A determination of the number of on-site parking
spaces to be provided; and
§ 244-239 JACKSON CODE § 244-239
1:1222
[f] A determination of the number of on-street parking
spaces that are available to the proposed development
in accordance with the standards of this section.
(n) The following minimum parking area setback requirements
shall be provided:
[1] Minimum setback from right-of-way: 10 feet;
[2] Minimum setback from residential use side property line:
20 feet;
[3] Minimum setback from nonresidential use side property
line: five feet;
[4] Minimum setback from Ocean County Route 526 and
Route 527: 30 feet; and
[5] Parking lot setbacks for lots having five or fewer spaces
shall be subject to Planning Board approval.
(o) Parking lot layout, landscaping, buffering and screening shall
be provided to minimize direct view of vehicles from streets,
and sidewalks, avoid spillover light, glare, or noise onto
adjoining properties and provide shading upon tree maturity.
[1] Parking lots exposed to views from streets and sidewalks
shall be screened by a minimum four-foot high, fourseason
landscape hedge or screen or three-foot-high wall.
Such screen, hedge or wall shall not obstruct the visibility
of pedestrians or motor vehicles.
[2] All surface parking lots of 20 spaces or more shall provide
shade trees, with a caliper of a minimum of 2.5 inches, at a
rate of one shade tree per 10 spaces.
[3] Surface parking lots shall incorporate landscaping strips
to separate parking rows wherever practical.
(p) Loading area and loading area operational requirements shall
be subject to Planning Board approval and, as a minimum,
include the following:
[1] No delivery, loading, trash removal or compaction or other
such operations shall be permitted between the hours of
9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. unless an applicant shall provide
evidence that barriers to sound are to be provided to
effectively limit noise levels to 45 dBA or less as measured
at any adjoining property line.
[2] Service and loading areas shall be located at the rear of
buildings. Loading docks shall not be located along
primary street frontages.
§ 244-239 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-239
1:1223
[3] Screening and landscaping shall be required to minimize
direct views of loading areas from adjacent properties or
public rights-of-way. Screening and buffering shall be
provided via walls, fences and landscaping. Building
recesses and depressed ramps may be used as screening
measures.
(q) Lighting standards - building exterior and street.
[1] All building exterior and street lighting shall be designed
to prevent glare onto adjacent properties. Pedestrian
pathways shall be clearly marked and well lighted for
security and identification without significant negative
spillover to adjacent properties. The height of lighting
fixtures shall be a maximum of 16 feet for parking areas
and drives and 12 feet for pedestrian walkways.
[2] Streetlights and alley lights shall be decorative and match
or compliment the overall architectural style of the Mixed
Use Neighborhood Center of the immediate neighborhood
of which it is a part.
[3] Decorative street lights, a maximum of 12 feet in height,
shall be provided at regular intervals along all
nonresidential and mixed use streets, parking areas,
sidewalks, walkways, courtyards, civic use areas, and
interior open space areas. Street lighting on residential
streets shall be spaced no greater than 150 feet apart per
side and located at all intersections.
[4] The use of minimum wattage metal-halide or colorcorrected
sodium or mercury vapor light sources is
encouraged. The use of lower wattage streetlights, more
closely spaced, rather than higher wattage street lighting,
more widely spaced, shall be encouraged. Noncolorcorrected
low-pressure sodium lighting is prohibited.
[5] For alleyways and pedestrian walkways between
buildings, lighted bollards shall be strongly encouraged.
[6] Light fixtures attached to the exterior of buildings shall be
architecturally compatible with the style, materials,
colors, and details of the building.
[7] The color spectrum and character of the light produced by
the lighting used should be consistent and compatible
throughout the Mixed Use Neighborhood Center, including
the exterior of lighted buildings, streets, signs, parking
areas, pedestrian walkways, and other areas. Residential
side shielding shall be provided where abutting residential
uses. The use of low-pressure sodium, fluorescent, or
§ 244-239 JACKSON CODE § 244-239
1:1224
mercury vapor lighting, either attached to buildings or to
light the exterior of buildings, shall be prohibited.
[8] Building facades shall be lighted from the exterior, and in
general, the light source should be concealed through
shielding or recessed behind architectural features.
Mounting brackets and associated hardware should be
inconspicuous.
[9] Porch and yard post lighting is encouraged to augment and
complement street lighting design.
[10] Garages along streets or alleys shall provide buildingmounted
lighting facing the alley or street, unless
streetlights are provided along the street or alley.
(7) Sign design standards.
(a) Signs affixed to the exterior of a building shall be
architecturally compatible with the style, composition,
materials, colors, and details of the building, as well as with
other signs used on the building or its vicinity.
(b) Building-mounted signs shall be located in architecturally
appropriate sign bands or other similar facade features, and
shall not interfere with door and window openings, conceal
architectural details or obscure the composition of the facade.
Whenever possible, signs located on buildings within the same
block shall be placed at the same height in order to create a
unified sign band. Signs shall be mounted so that the method of
installation is concealed.
(c) Wood and metal, painted with a durable high-quality finish, are
the preferred materials for signs. Flat signs should be framed
with raised edges. Wood signs shall be fabricated from highquality
exterior grade wood with suitable grade finishes. Sign
colors should be compatible with the colors of the building
facade.
(d) Signs mounted perpendicular to, and projecting from, a
building wall of a mixed-use or commercial building shall be
permitted, provided the following standards are met: the
signboard does not exceed six square feet; a minimum of 10
feet of vertical clearance is provided from the ground or
sidewalk to the lower edge of the signboard; the top of the
signboard shall not extend above the height of the first floor of
the building; the maximum distance from the building to the
signboard shall not exceed six inches nor shall the signboard
extend more than four feet from the building; the height of the
lettering, numbers or graphics on the signboard shall not
exceed eight inches; there shall be a limit of one projecting,
perpendicularly mounted signboard per business and shall not
§ 244-239 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-239
1:1225
be used in conjunction with wall-mounted or freestanding
signs.
(e) Painted glass window and door signs shall be permitted subject
to the following standards:
[1] The painted sign area shall not exceed the lesser of 10% of
the window or door glass or four square feet;
[2] The sign shall be hand or silk screen painted;
[3] The height of the lettering shall not exceed four inches;
[4] There shall be one painted window or door sign per
business; and
[5] A painted window or door sign may be used in conjunction
with one additional sign from the following: a wallmounted
sign, an applied letter sign, a projecting sign or
an awning sign.
(f) Awning signs for first floor businesses shall be permitted,
subject to the following standards:
[1] If the awning sign is the primary sign, it shall not exceed
10 square feet and shall not be in addition to a wallmounted
sign, and lettering height shall be no greater
than nine inches;
[2] If the awning sign is a secondary sign, lettering shall be
located on the valance only, and lettering height shall be
limited to six inches or less; and
[3] No business shall have more than one awning sign.
(g) Businesses located in corner buildings are permitted signage
as permitted by this subsection on both street frontages.
(h) Signs shall be either spotlit or backlit with a diffused light
source. Spotlighting shall require complete shielding of all
light sources. Light shall not significantly spill over to other
portions of the building or site. Backlighting shall illuminate
the letters, characters, or graphics on the sign. Warm
fluorescent bulbs may be used to illuminate the interior of
display windows. Neon signs placed inside the display windows
shall ensure low-intensity colors.
(i) Temporary civic, cultural, and public service window posters,
promotional or other special event (e.g., sale) inside of first
floor commercial uses, shall be permitted, provided they do not
individually or in the aggregate exceed the lesser of 25% of the
total area of the window or six square feet and any such sign
shall not be posted for more than 90 days.
§ 244-239 JACKSON CODE § 244-239
1:1226
(8) Refuse and recycling design standards.
(a) Shared refuse and recycling facilities shall be utilized
wherever available or practical.
(b) The storage of refuse and recyclables shall be provided inside
of buildings or within an outdoor area in the rear of the
property, screened around the perimeter by wood enclosures
with a roof or by brick/masonry walls with cap, with a minimum
height of seven feet on three sides, and door or gate on the
remaining side which visually screens the inside of the storage
area.
(c) A minimum five-foot-wide landscape area shall be provided
along the walls of the outdoor storage enclosure.
(9) Fence and wall design standards.
(a) Fencing shall be constructed of vinyl, masonry, aluminum,
wrought iron or combinations thereof;
(b) No fencing located in any front yard area between the front
building line and street line shall exceed three feet in height
nor contain any solid section or component, except for masonry
pillars/columns. Such masonry pillars/columns shall not exceed
18 inches in width and shall maintain a minimum of six feet
between any such pillars/columns, excepting pillars/columns
forming walkways or gates.
(c) Solid masonry walls, not to exceed six feet in height, may be
utilized for screening purposes in side and rear yard areas.
(10) Landscaping and buffer design standards.
(a) Notwithstanding the provisions of § 244-193B and C, the
Planning Board may approve reduced buffers consistent with
the overall concept of the Mixed Use Neighborhood Centers to
provide more compact mixed-use development. This may
include the elimination or reduction of buffers and screening
separating residential and nonresidential uses, where
appropriate, as determined by the Board.
(b) In addition to the street tree species permitted pursuant to
§ 244-193A(2)(b), the following may also be utilized within a
Mixed Use Neighborhood Center:
[1] London plane (Platanus acerifolia).
[2] American sycamore (Platanus occidentalis).
[3] Swamp white oak (Quercus bicolor).
[4] American hornbeam (Carpinus caroliniana).
§ 244-239 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-239
1:1227
(c) Notwithstanding the provisions of § 244-193, street trees
within a Mixed Use Neighborhood Center may be planted
between the curb and sidewalk in locations and spaced in
accordance with the design standards for the respective street
types set forth in Appendix A183. Street trees planted between
the curb and sidewalk shall also meet the species and planting
strip/grate sizing requirements set forth in the most current
edition of the publication entitled "Trees for New Jersey
Streets," prepared by the Shade Tree Federation of New
Jersey.
183. Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 244-239 JACKSON CODE § 244-239
1:1228
Chapter 245
LANDLORD REGISTRATION AND RESPONSIBILITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unsafe buildings and structures — See Ch.
133.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 162.
Housing standards — See Ch. 233.
Mobile homes and trailers — See Ch. 285.
Registration of property — See Ch. 331.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 474.
§ 244-239 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-239
1:1229

ARTICLE I
Landlord Registration
§ 245-1. Registration of residential rental units.
§ 245-2. Certificate of registration.
§ 245-3. Registration forms.
A. The term "landlord" shall mean the person or persons who own or
purport to own, or exercise control of, any building or project in which
there is rented, or offered for rent, housing space for living or dwelling
purposes under either a written or oral lease, provided that this
definition shall not include owner-occupied two-unit premises.
B. No person shall hereafter occupy any rental unit, nor shall the landlord
or owner permit occupancy of any rental unit within the Township,
which is not registered, if required, in accordance with this article.
C. Each rental unit shall be inspected upon each change in tenancy or
occupancy. No tenant shall occupy a rental unit where a certificate of
occupancy has not been issued by the Housing Official.
A. Every landlord of a one-dwelling-unit rental or a two-dwelling-unit nonowner-
occupied premises shall hereafter be registered with the Code
Enforcement Division on forms which contain the requirements of
N.J.S.A. 46:8-28. The forms shall be provided by the Code Enforcement
Division. [Amended 8-13-2019 by Ord. No. 19-19]
B. The registration fee shall be $100 annually.
C. The landlord registration form shall be renewed annually each year. All
landlord registration forms received after the anniversary date of the
initial registration each year shall be considered late and the property
owner shall be subject to penalties pursuant to § 245-19 of this article.
[Amended 12-27-2016 by Ord. No. 32-16]
D. Every landlord shall deliver a copy of the rental license and certificate
of occupancy simultaneously to the tenant(s) upon submission of the
landlord registration form to the Code Enforcement Division.
[Amended 8-13-2019 by Ord. No. 19-19]
E. Amendments. Every person required to file a landlord registration form
pursuant to this section shall file an amended registration form within
20 days after any change in the information required to be included
thereon. No fee shall be required for the filing of an amendment, except
where the ownership or tenancy of the premises is changed.
A. Every owner shall file with the Code Enforcement Division a
registration form or other forms developed by the Township for each
rental unit contained within a building or structure, which shall include
the following information: [Amended 8-13-2019 by Ord. No. 19-19]
§ 245-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-3
1:1231
(1) The name, address, telephone number and email address of the
owner or owners of the premises and the record owner or owners
of the rental business, if not the same persons, shall be provided. In
the case of a partnership, the names and addresses of all general
partners shall be provided, together with the telephone numbers
and email addresses for each individual partner, indicating where
such individual may be reached both during day and evening hours,
which telephone numbers shall include cell phone numbers. If the
record owner is a corporation, the name and address of the
registered agent and corporate officers of said corporation shall be
provided, together with the telephone number and email address
for each such individual, indicating where such individual may be
reached both during day and evening hours, which shall include
providing the cell phone numbers of each such individual. All
registration addresses shall be physical addresses; post office
boxes alone are insufficient.
(2) If the address of the owner of record is not located in the County of
Ocean, the name, address, telephone number and email address of
a person who resides in the County of Ocean who is authorized to
accept notices from a tenant and to issue receipts therefor and to
accept service of process on behalf of the owner of record.
(3) The name, address, telephone number and email address of the
managing agent of the premises, if any.
(4) The name, address and loan number of every holder of a recorded
mortgage on the premises.
(5) As to each rental unit, a specification of the exact number of
sleeping rooms contained in the rental unit and the exact number
of sleeping accommodations contained in each of the sleeping
rooms, identifying each sleeping room specifically by number and
location within the apartment or dwelling and by the square
footage thereof.
(6) Number of occupants or tenants occupying the rental unit.
(7) Whether or not the landlord has conducted a tenant screening for
each new tenant and authorized adult household member.
(8) Such other information as may be prescribed by the Township on
the appropriate form or otherwise by ordinance or resolution.
B. In addition to the registration information set forth above, every owner
shall file with the Code Enforcement Division and provide a copy to
each individual tenant, by separate forms, the name, age and address,
including the dwelling unit number, telephone number and email
address of each occupant or tenant occupying a rental unit and a floor
plan of the rental unit. These forms shall be filed with the Housing
Department and shall not be available for public inspection. [Amended
8-13-2019 by Ord. No. 19-19]
§ 245-3 JACKSON CODE § 245-3
1:1232
§ 245-4. Taxes and other municipal charges.
No rental unit may be registered and no license shall be issued for any
property containing a rental unit unless all municipal taxes, sewer charges
and any other municipal assessments are paid on a current basis.
§ 245-5. through § 245-9. (Reserved)
C. Documents to be provided to the Township:
(1) A copy of the deed establishing ownership of the premises;
(2) A copy of the lease;
(3) If the premises is managed by a property manager or agent: a
property management agreement or such document evidencing
that the property manager or agent has agreed to be responsible
for the premises;
(4) Consent/authorization for Township officials to contact the
mortgage company for the status of the mortgage on the mortgage
company's official form;
(5) Copies of all notices sent to the tenant by landlord in compliance
with the Security Deposit Act;184
(6) If the owner is an entity registered with the New Jersey
Department of Treasury, certificate of good standing.
D. The owner is required to update any of the above-listed documentation
any time there is a change in status, refinance, change of tenancy or
change of property manager.
184. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:8-19 et seq.
§ 245-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-5
1:1233

ARTICLE II
Landlord Responsibility
§ 245-10. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to enable the Township of Jackson to take
effective action to assure that excesses arising from irresponsible rentals,
when they occur, shall not be repeated and that landlords be held to
sufficient standards of responsibility in order to preserve the peace and
tranquility of the Township for its permanent residents.
§ 245-11. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
HEARING OFFICER — A licensed attorney of the State of New Jersey
appointed by the governing body, who shall not be an owner or lessee of any
real property within the Township of Jackson, nor hold any interest in the
assets of or profits arising from the ownership or lease of such property.
LANDLORD — The person or persons who own or purport to own a building
that contains no more than four dwelling units in which there is rented, or
offered for rent, housing space for living or dwelling under either a written
or oral lease. In the case of a mobile home park, landlord shall mean the
owner of an individual dwelling unit within the mobile home park.
SUBSTANTIATED COMPLAINT — A complaint for a violation of any
provision of Title 2C of the New Jersey Statutes or any municipal ordinance
governing disorderly conduct, upon or in proximity to any rental premises,
and attributable to the acts or incitements of any of the tenants of those
premises which has been substantiated by prosecution and conviction in
any court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 245-12. Complaint.
If in any twenty-four-month period a specified number, which shall not be
less than two complaints on separate occasions, of conduct upon or in
proximity to any rental premises, and attributable to the acts or incitements
of any of the tenants of those premises, have been substantiated by
prosecution and conviction in any court of competent jurisdiction as a
violation of any provision of Title 2C of the New Jersey Statutes or any
municipal ordinance governing disorderly conduct, the municipal governing
body or any officer or employee of the municipality designated by the
governing body for the purpose may institute proceedings to require the
landlord of those premises to post a bond against the consequences of
future incidents of the same character.
§ 245-13. Notice requirements.
A. The governing body, or officer or employee designated pursuant to
§ 245-12, shall cause to be served upon the landlord, in person or by
§ 245-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-13
1:1235
§ 245-14. Hearing; violations and penalties.
registered mail to the address appearing on the tax records of the
Township, notice advising of the institution of such proceedings,
together with particulars of the substantiated complaints upon which
those proceedings are based, as well as the time and place at which
a hearing will be held in the matter, which shall be in the municipal
building, municipal court or other public place within the municipality,
and which shall be no sooner than 30 days from the date upon which
the notice is served or mailed.
B. In the event a tenant is convicted of any of the conduct described in
§ 245-12, the governing body or officer or employee designated
pursuant to § 245-12, shall cause notice advising that the conduct
specified has occurred to be served on the landlord, in person or by
registered mail to the address appearing on the tax records of the
Township.
A. At the hearing convened pursuant to this article, the Hearing Officer
shall give full hearing to both the complaint of the Township and to any
evidence in contradiction or mitigation that the landlord, if present or
represented and offering such evidence, may present. The Hearing
Officer may consider, to the extent deemed relevant by the Hearing
Officer, prior complaints about the residents of the property, even if
those complaints did not result in a conviction. At the conclusion of the
hearing, the Hearing Officer shall determine whether the landlord shall
be required to post a bond in accordance with the terms of this article.
B. Any bond required to be posted shall be in accordance with the
judgment of the Hearing Officer, in light of the nature and extent of the
offenses indicated in the substantiated complaints upon which the
proceedings are based, and shall be adequate in the case of subsequent
offenses to make reparation for:
(1) Damages likely to be caused to public or private property and
damages consequent upon disruption of affected residents' rights
of fair use and quiet possession of their premises;
(2) Securing the payment of fines and penalties likely to be levied for
such offenses; and
(3) Compensating the municipality for the costs of repressing and
prosecuting such incidents of disorderly behavior; however, no
such bond shall be in an amount less than $500 or more than
$5,000. The municipality may enforce the bond thus required by
action in the Superior Court, and shall be entitled to an injunction
prohibiting the landlord from making or renewing any lease of the
affected premises for residential purposes until that bond or
equivalent security, in satisfactory form and amount, has been
deposited with the municipality.
§ 245-13 JACKSON CODE § 245-14
1:1236
§ 245-15. Proceedings against landlord; recovery from tenant.
C. A bond or other security deposited in compliance with this section shall
remain in force for a period of not less than two nor more than four
years, as recommended by the Hearing Officer. Upon the lapse of the
specified period, the landlord shall be entitled to the discharge thereof,
unless prior thereto further proceedings leading to a forfeiture or
partial forfeiture of the bond or other security shall have been had
under § 245-15, in which case the security shall be renewed, in an
amount and for a period that shall be specified by the Hearing Officer.
A. If, during the period for which a landlord is required to give security
pursuant to § 245-14, a substantiated complaint is recorded against the
property in question, the governing body or its designee may institute
proceedings against the landlord for the forfeiture or partial forfeiture
of the security, for an extension of the period for which such security is
required, or for an increase in the amount of security required, or for
any or all of those purposes.
B. Any forfeiture or partial forfeiture of security shall be determined by
the Hearing Officer solely in accordance with the amount deemed
necessary to provide for the compensatory purposes set forth in
§ 245-14. Any decision by the Hearing Officer to increase the amount or
extend the period of the required security shall be determined in light
of the same factors set forth in § 245-14, and shall be taken only to the
extent that the nature of the substantiated complaint or complaints out
of which proceedings arise under this section indicates the
appropriateness of such change in order to effectually carry out the
purposes of this article. The decision of the Hearing Officer in such
circumstances shall be enforceable in the same manner as provided for
in § 245-14.
C. A landlord may recover from a tenant any amounts of security actually
forfeited as described in this section
§ 245-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-15
1:1237

ARTICLE III
Inspection Requirements
§ 245-16. Certificate of occupancy. [Amended 8-13-2019 by Ord. No.
19-19]
§ 245-17. Obligation of property owner. [Amended 8-13-2019 by
Ord. No. 19-19]
The owner, rental agent or manager of all buildings, structures and units
thereof subject to inspection pursuant to this chapter shall be responsible
for notifying the Code Enforcement Official, in writing, that such premises
are leased or rented or being offered for lease or rental so that an inspection
or reinspection may occur.
§ 245-18. Revocation of certificate. [Amended 8-13-2019 by Ord.
No. 19-19]
If, subsequent to the issuance of a rental certificate of occupancy, the Code
Enforcement Official learns or becomes aware of violations of this article,
an inspection shall be made of the subject premises. If violations are found
to exist, then notification, in writing, shall be given to the owner, rental
agent or manager, and said person shall have 10 days from service of the
notice to correct all deficiencies noted therein. In the event that the same
have not been corrected within 10 days, the rental certificate of occupancy
may be revoked by the Housing Official by mailing a notice of revocation by
certified mail to the owner, rental agent or manager and to the tenant or
tenants, and the premises shall be vacated.
§ 245-19. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than $500
or imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or both. Each day such violation is
committed or continues after the first 30 days shall be deemed to constitute
a separate offense for each day and shall be punishable by an additional fine
of not more than $50 per day. The Township of Jackson may, at its discretion,
seek injunctive relief from a court of competent jurisdiction of the State of
New Jersey.
A. Upon change of occupancy: All buildings, structures and units thereof
that are leased or rented, regardless of the term, in the Township of
Jackson shall be inspected by the Code Enforcement Official on every
initial occupancy or change of occupancy for compliance with the
standards set forth in § 233-18.
B. Periodic: All buildings, structures and units thereof that are leased or
rented in the Township of Jackson shall be inspected by the Code
Enforcement Official once in every three-year period, regardless of
whether a change in occupancy has occurred.
§ 245-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-19
1:1239

ARTICLE IV
Relocation Assistance
[Added 4-10-2018 by Ord. No. 07-18]
§ 245-20. Findings, liability for relocation costs.
§ 245-21. Assistance fund for displaced persons.
§ 245-22. Relocation assistance fund established.
A. The Township Council recognizes that there are residential premises
throughout the Township that are subject to illegal tenancies due to
unsuitable building conditions which violate zoning and/or housing
codes of the state and/or Township, and require demolition or
rehabilitation of the premises necessitating relocation of the tenants.
B. In the event that the displacement of tenants occur due to such
conditions, the landlord is liable to the tenant for relocation costs.
A. Any tenant who receives a notice of eviction, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
2A:18-61.2, that results from a zoning or code enforcement activity for
an illegal occupancy which the landlord must correct, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 2A:18-61.1g, or as a result of being cited by local or state
housing inspectors or zoning officers, and it is unfeasible to correct
such illegal occupancy without removing the tenant, shall be
considered a displaced person and entitled to relocation assistance in
an amount equal to six times the monthly rental paid by the displaced
person. The owner/landlord of the structure/building shall be liable for
the payment of such relocation assistance.
B. The Township may pay relocation assistance from the relocation
assistance fund to any displaced person who has not received the
required payment from the owner/landlord of the structure at the time
of eviction.
C. All relocation assistance costs incurred by the Township pursuant to
this chapter shall be repaid by the owner/landlord of the structure to
the Township in the same manner as relocation costs are billed
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 20:4-4.1 and 20:4-4.2.
D. All repayments shall be deposited into the Township's relocation
assistance fund.
A. The Township does hereby establish a relocation assistance fund into
which shall be deposited the following sums:
(1) Any relocation costs and the interest thereon paid by an owner of
real property who has been liable for a civil or criminal penalty in
the case of any displacement of persons by housing or construction
code enforcement pursuant to law.
§ 245-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-22
1:1241
§ 245-23. Violations and penalties.
(2) Any sums realized by the Township upon enforcement of the
Township's liens or liquidation of any property acquired by virtue of
enforcement pursuant to law.
(3) Any sums realized by the Township relating to any relocation cost
and interest thereon upon enforcement or liquidation of any
property acquired by virtue of enforcement and collected pursuant
to law.
B. Money appropriated from the fund shall be used to provide relocation
assistance.
A. In addition to requiring reimbursement from the owner/landlord of the
structure for relocation assistance paid to a displaced tenant, a
separate fine for zoning or housing code violations for an illegal
occupancy shall be assessed, up to an amount to six times the monthly
rental paid by the displaced person, to the Township by the owner of the
structure.
B. For any second or subsequent violation of this chapter and after notice
and an opportunity to be heard, the Township shall impose a fine equal
to the annual tuition cost of any resident of the illegally occupied unit
attending a public school, which fine shall be recovered in a civil action
by a summary proceeding in the name of the Township, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 2A:58-10 et seq. The Municipal Court and the Superior Court
shall have jurisdiction of proceedings for the enforcement of this
penalty pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:18-61.1g.
§ 245-22 JACKSON CODE § 245-23
1:1242
Chapter 251
LICENSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 86.
Amusements — See Ch. 92.
Junk and junk dealers — See Ch. 239.
Massage parlors — See Ch. 268.
Mobile home dealerships — See Ch. 275.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 310.
Raffles and bingo — See Ch. 322.
Secondhand dealers — See Ch. 338.
Zoological or animal exhibition parks — See
Ch. 443.
Retail food establishments — See Ch. 479.
§ 245-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-23
1:1243

ARTICLE I
Licensing of Businesses and Occupations
[Adopted 7-10-1973 by Ord. No. 36-73 (Ch. 73, Art. I, of the 1972
Code)]
§ 251-1. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to operate or
continue the operation of any business, activity or other occupation for
which a license is required under the Code of the Township of Jackson,
County of Ocean, State of New Jersey, as amended and supplemented,
without having first obtained the appropriate license from the proper
authorities of the Township of Jackson.
§ 251-2. Renewal of license required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to operate or
continue the operation of any business, activity or other occupation for
which a license is required under the Code of the Township of Jackson,
unless a license which has been issued previously shall be renewed for such
operation, business, activity or occupation.
§ 251-3. Approval of license. [Added 4-27-1976 by Ord. No. 16-76]
A. Before any municipal license shall be issued pursuant to the provisions
of the Jackson Code or pursuant to the provisions of state law or
regulation under which the Township Committee is the issuing
authority, the applicant shall secure the approval of the following
municipal departments and agencies having jurisdiction as to the laws,
ordinances or regulations listed:
(1) The Board of Fire Commissioners of the appropriate fire district (as
to provisions of the Jackson Township Fire Code).
(2) The Jackson Township Board of Health (as to state and local health
regulations and ordinances).
(3) The Jackson Township Police Department (as to past criminal
activities and character).
(4) The Jackson Township Building Department (as to Building Code
matters).
(5) The Environmental Commission (as to environmental statutes and
regulations and environmental conditions).
(6) The Township Engineer (as to engineering conditions and
ordinances of which the Township Engineer is the enforcing
officer).
(7) The Jackson Township Code Enforcer (as to ordinances of the
Township of Jackson in general).
§ 251-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 251-3
1:1245
§ 251-4. Nonissuance or nonrenewal of license. [Amended
10-25-1977 by Ord. No. 55-77; 10-23-1979 by Ord. No. 47-79]
(8) The Jackson Township Zoning Officer (as to the provisions of the
Zoning Ordinance185 of the Township of Jackson).
(9) The Jackson Township Animal Control Officer (as to the provisions
of Chapter 98 of the Administrative Code entitled "Animals").
[Added 3-22-2016 by Ord. No. 06-16]
B. Each of the municipal departments and agencies shall be notified by the
Township Clerk of the receipt of the application for a license and the
availability of the license application and supporting documents for
inspection in the office of the Township Clerk. Each of said municipal
departments and agencies shall recommend the approval or
disapproval of the issuance of the license in question. In the event that
any of the aforesaid municipal departments or agencies disapprove of
the issuance of the license applied for, said department or agency shall
submit a written report to the Township Committee which specifies the
provision or provisions of the applicable state statute or regulation or
municipal ordinance or code which is being violated or will be violated
by the applicant if the license is issued by the Township Committee. In
the absence of the submission of clear and convincing evidence of such
violation or possible violation of a state statute or regulation or
municipal ordinance or code, the Township Committee shall have
discretion to issue any such license. [Amended 8-13-1984 by Ord.
No. 31-84]
A. Requirement to make timely application for renewal of license.
(1) All persons whose business or enterprises are regulated under the
licensing authority of the Township of Jackson shall make timely
application for renewal of their licenses. If a license renewal date is
not provided for in the specific chapter of this Code which requires
such a license, an application for a license shall be deemed to be
timely filed if submitted 30 days prior to the expiration date of the
current license.
(2) Any person failing to make a timely application for renewal of his
license within 10 days after the application renewal date,
determined in accordance with Subsection A(1), shall be assessed
an administrative charge as follows: 10% of the license fee after 10
days, 20% of the license fee after 30 days and 25% of the license
fee after 60 days. This provision shall be deemed supplementary to
and not in lieu of any other article or provision of the Code of the
Township of Jackson.
B. Compliance with license requirements; imposition of administrative
charges for unabated violations.
185. Editor's Note: For zoning provisions, see Ch. 244, Land Use and Development Regulations.
§ 251-3 JACKSON CODE § 251-4
1:1246
(1) In the event that a license is not issued or renewed for any of the
following reasons, which severally or conjunctively shall constitute
sufficient grounds for denying an application to issue or renew any
license required by this Code, there shall be deemed to be an
offense under this article:
(a) Noncompliance with the requirements for such license as
contained in the applicable chapter of the Code of the
Township of Jackson.
(b) A violation of any applicable state statute or regulation.
(c) A violation of any other applicable ordinance or Code
provision.
(d) The existence of any condition on the premises to be licensed
which is detrimental or likely to be detrimental to the health,
safety or welfare of any person.
(2) In addition to the penalty provisions of § 251-8 of this article, upon
a determination by the Township Committee that a license is not to
be issued or renewed based upon the commission of an offense, as
set forth in Subsection B(1) hereof, the applicant shall have his
license fee or license renewal fee returned, less 25% of such fee
which shall be collected to defray and to cover the cost of
inspections occurring prior to such application and for the
processing or reprocessing of the license application.
(3) If at any time subsequent to the imposition of the foregoing
administrative charge further inspections are required to be
performed by any of the municipal departments or agencies
enumerated in § 251-3 of this article in order to continue the
processing of a license application, an applicant shall pay an
additional administrative charge of $25 for each inspection deemed
necessary in the discretion of the appropriate municipal
department or agency.
(4) In order for the Township Committee to determine that an offense
under Subsection B(1) hereof exists for which the applicant is to be
held responsible in accordance with § 251-3 of this article, clear
and convincing evidence of such offense shall be presented to the
Township Committee, and, in the absence of such evidence, the
Township Committee shall have the discretion to issue or renew
any such license. For purposes of this subsection, if a judgment of
any court having competent jurisdiction established the
commission of any offense falling within the purview of Subsection
B(1) hereof and said judgment is entered against any applicant or
any person, firm or corporation over whom such applicant has
control, there shall be deemed to be clear and convincing evidence
that an offense exists or existed for purposes of this article.
§ 251-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 251-5
1:1247
§ 251-5. Proof of payment of taxes. [Added 2-25-1975 by Ord. No.
9-75; amended 6-15-1976 by Ord. No. 27-76]
No license required by any provision of the Jackson Code shall be issued or
renewed or shall be considered for issuance or renewal until the applicant
for such license has submitted proof that taxes or other assessments or
assessments for local improvements are paid in full and are not due or
delinquent on the licensed premises or the property on which the licensed
business or activity is to be located.
§ 251-6. Time limit for compliance. [Added 10-19-1981 by Ord. No.
50-81]
At the time of submission of an application for a license, the applicant shall
fully comply with all of the requirements for such license as contained in the
applicable chapter or chapters of the Code of the Township or the applicable
state statutes or regulations. In the event of noncompliance with any of such
requirements at the time of submission of the application or within 90 days
after the date of submission or within such additional reasonable period
as may be determined by the Township Committee, the application shall
be denied by a duly adopted resolution of the Township Committee setting
forth the reasons for such denial.
§ 251-7. Illegal or improper business practices prohibited. [Added
2-28-1983 by Ord. No. 8-83]
Any of the following acts, conduct or activity on the part of the licensees are
hereby declared to be grounds for refusal to issue or renew such license or
be grounds for revocation or suspension of such license: actions, conduct
or behavior by a licensee amounting to false, fraudulent or misleading
representations or statements; concealment of information; fraudulent
practices; making false promises or statements; any other conduct which
constitutes fraud or dishonest dealing; conduct which demonstrates
unworthiness, incompetency, bad faith or dishonesty; conviction of any
crime; or conviction of any disorderly persons offense or ordinance violation
arising out of the operating of the licensed business.
§ 251-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than $500
or imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or both. Each day such violation is
committed or continues after the first 30 days shall be deemed to constitute
a separate offense for each day and shall be punishable by an additional fine
of not more than $50 per day.
§ 251-5 JACKSON CODE § 251-8
1:1248
ARTICLE II
Enlargement or Transfer of Licenses
[Adopted 9-9-1975 by Ord. No. 40-75 (Ch. 73, Art. II, of the 1972
Code)]
§ 251-9. Authorization required.
No license authorized or issued by the Township Committee of the Township
of Jackson shall be enlarged, extended, amended or transferred from person
to person or from place to place unless such enlargement, extension,
amendment or transfer is authorized by resolution of the Township
Committee, after submission of a proper application and fee and after proof
of compliance with the provisions of all applicable laws, ordinances and
regulations.
§ 251-10. Application for authorization.
Prior to any such authorization to enlarge, extend, amend or transfer any
such license, an applicant therefor shall be required to submit a written
application containing all of the information required for an original
application for the specific type of license involved, unless the form of
application is more particularly specified by any applicable law, ordinance
or regulation.
§ 251-11. Fee.
Any application for such an enlargement, extension, amendment or transfer
of a license shall be accompanied by a fee amounting to 1/2 of the basic,
annual fee for the specific type of license involved, unless the fee for such an
application is more particularly specified by a specific provision contained
in any law, ordinance or regulation.
§ 251-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 251-11
1:1249

ARTICLE III
Screening of Applicants
[Adopted 11-29-1982 by Ord. No. 53-82 (Ch. 73, Art. III, of the 1972
Code)]
§ 251-12. Fees.
Each and every applicant for an alcoholic beverage license, a firearms
retail dealers or employees license, a permit to purchase or carry firearms,
a license for bingo, raffles or amusement games, or for municipal office
holding or employment shall remit to the Township of Jackson the sum of
$12 to defray the cost of payment of the Federal Bureau of Investigation
processing user fee required to be paid for the screening and investigation
of any such applicant. Payment shall be made in cash or by certified or
cashier's check or money order made payable to the Federal Bureau of
Investigation.
§ 251-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 251-12
1:1251
Chapter 256
LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing standards — See Ch. 233. Toxic and hazardous materials — See Ch. 394.
§ 251-12 JACKSON CODE § 251-12
1:1252
ARTICLE I
Termination of Service
[Adopted 8-23-1982 by Ord. No. 40-82 (Ch. 73A, Art. I, of the 1972
Code)]
§ 256-1. Findings; purpose.
The Township Committee of the Township of Jackson finds and declares that
the termination of service to residential customers of unregulated utilities
supplying liquefied petroleum (gas) to such customers who require such
gas for heating, cooking or other utility purposes imposes a severe burden
on such customers and, in certain circumstances, may cause severe health
problems to residential customers of such unregulated utilities, and the
Township Committee is of the opinion that the adoption of this article is
necessary for the preservation of public health, safety and welfare of the
inhabitants of the Township of Jackson and is necessary and proper for good
government, order and the protection of persons and property.
§ 256-2. Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall apply to unregulated utilities and
companies supplying liquefied petroleum gas (propane) to residential
customers for home heating or cooking purposes.
§ 256-3. Notice of discontinuance.
At least 10 days' time for payment shall be allowed after sending a bill for
the providing of liquefied petroleum gas (propane) to a residential customer.
An unregulated public utility or company may discontinue service to such
customer for nonpayment of bills, provided that it gives to such residential
customer at least 10 days' written notice of its intention to discontinue.
The notice of discontinuance shall not be served until the expiration of the
ten-day period of time for payment as aforesaid. However, in case of fraud,
illegal use or when it is clearly indicated that the customer is preparing to
vacate the premises, immediate payment of account may be required.
§ 256-4. Bill disputes.
An unregulated utility or company supplying liquefied petroleum gas
(propane) to a residential customer shall not discontinue service because
of nonpayment of bills in cases where a charge is in dispute, provided that
the undisputed portion of any such charges are paid. In such case, the
unregulated public utility shall take the appropriate legal action to collect
the disputed portion of any such bill. Whenever a residential customer
advises the unregulated public utility or company prior to the date of
a proposed discontinuance for nonpayment that he wishes to discuss a
deferred payment agreement because he is presently unable to pay a total
outstanding bill, said utility or company shall make a good faith effort
to provide the customer with an opportunity to enter into a reasonable
deferred payment agreement.
§ 256-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 256-5
1:1253
§ 256-5. Deferred payment plan.
§ 256-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate a provision of this article
or fail to comply therewith shall, for each and every such violation and
noncompliance, be subject to a fine not to exceed the sum of $500 or
shall be imprisoned for a period of not more than 90 days, or both, in the
discretion of the Judge before whom such conviction is had. Each day that
such violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
A. In no event shall any unregulated public utilities or companies
supplying liquefied petroleum gas (propane) be required to accept a
deferred payment plan unless it meets the following minimum
requirements:
(1) An initial payment of at least 25% of the past due amount subject to
the deferred payment plan payable on an immediate basis.
(2) A maximum of three monthly installment payments of at least 25%
of the unpaid charges with the first such installment due 30 days
after payment of the initial payment.
(3) A monthly surcharge of 1 1/2% of the customer's outstanding
balance following payment of the initial payment or any installation
payable at the time that each installment is due.
B. In the event that any residential customer fails to comply with a
deferred payment plan, the unregulated public utility or company
providing liquefied petroleum gas (propane) service may discontinue
such service on an immediate basis with no further notice to the
residential customer. In the event that the entire unpaid balance of the
utility bill is paid by the residential customer, said unregulated public
utility or company shall be required to reinstate utility service to the
residential customer.
§ 256-5 JACKSON CODE § 256-6
1:1254
Chapter 262
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, weeds, trash and debris — See Ch. 115.
Garbage, rubbish and waste material — See
Ch. 216.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 474.
§ 256-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 256-6
1:1255

ARTICLE I
Newspapers and Handbills
[Adopted 6-12-1973 by Ord. No. 26-73 (Ch. 74, Art. II, of the 1972
Code)]
§ 262-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the terms used herein are defined as follows:
HANDBILL — Any printed or written matter, sample, device, dodger,
circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise
reproduced original or copy of any matter of literature, whether for
advertising purposes or otherwise.
NEWSPAPER — Any newspaper of general circulation, as defined by
general law, any newspaper duly entered with the Post Office Department of
the United States in accordance with federal statute or regulation and any
newspaper filed and recorded with any recorded officer as provided by law;
and, in addition thereto, shall mean and include any periodical or magazine
regularly published with not fewer than four issues per year and sold or
circulated to the public.
§ 262-2. Deposit or distribution on private premises.
A. No person shall throw or deposit any newspaper or handbill in or upon
any private premises which are temporarily or continuously
uninhabited or vacant.
B. No person shall throw or deposit or distribute any newspaper or
handbill upon any private premises if requested by anyone thereon not
to do so or if there is placed on the premises in a conspicuous position
near the entrance thereof a sign bearing the words "No Trespassing" or
"No Peddlers or Agents," such notice indicating in any manner that the
occupants of the premises do not desire to be molested or have their
right of privacy disturbed or to have any such newspapers or handbills
left upon their premises.
C. No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any newspaper or handbill
in or upon private premises which are inhabited, except by handing or
transmitting any such newspaper or handbill directly to the occupant or
other person then present in or upon such private premises or by
placing or depositing such newspaper or handbill in or upon such
inhabited private premises so as to be secure or as to prevent it from
being blown or drifted about the premises or sidewalks, streets or other
public places, except that mailboxes may not be used when so
prohibited by federal postal law or regulations.
§ 262-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 262-3
1:1257
§ 262-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-29-1985 by Ord. No.
11-85]
Any person who violates any one or more of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 for each separate offense
and/or confinement in the Ocean County Jail for a period of not more than
90 days. In the case of a continuing violation or violations, a fine of not more
than $1,000 may be assessed for each day that said violation or violations
are corrected. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 262-3 JACKSON CODE § 262-3
1:1258
ARTICLE II
Litter Control
[Adopted 2-28-2005 by Ord. No. 16-05 (Ch. 74, Art. I, of the 1972
Code)]
§ 262-4. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish requirements to control littering in
the Township of Jackson, so as to protect public health, safety and welfare,
and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 262-5. Definitions; word usage.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein, unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
LITTER — Any used or unconsumed substance or waste material which
has been discarded, whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic, rubber,
paper, or other natural or synthetic material, or any combination thereof,
including, but not limited to, any bottle, jar or can, or any top, cap or
detachable tab of any bottle, jar or can, any unlighted cigarette, cigar,
match or any flaming or glowing material or any garbage, trash, refuse,
debris, rubbish, grass clippings or other lawn or garden waste, newspapers,
magazines, glass, metal, plastic or paper containers or other packaging
or construction material, but does not include the waste of the primary
processes of mining or other extraction processes, logging, sawmilling,
farming or manufacturing.
LITTER RECEPTACLE — A container suitable for the depositing of litter.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
§ 262-6. Prohibited acts and regulated activities.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, discard or otherwise
place any litter of any nature upon public or private property other than
in a litter receptacle or, having done so, to allow such litter to remain.
B. Whenever any litter is thrown or discarded or allowed to fall from a
vehicle or boat in violation of this article, the operator or owner, or
both, of the motor vehicle or boat shall also be deemed to have violated
this article.
§ 262-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 262-7
1:1259
§ 262-7. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Jackson Township
Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 262-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $100.
§ 262-7 JACKSON CODE § 262-8
1:1260
Chapter 268
MASSAGE PARLORS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licensing of businesses — See Ch. 251, Art. I. Public health nuisances — See Ch. 474.
§ 268-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
MASSAGE — The administration by any person or method of exerting or
applying pressure, friction, moisture, heat or cold to the human body, or the
rubbing, stroking, kneading, pounding or tapping of the human body by any
physical or mechanical means for any form of consideration.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment or operation wherein
a massage is administered or is permitted to be administered, when such
massage is administered for any form of consideration.
MASSAGIST — Any person, male or female, who administers a massage for
any form of consideration.
§ 268-2. License required for establishments.
No person, firm or corporation shall operate any establishment or utilize
any premises in the Township of Jackson in the County of Ocean as or for
a massage establishment unless or until there first has been obtained a
license for such establishment or premises from the Township Clerk of the
Township of Jackson, in accordance with the terms and provisions of this
chapter.
§ 268-3. License required for massagists.
No person shall render or perform services as a massagist or engage in the
business of or be employed as a massagist unless and until he or she has
obtained a massagist's license from the Township Clerk of the Township of
Jackson in accordance with the terms and provisions of this chapter. Said
application shall contain a photograph of the applicant, together with a
medical certificate showing said applicant to be in good health.
§ 268-4. Application for license.
Each and every applicant for a license, either for an establishment or
premises, to be used for a massage establishment or for a massagist's
license shall set forth the following information in writing on forms provided
by the Township Clerk:
§ 262-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 268-4
1:1261
§ 268-5. Fees.
The applicant for a license for a massage establishment or premises shall
pay an annual license fee of $100, which license fee shall become due on
the first of January in each year. The applicant for a massagist's license shall
pay an annual license fee of $100, which license fee shall become due on
the first of January in each year.
§ 268-6. Public hearing; notice.
When an application is filed for a massage establishment license under
this chapter, the Township Council shall fix a time and a place for a public
hearing where the applicant may present evidence upon the question of his
or her application. Not less than 10 days before the date of such hearing,
the Township Clerk shall cause a notice of said hearing to be published in
an official newspaper of the Township.
§ 268-7. Issuance of establishment license; exceptions.
A. The name and residence address of the applicant and all former
addresses for a period of three years prior to making the application.
B. The address of the establishment or premises to be used in the massage
business and a physical description of the property and facilities if the
applicant desires a license for said establishment or premises.
C. If the applicant desires a massagist's license, a statement of all
employment for a period of three years prior to making the application.
D. A statement as to whether or not the applicant, or any officer or
director thereof, if a corporation, has ever been convicted of a crime in
this or any other state.
A. The Township Council may issue a massage establishment license
within 14 days following a hearing if all requirements for a massage
establishment described in this chapter are met, unless it is found:
(1) The operation as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, would not
have complied with all applicable laws, including, but not limited
to, the Building, Health, Housing, Zoning and Fire Codes of the
Township of Jackson.
(2) That the applicant and any other person who will be directly
engaged in the management and operation of a massage
establishment has been convicted of:
(a) A felony.
(b) An offense involving sexual misconduct with children.
(c) Obscenity, keeping or residing in a house of ill fame,
solicitation of a lewd or unlawful act, prostitution or pandering.
§ 268-4 JACKSON CODE § 268-7
1:1262
§ 268-8. Issuance of massagist's license; exceptions.
§ 268-9. Suspension or revocation of establishment license.
(3) Based on the past criminal record of the applicant, or the principal
thereof, or based on other evidence of bad character or morals, it is
found that the granting or renewal of the license would tend to
encourage or permit criminal or immoral activities within the
Township of Jackson.
B. The Township Council in its discretion may issue a license to any person
convicted of any of the crimes in Subsection A(2)(a), (b) and (c) if it is
found that such conviction occurred at least three years prior to the
date of the application and the applicant has had no subsequent
convictions.
A. The Township Council may issue a massagist's license within 21 days
following application, unless it is found:
(1) That the applicant has been convicted of:
(a) A felony.
(b) An offense involving sexual misconduct with children.
(c) Obscenity, keeping or residing in a house of ill fame,
solicitation of a lewd or unlawful act, prostitution or pandering.
(2) Based on the past criminal record of the applicant or based on
other evidence of bad character or morals, it is found that the
granting or renewal of the license would tend to encourage or
permit criminal or immoral activities within the Township of
Jackson.
B. The Township Council, in its discretion, may issue a license to any
person convicted of such crimes if it finds that such conviction occurred
at least three years prior to the date of the application and the applicant
has had no subsequent convictions.
A. Any license issued for a massage establishment may be revoked or
suspended by the Township Council, after a public hearing before the
Township Council, where it is found that any of the provisions of this
chapter are violated or where the licensee, including a massagist, has
been convicted of any offense found in § 268-8A(1) and the licensee has
actual or constructive knowledge of the violation or conviction or, in any
case, where the licensee refuses to permit any duly authorized police
officer or Health Inspector of the Township of Jackson to inspect the
premises or the operations therein.
B. The Township Council, before revoking or suspending any license, shall
give the licensee at least 10 days' written notice of the charges against
the licensee and the opportunity for a public hearing before the
§ 268-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 268-9
1:1263
§ 268-10. Suspension or revocation of massagist's license.
§ 268-11. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to massage or physical therapy
treatments given:
§ 268-12. Signs.
A recognizable and legible sign shall be posted at the main entrance to any
building, or to the portion of a building used as a massage establishment,
identifying the premises as a massage establishment, and recognizable and
legible signs shall be posted at all exits identifying each such exit. All such
signs shall be posted in accordance with all existing municipal ordinances.
§ 268-13. Minors prohibited; exception.
No person under the age of 18 shall be present during operating hours
of a massage establishment, except that a minor under the age of 18
years of age may receive treatments from the massagist as a patron or
customer if the minor's parent or legal guardian is present. The massage
establishment shall be responsible for verifying the presence of the parent
or legal guardian of a minor prior to rendering services to such minor.
Township Council, at which time the licensee may present evidence
bearing upon the question. In such cases, the charges shall be specific
and in writing.
A. A massagist's license issued by the Township Council shall be revoked
or suspended after a public hearing before the Township Council where
it appears that the massagist has been convicted of any offenses
enumerated in § 268-8A(1).
B. The Township Council, before revoking or suspending any massagist's
license, shall give the massagist at least 10 days' written notice of the
examination into his or her conviction record and the opportunity for a
public hearing before the Township Council, at which hearing the
Township Council shall determine the relevant facts regarding the
occurrence of the conviction.
A. In the office of a licensed physician, chiropractor or physical therapist.
B. In a regularly established medical center, hospital or sanatorium having
a staff which includes licensed physicians, chiropractors and/or
physical therapists.
C. By any licensed physician, chiropractor or physical therapist in the
residence of his patient.
§ 268-9 JACKSON CODE § 268-14
1:1264
§ 268-14. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be punished by imprisonment in the county jail for a term not
exceeding 90 days, by a fine not exceeding $2,000 and/or by a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days, in the discretion of the Judge of
the Municipal Court.
Chapter 275
MOBILE HOME DEALERSHIPS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licensing of businesses — See Ch. 251, Art. I.
Mobile home parks — See Ch. 280.
Mobile homes and trailers — See Ch. 285.
Secondhand dealers — See Ch. 338.
Trailers and campsites — See Ch. 400.
§ 275-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the terms used herein are defined as
follows:
MOBILE HOME — Any vehicle or similar portable structure having no
foundation other than wheels, jacks or skirtings and so designed or
constructed as to permit occupancy for dwelling or sleeping purposes.
PERSON — Any natural individual, firm, partnership, association or
corporation.
§ 275-2. License required.
No person shall, at the effective date of this chapter, begin or continue to
deal or trade in mobile homes in this Township unless and until a license for
each such dealer is procured pursuant hereto.
§ 275-3. License requirements.
No license shall be considered or issued to any applicant pursuant to this
chapter unless the business is to be conducted on an approved mobile home
park, as defined in this Code, and unless the applicant is the holder of a
current and validly issued license of this Township to maintain or operate
such mobile home park wherein any such mobile homes which are sold by
the applicant may be placed and accommodated. In addition, no license
shall be considered or issued hereunder to any applicant unless and until:
A. A written, signed application is made by such applicant on forms
therefor to be provided by the Township. Said forms shall make
provision for the applicant to furnish information giving the area,
§ 268-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-3
1:1265
§ 275-4. Issuance of license. [Amended 4-13-1976 by Ord. No.
17-76]
Licenses shall be issued by the Township Clerk for such applicants as meet
the requirements of this chapter and as shall hereafter be approved for such
licenses by the Township Committee. Such licenses shall be issued on an
annual basis for a term of one year commencing on April 1 of each year and
terminating on March 31 following.
§ 275-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person convicted of a violation of this chapter shall, upon conviction,
be subjected to a penalty not exceeding $500 or imprisonment in the Ocean
County Jail for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both, at the discretion of
the Judge before whom said conviction is had.
Chapter 280
MOBILE HOME PARKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing standards — See Ch. 233.
Land use and development regulations — See
Ch. 244.
Mobile home dealerships — See Ch. 275.
Mobile homes and trailers — See Ch. 285.
Rent control for mobile home parks — See Ch.
334.
Trailers and campsites — See Ch. 400.
dimensions, location and road frontage of the land where the business
is proposed to be conducted; name and address of the applicant;
consent of the owner of said lands for the conduct of business thereon,
if the applicant is not the owner; the precise location on the premises
where the business will be located and conducted; reference to the
deed by which the owner acquired said land and its recordation when
recorded; and showing all dwellings within 500 feet of the proposed
site on which the business shall be conducted. Said applicant shall
also state in his application whether he has ever been convicted of a
crime and, if so, when, where, the nature of the crime and the penalty
imposed.
B. A fee of $100 shall be paid to the Township by the applicant. Said fee
shall be an annual fee for each license granted.
§ 275-3 JACKSON CODE § 275-5
1:1266
ARTICLE I
Senior Citizens' Parks
[Adopted 2-16-1966 by Ord. No. 3-66 (Ch. 77, Art. I, of the 1972
Code)]
§ 280-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DEPENDENT MOBILE HOME — A mobile home which does not have a flush
toilet and a bath or shower.
INDEPENDENT MOBILE HOME — A mobile home which has a flush toilet
and a bath or shower.
LICENSEE — Any person licensed to operate and maintain a mobile home
park under the provisions of this article.
MOBILE HOME — Any vehicle or similar portable structure having no
foundation other than wheels, jacks or skirtings and so designed or
constructed as to permit occupancy for dwelling or sleeping purposes.
MOBILE HOME PARK — Any plot of ground upon which two or more mobile
homes occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes are located, regardless
of whether or not a charge is made for such accommodation, and housing
persons of the age of 55 years or older in accordance with all Federal
Fair Housing Act standards, together with such other persons as may
be permitted according to the provisions of this article hereinafter set
forth.[Amended 5-24-1977 by Ord. No. 21-77; 4-22-1991 by Ord. No.
12-91]
MOBILE HOME SPACE — A plot of ground within a mobile home park,
designed for the accommodation of one mobile home.
OCCUPANCY — The actual use of a mobile home located in a mobile
home park regulated by this article as a dwelling place or place of
residence.[Added 2-28-1978 by Ord. No. 14-78]
PARK — A senior citizens' mobile home park.
PERSON — Any natural individual, firm, partnership, association or
corporation.
§ 280-2. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or operate a mobile home
park within the limits of the Township of Jackson unless such person shall
first obtain a license therefor.
§ 280-3. Number of licenses. [Amended 12-1-1969 by Ord. No.
14-69]
The number of licenses permitted to be issued for the operation of senior
citizens' mobile home parks shall not exceed six in number.
§ 280-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-4
1:1267
§ 280-4. License fees. [Amended 12-1-1969 by Ord. No. 14-69;
5-14-1974 by Ord. No. 12-74; 3-11-1975 by Ord. No. 12-75;
2-10-1976 by Ord. No. 3-76]
The annual license fee for each mobile home park shall be $600. The annual
license fee shall be paid to the Township Clerk on February 1 of each and
every year.
§ 280-5. Escrow deposit for utility bills. [Added 5-27-1975 by Ord.
No. 26-75]
§ 280-6. Application for license. [Amended 12-1-1969 by Ord. No.
14-69]
A. In addition to the annual license fee required by § 280-4 of this article,
there shall be paid to the Township of Jackson by each mobile home
park the sum of $500. Said amount shall be paid within 30 days of the
effective date of this section. Such payment shall be a one-time payment
and shall be considered as a part of the license fee authorized to be
imposed for revenue by N.J.S.A. 40:52-2.
B. The purpose of said payment shall be to guarantee the up-to-date
payment of all bills for public utilities essential to the continued
operation of the mobile home park and to protect the welfare of the
inhabitants thereof by providing a means for the payment of delinquent
utility bills.
C. In the event of nonpayment of a bill or bills for and a threatened
discontinuance of public utility services essential to the continued
operation of any mobile home park, the Township Committee may, by
resolution, authorize the payment from such funds on deposit of the
amount of the unpaid bill or bills, up to the amount of $500. In such
event the mobile home park shall immediately reimburse the Township
for the amount paid, and a failure to do so shall be a violation of this
article and shall be a sufficient cause for the revocation of the license
issued pursuant to this article.
A. Application for a mobile home park license shall be filed with the
Township Clerk, and such license shall be issued by the Township Clerk
after having received approval from the Township Committee. The
application shall be in writing, signed by the applicant, and shall
include the following:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The location and legal description of the mobile home park.
(3) A complete plan of the park in conformity with the requirements of
this article.
(4) Plans and specifications of all buildings, improvements and
facilities constructed or to be constructed within the park.
§ 280-4 JACKSON CODE § 280-6
1:1268
(5) Such further information as may be requested by the Township
Clerk or the Township Board of Health.
B. The applicant shall submit appropriate plans and specifications to the
Municipal Utilities Authority as are in accordance with the rules and
regulations of the Municipal Utilities Authority or are provided for in
the applicable ordinances of the Township of Jackson. Before any
license hereunder shall be issued, the applicant must secure the
approval of said Jackson Township Municipal Utilities Authority and of
the State Board of Health and other applicable state agencies. This
approval will include the obtaining of appropriate guaranties by way of
bonding that the proposed sewerage facilities will be built in
accordance with approved plans and specifications. [Amended
12-21-1971 by Ord. No. 31-71]
C. The Township Committee shall investigate the applicant and inspect the
application and proposed plans and specifications. The Township
Committee shall be the sole issuing authority under this article. If the
applicant is of good moral character and the proposed mobile home
park will, when constructed or altered in accordance with such plans
and specifications, be in accordance with all the provisions of this
article, the Zoning Ordinance186 and all other applicable ordinances,
the Township Committee shall authorize the Township Clerk to approve
the application. Upon completion, or posting of a performance bond to
guarantee the completion, of the first section of the park in compliance
with the following schedule, the Township Committee shall authorize
the Township Clerk to issue the license to operate: [Amended
12-21-1971 by Ord. No. 31-71]
(1) First section. Upon completion, or posting of a performance bond
to guarantee the completion, of all walkways, curbing, streets,
lighting, water supply and sewage and refuse disposal systems to
accommodate the first section, it shall be deemed completed.
(2) Second section. Upon completion, or posting of a performance
bond to guarantee the completion, of all walkways, curbing,
streets, lighting, water supply and sewage and refuse disposal
systems to accommodate the additional mobile homes, the second
section shall be deemed completed. The licensee shall not begin
construction or operation of the third section or any subsequent
sections until the recreational, laundry and sanitation facilities are
completed according to the provisions of this article.
(3) Third section and subsequent sections. The licensee must complete
construction of all improvements set forth in Subsection C(1) above
to accommodate the mobile homes in that section before he will be
permitted to begin construction and use of any subsequent section.
All subsequent sections shall consist of plots and improvements to
accommodate all mobile homes in that section.
186. Editor's Note: For zoning provisions, see Ch. 244, Land Use and Development Regulations.
§ 280-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-7
1:1269
§ 280-7. Mobile home park plan.
The mobile home park shall conform to the following requirements:
§ 280-8. Water supply.
A. The park shall be located on a well-drained site, properly graded to
ensure rapid drainage and freedom from stagnant pools of water.
B. Mobile home spaces shall be provided consisting of a maximum of
seven spaces for each acre of ground within the mobile home park.
C. Mobile homes shall be so harbored on each space that there shall be at
least a twenty-five-foot clearance between mobile homes; provided,
however, that with respect to mobile homes parked end-to-end, the endto-
end clearance may be less than 25 feet but shall not be less than 20
feet. No mobile home shall be located closer than 50 feet away from any
building within the park or from any property line boundary of the park;
and no mobile home or building shall be located within 50 feet of any
boundary line of the park or within 75 feet of an existing street or
roadway. [Amended 12-1-1969 by Ord. No. 14-69; 12-11-1973 by
Ord. No. 71-73]
D. All mobile home spaces shall abut upon a driveway of not less than 30
feet in width, which shall have unobstructed access to a public street,
alley or highway. [Amended 12-1-1969 by Ord. No. 14-69]
E. Walkways not less than three feet wide shall be provided from the
mobile home spaces to the service buildings. [Amended 12-1-1969 by
Ord. No. 14-69]
F. All driveways and walkways within the park shall be hard-surfaced and
lighted at night with lights spaced at intervals so as to illuminate
adequately all such driveways and walkways. [Amended 12-1-1969
by Ord. No. 14-69]
G. Each park shall provide service buildings to house such toilet, bathing
and other sanitation facilities and such laundry facilities as are
hereinafter more particularly prescribed.
H. An electrical receptacle, properly grounded, shall be provided for each
mobile home space and each mobile home, shall be waterproof and
shall be accessible to the parked mobile home. The receptacle shall
supply 115/230 volts with a minimum rated capacity of 50 amperes. A
properly sized overcurrent device shall be installed as an integral part
of each outlet.
A. An adequate supply of potable water, complying with the Potable Water
Standards established by the State Department of Health of the State of
New Jersey, shall be provided in each mobile home park. The water
shall be obtained from an approved public potable water supply, if
available. If an approved public potable water supply is not available, a
§ 280-7 JACKSON CODE § 280-8
1:1270
§ 280-9. Compliance with minimum requirements. [Added 7-6-1966
by Ord. No. 12-66; amended 5-12-1980 by Ord. No. 22-80]
Every mobile home park licensed under the provisions of this article and
every licensee, owner, operator or manager of such a mobile park shall
comply with the minimum requirements of each and every state, county and
municipal law, code, ordinance and regulation applicable to the ownership,
occupancy and operation of mobile home parks and trailer parks. Every
licensee, owner, operator or manager of a mobile home park licensed under
the provisions of this article shall maintain the same facilities and the same
water supply shall be developed in accordance with Standards for
the Construction of Water Supply Systems for Realty Improvements
promulgated by the State Commissioner of Health pursuant to the
provisions of P.L. 1954, c. 199,187 and approved by the Jackson
Township Board of Health prior to its use.
B. The water supply system shall be piped so as to provide service to all
buildings and to each mobile home space. An individual connection
shall be provided for each mobile home space and so installed that it
will not be damaged by the parking of mobile homes. The connection
shall consist of a riser terminating at least four inches above the ground
surface, with a three-fourths-inch valved outlet threaded so that a
flexible tubing with a screw connection may be attached between the
riser and the home. If the mobile home is disconnected, the outlet shall
be disinfected and capped. The water system piping shall deliver water
to each mobile home space connection at six gallons per minute at 20
pounds per square inch.
C. Potable water shall be stored only in impervious tanks protected
against surface drainage. All tanks shall be provided with watertight
covers, and any overflow or ventilation openings shall be covered with a
metallic screen of not less than No. 16 mesh to prevent the entrance of
insects and vermin. No storage tank shall have a drainage connection
direct to a sewer.
D. No physical cross-connection shall be made between an approved
public potable water supply and an unapproved water supply unless it
satisfies the provisions of P.L. 1942, c. 308 (N.J.S.A. 58:11-9.1 et seq.). A
semipublic water supply is considered as an unapproved water supply
for the purpose of this article even though it may meet the Potable
Water Standards established by the State Department of Health of the
State of New Jersey.
E. Drinking fountains, if provided, shall be constructed of impervious
material and have an angle jet with the nozzle above the overflow rim of
the bowl. The nozzle shall be protected by a nonoxidizing guard. The
bowl shall be of easily cleanable design, without corners, and the bowl
opening equipped with a strainer.
187. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 58:11-23 et seq.
§ 280-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-9
1:1271
standards of service, maintenance and equipment in the mobile home park
as was provided from the time the mobile home park commenced operation
or as is or was required by law, ordinance or regulation or by lease at the
date the lease was entered into.
§ 280-10. Sanitation facilities.
Each park accommodating dependent mobile homes shall be provided with
toilets, baths or showers, slop sinks and other sanitation facilities which
shall conform to the following requirements:
§ 280-11. Laundry facilities.
Laundry facilities shall be provided as follows:
A. Toilet facilities for males shall consist of not less than one flush toilet
and one urinal for the first 15 dependent mobile homes or any less
number thereof, and for dependent mobile homes in excess of 15, not
less than one additional flush toilet for every 10 additional dependent
mobile homes or fractional number thereof.
B. Toilet facilities for females shall consist of not less than one flush toilet
for the first 10 dependent mobile homes or any less number thereof,
and for dependent mobile homes in excess of 10, not less than one
additional lavatory and one additional flush toilet for every 10
additional dependent mobile homes or fractional number thereof.
C. Each sex shall be provided with not less than one lavatory and one
shower or bathtub with individual dressing accommodations for the
first 10 dependent mobile homes or any less number thereof, and for
dependent mobile homes in excess of 10, not less than one additional
lavatory and one additional shower or bathtub with individual dressing
accommodations for every 10 additional dependent mobile homes or
fractional number thereof.
D. Each toilet and each shower or bathtub with individual dressing
accommodations, for which provision is made in Subsections A, B and
C, shall be in a private compartment or stall.
E. The toilet and other sanitation facilities for males and females shall be
either in separate buildings or shall be separated, if in the same
building, by a soundproof wall.
A. Not less than one single-tray laundry and one automatic or
semiautomatic-type washing machine for the first 25 dependent mobile
home spaces or any less number thereof, and for dependent mobile
home spaces in excess of 25, not less than one additional single-tray
laundry and one additional automatic or semiautomatic-type washing
machine for every 25 additional mobile home spaces.
B. An ample number of electrical outlets shall be provided supplying
current sufficient to operate each washing machine. Drying spaces
§ 280-9 JACKSON CODE § 280-11
1:1272
§ 280-12. Service and recreational buildings.
§ 280-13. Sewerage and refuse disposal.
shall be provided sufficient to accommodate the laundry of the mobile
home occupants if automatic drying equipment is not supplied.
C. The laundry facilities shall be either in a separate building or, if in the
same building where sanitation facilities are housed, shall be separated
from the rooms housing the sanitation facilities by a soundproof wall.
A. Service buildings housing sanitation and laundry facilities or any of
such facilities shall be permanent structures complying with all
applicable ordinances and statutes regulating buildings, electrical
installations and plumbing and sanitation systems.
B. The service buildings shall be well lighted at all times of the day and
night, shall be well ventilated with screened openings, shall be
constructed of such moistureproof material, including painted
woodwork, as shall permit repeated cleaning and washing, and shall be
maintained at a temperature of at least 68° F. during the period from
October 1 to May 1. The floors of the service buildings shall be of waterimpervious
material.
C. Service buildings housing sanitation facilities shall be located not closer
than 15 feet nor farther than 100 feet from any mobile home space upon
which a dependent home is harbored.
D. All service buildings and the grounds of the park shall be maintained in
a clean, sightly condition and kept free of any condition that will
menace the health of any occupant or the public or constitute a
nuisance.
E. Every mobile home park shall provide at least 200 square feet of
recreation area for each mobile home space within the park. Said
recreation area shall be located entirely within one section of the park,
unless the authority issuing the license permit shall permit the
recreational area to be divided into two or more locations. Such
recreation area shall be located so as to be convenient to the residents
of the mobile home park. In addition to the requirements set forth
herein, senior citizens' mobile home parks shall provide an ample and
suitable structure for the housing of recreational facilities. Any such
recreational clubhouses and other common facilities shall be made
available by the owner or operator at all times to any resident or group
of residents of the park for any lawful purpose, including, but not
limited to, entertainment, recreational programs or meetings of any
groups or organizations made up solely of residents of the park or
guests of residents so engaged for representation or information
purposes. [Amended 12-28-1981 by Ord. No. 58-81]
§ 280-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-13
1:1273
A. Senior citizens' mobile home parks accommodating 60 mobile homes or
fewer shall be permitted to maintain individual sewage disposal
systems, consisting of suitable septic tanks and laterals. No septic tank
shall be connected by laterals to more than seven mobile homes. Any
senior citizens' mobile home park accommodating more than 60 mobile
homes shall be required to discharge waste from stoves, bathtubs, flush
toilets, urinals, lavatories, slop sinks and laundries into a public sewer
system or into a private sewer and disposal plant. Notwithstanding the
provisions of this section, individual sewage disposal systems or other
means of private sewage disposal shall not be permitted where a public
sanitary sewer is available within 100 feet of the site of the mobile home
park.
B. Where sewer lines are not to be connected to a public sewer system, an
individual sewage disposal system shall be constructed and installed in
accordance with "Standards for the Construction of Sewerage Facilities
for Realty Improvements," promulgated by the New Jersey State
Commissioner of Health, and shall be approved by the State
Department of Health and the Jackson Township Board of Health prior
to use.
C. Each mobile home space shall be provided with a building sewer
installed in accordance with the requirements of Regulation 4.1 of the
New Jersey State Sanitary Code, Chapter IX, Mobile Home Parks. The
building sewer shall be at least four inches in diameter, constructed of
cast-iron extra strength.
D. The sewer inlet shall consist of a four-inch riser extending, as a
minimum, four inches above the surface of the ground in order that a
hose connection from the mobile home can be made. The riser shall be
embedded firmly in the ground and be protected against heaving and
shifting.
E. The sewer riser shall be equipped with a forty-five-degree ell or quarter
bend, fitted with a standard ferrule and close nipple and provided with
a screw cap. The screw cap shall be fastened by a durable chain to
prevent its removal while the sewer riser is in use. When the sewer
riser is not in use, it shall be capped.
F. The sewer connection (hose) shall be provided with suitable fittings to
permit a watertight junction. The connections between the mobile
home drain and the sewer shall be watertight, self-draining, and shall
be effected by a noncollapsible, corrosion- and weather-resistant
flexible hose of suitable diameter to fit the drain and the building sewer.
G. The mobile home park owner shall maintain in good repair several
spare connecting hoses, to be used when privately owned hoses do not
meet the requirements of this article.
H. Sewer lines and appurtenances shall be laid in accordance with the
following requirements:
§ 280-13 JACKSON CODE § 280-13
1:1274
§ 280-14. Garbage receptacles.
Metal garbage cans with tight-fitting covers shall be provided in quantities
adequate to permit disposal of all garbage and rubbish. Garbage cans shall
be located not further than 200 feet from any mobile home space. The cans
shall be kept in sanitary condition at all times. Garbage and rubbish shall be
collected and disposed of as frequently as may be necessary to ensure that
the garbage cans shall not overflow.
§ 280-15. Occupancy. [Amended 5-24-1977 by Ord. No. 21-77;
6-28-1977 by Ord. No. 37-77; 3-13-1979 by Ord. No. 9-79; 5-24-1982
by Ord. No. 19-82; 8-9-1982 by Ord. No. 33-82; 4-2-1984 by Ord. No.
14-84; 5-8-1989 by Ord. No. 14-89; 4-9-1990 by Ord. No. 16A-90;
4-22-1991 by Ord. No. 12-91]
The occupancy of any senior citizens' mobile home park shall be limited to
persons who are 55 years of age or over, with the following exceptions:
(1) Minimum size: six inches (except building sewer).
(2) Grade.
Pipe Size
(inches)
Minimum Grade
(percent)
6 0.65%
8 0.40%
10 0.29%
12 0.22%
(3) Construction. All sewer line joints, sewer connections and
manholes shall be watertight.
(4) Manholes: at the upper end of each sewer line; at intersections; at
changes in grade or alignment; at intervals of not more than 500
feet when the pipe is eight inches in diameter or greater. When the
pipe is less than eight inches in diameter, manholes or cleanouts
shall be at intervals of not more than 200 feet.
(5) Installation: preferably laid in trenches separated horizontally from
any potable water line by at least five feet of undisturbed or wellcompacted
earth. If laid in a common trench with the potable water
line, the potable water line shall be placed on firm foundation at the
side of the trench at least 12 inches above the sewer.
A. A husband or wife under the age of 55 years who is residing with his or
her spouse who is of the age of 55 years or over.
B. Adults under 55 years of age if it is established that the presence of
such persons is essential for the physical care or economic care of other
occupants of the age of 55 years or older.
§ 280-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-15
1:1275
§ 280-16. Certificates of occupancy; concrete piers; inspection.
[Added 8-10-1976 by Ord. No. 36-76]
C. Adults under 55 years of age who, because of physical or mental
disability, are dependent upon and are under the supervision and care
of the occupant or occupants of the age of 55 years or older, where it is
established that it is essential that such individuals reside with the
occupant or occupants.
D. Adults under 55 years of age who are presently occupying a mobile
home in a senior citizens' mobile home park as a result of
misstatements made by the licensee or a predecessor of the licensee, or
the legal representative of such licensee or predecessor, shall be
permitted to remain in such occupancy at the licensed premises for a
period of three years from the date of adoption of this subsection,
notwithstanding the fact that such adults do not meet the requirements
of Subsection A, B or C of this section. All other occupants who do not
fall within either the categories set forth in Subsection A, B or C of this
section or of this subsection shall be deemed to be in violation of this
section and shall abate or remove such violation within six months from
the date of adoption of this subsection.
E. The age requirements set forth hereinabove are applicable not only to
occupants and residents of the park, but are applicable in all respects to
all resident park managers, maintenance staff and other employees of
the park. In the event that any such resident manager, officer, staff
member or other employee of the park or any immediate family member
of such employees presently residing within and occupying a mobile
home located therein does not meet the age requirements set forth
hereinabove, such manager, officer, staff member or employee and any
immediate family members shall be permitted to remain in such
occupancy within the park for a period not to exceed five years from the
date of adoption of this provision
F. Any individual resident or occupant not in compliance with the abovestated
age requirements, but who took lawful residence and occupancy
on or before May 19, 1981, in a mobile home park formerly licensed as
an adult mobile home park pursuant to the judicially declared invalid
ordinance establishing adult mobile home parks, and who has used or
occupied the mobile home in such a park as his or her legal residence at
any time prior to the date of adoption of this provision, may continue as
a resident and occupant until the sale or removal of the mobile home in
which such occupant resides and the cessation of said residency by the
resident, or the abandonment by such resident or occupant of legal
residence at the mobile home for 90 or more days. Upon the sale of any
mobile home occupied by such an underaged individual, the new
residents shall fully comply with the age requirements of this section.
The provisions of this subsection shall apply only to residents and
occupants in mobile home parks formerly licensed as adult mobile home
parks.
§ 280-15 JACKSON CODE § 280-16
1:1276
A. Certificates of occupancy.
(1) No mobile home or trailer located in a mobile home park, whether
such mobile home is sold or rented, shall be occupied by the
vendee, tenant or lessee, as the case may be, until a certificate of
occupancy has been secured from the Building Inspector of the
Township of Jackson certifying that said mobile home or trailer
complies with all applicable state laws and regulations, as well as
with all applicable provisions of the Jackson Code.
(2) Application shall be made to the Construction Code Official, on a
form to be provided, for a certificate of occupancy. Inspections shall
be made by the Construction Code Official or his designee. A fee of
$5 shall accompany such application. A certificate of occupancy
shall be issued if the mobile home or trailer complies with all
applicable laws, regulations and ordinances; otherwise, the owner
shall be notified in writing of any violations found. The inspections
shall be made and either a certificate of occupancy or a notice of
violation shall be issued within seven days from the date of
application. [Amended 3-22-1977 by Ord. No. 7-77]
(3) At the time of application for the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy under this section, there shall be submitted with the
application a statement signed and sworn to by both the mobile
home park owner and by any prospective tenants of the mobile
home which shall be the subject of the issuance of the certificate of
occupancy, certifying that the prospective tenants and occupants of
said mobile home are in compliance with the age requirements set
forth in § 280-15 of this article. In the event that such certification
does not accompany the application, the application for a
certificate of occupancy shall be deemed incomplete, and the
application for such certificate of occupancy shall be denied.
[Added 6-16-1980 by Ord. No. 29-80]
B. Concrete pier required. No mobile home shall be installed or occupied
in any mobile home park unless it is located upon and supported by a
concrete pier or platform of sufficient size and width to accommodate
the mobile home to be installed.
C. Inspection. No mobile home shall be occupied in any mobile home park
until an inspection is made by the Building Inspector or Code
Enforcement Officer of the Township certifying that said mobile home is
properly located upon and supported by a concrete pier or platform of
sufficient size and width as indicated above and that said mobile home
is otherwise acceptable for occupation in accordance with any
applicable laws, ordinances or regulations. Mobile homes shall not be
occupied in any mobile home park until said concrete pad for the mobile
units shall be provided with devices for anchoring the unit to prevent
overturning or uplift. A mobile home park owner shall anchor or cause
to be anchored all mobile units located on a concrete pier or platform.
All anchorage and tie-downs shall comply with the standards set forth
§ 280-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-16
1:1277
§ 280-17. Register of occupants; enforcement of age regulations.
[Amended 5-12-1980 by Ord. No. 22-80]
§ 280-18. Fire protection.
Every park shall be equipped at all times with fire-extinguishing equipment
in good working order, of such type, size and number and so located
within the park as to satisfy applicable reasonable regulations of the Fire
Department. No open fires shall be permitted at any place which may
endanger life or property. No fires shall be left unattended at any time.
§ 280-19. Roadways. [Added 3-14-1978 by Ord. No. 11-78]
in the BOCA National Building Code, as amended and supplemented.
[Amended 9-26-1994 by Ord. No. 26-94]
A. It shall be the duty of each licensee to keep a current register
containing a record of all mobile home owners and occupants located
within the park. The register shall contain the following information:
(1) The name and address of each mobile home occupant.
(2) The name and address of the owner of each mobile home.
(3) The make, model, year and license number of each mobile home
and motor vehicle.
(4) The state, territory or jurisdiction issuing said licenses.
(5) The date of arrival and departure of each mobile home.
(6) Whether or not each mobile home is a dependent or an
independent mobile home.
(7) The ages of each occupant of every mobile home.
B. The licensee shall keep the register available at the park for inspection
at all times by law enforcement officers, public health officials, the
Township Clerk, the Code Enforcer and other officials whose duties
necessitate acquisition of the information contained in the register.
C. It shall be the duty and obligation of each licensee to enforce the age
requirements set forth in § 280-15 of this article. In the event that an
occupant or occupants of a mobile home located in a mobile home park
licensed under this article are in violation of the age restrictions set
forth in § 280-15, it shall be the duty and obligation of the licensee to
take such action as may be necessary to abate the violation, including
but not limited to dispossess actions, eviction proceedings or actions for
possession of land.
A. Roads, where provided, shall be designed so as to permit convenient
and safe movement of traffic and unobstructed access to a public street
or highway. All roads shall be provided with a smooth, hard, dense and
§ 280-16 JACKSON CODE § 280-19
1:1278
§ 280-20. Supervision.
The licensee or a duly authorized attendant or caretaker shall be in charge
at all times to keep the park, its facilities and equipment in a clean, orderly
and sanitary condition. The attendant or caretaker shall be answerable,
with the licensee, for the violation of any provision of this article to which
the license is subject.
§ 280-21. Compliance with other provisions.
In addition to the specifications and requirements set forth in this article,
every licensee shall comply with all applicable provisions and standards
of the New Jersey State Sanitary Code and all state, county and Jackson
Township statutes, codes, ordinances, rules and regulations.
§ 280-22. Posting of license.
The license certificate shall be conspicuously posted in the office of or on
the premises of the park at all times.
§ 280-23. Advertising. [Added 7-25-1978 by Ord. No. 40-78]
No owner, operator or manager of a mobile home park licensed under this
article or to which this article applies shall publicly advertise such a mobile
home park by any designation other than as a senior citizens' mobile home
park.
§ 280-24. Revocation of license.
The Township Clerk may revoke any license to maintain and operate a park
when the licensee has been found guilty by a court of competent jurisdiction
of violating any provision of this article. After such conviction, the license
may be reissued if the circumstances leading to conviction have been
remedied and the park is being maintained and operated in full compliance
with law.
dust-free surface which shall be durable and well drained under normal
use and weather conditions. Road surfaces shall be maintained free of
holes and free of snow and ice, and any such accumulation of snow or
ice shall be removed within a minimum of 24 hours after termination of
the precipitation which caused the snow or ice to accumulate.
B. No street, roadway or driveway located in a mobile home park shall
have a name which will duplicate or so nearly duplicate as to be
confused with the names of any other existing streets, roadways or
driveways, public or private, located within the Township of Jackson. All
such street names shall be subject to approval of the Township
Committee. [Added 4-24-1979 by Ord. No. 17-79]
§ 280-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-25
1:1279
§ 280-25. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-5-1972 by Ord. No.
34-72]
Any person violating this article shall be fined not more than $500 or
imprisoned for a term not to exceed 90 days, or both, for each offense.
§ 280-25 JACKSON CODE § 280-25
1:1280
ARTICLE II
Adult Parks
[Adopted 5-18-1981 by Ord. No. 17-81 (Ch. 77, Art. II, of the 1972
Code)]
§ 280-26. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FAMILY — One or more persons occupying a mobile home and living as a
single, nonprofit housekeeping unit.
LICENSEE — Any person licensed to operate and maintain a mobile home
park under the provisions of this article.
MOBILE HOME — Any vehicle or similar portable structure having no
foundation other than wheels, jacks or skirtings and so designed or
constructed as to permit occupancy for dwelling or sleeping purposes.
MOBILE HOME PARK — Any plot of ground upon which two or more mobile
homes occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes are located, regardless
of whether or not a charge is made for such accommodations and housing
such persons as may be permitted according to the provisions of this article
hereafter set forth.
MOBILE HOME SPACE — A plot of ground within a mobile home park
designed for the accommodation of one mobile home.
OCCUPANCY — The actual use of a mobile home located in a mobile home
park regulated by this article as a dwelling place or place of residence.
PARK — An adult mobile home park.
PERSON — Any natural individual, firm, partnership, association or
corporation.
§ 280-27. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or operate an adult mobile
home park within the limits of the Township of Jackson unless such person
shall first obtain a license therefor.
§ 280-28. Number of licenses.
The number of licenses permitted to be issued for the operation of adult
mobile home parks shall not exceed three in number.
§ 280-29. License fee.
The annual license fee for each mobile home park shall be $600. The annual
license fee shall be paid to the Township Clerk on February 1 of each and
every year.
§ 280-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-30
1:1281
§ 280-30. Escrow deposit for utility bills.
§ 280-31. Conversion of senior citizen park license.
§ 280-32. Application for license.
A. In addition to the annual license fee required by § 280-29 of this article,
there shall be paid to the Township of Jackson by each mobile home
park the sum of $500. Said amount shall be paid within 30 days of the
effective date of this section. Such payment shall be a one-time payment
and shall be considered as a part of the license fee authorized to be
imposed for revenue by N.J.S.A. 40:52-2.
B. The purpose of said payment shall be to guarantee the up-to-date
payment of all bills for public utilities essential to the continued
operation of the mobile home park and to protect the welfare of the
inhabitants thereof by providing a means for the payment of delinquent
utility bills.
C. In the event of nonpayment of a bill or bills for and a threatened
discontinuance of public utility services essential to the continued
operation of any mobile home park, the Township Committee may, by
resolution, authorize the payment from such funds on deposit of the
amount of the unpaid bill or bills up to the amount of $500. In such
event, the mobile home park shall immediately reimburse the Township
for the amount paid, and a failure to do so shall be a violation of this
article and shall be a sufficient cause for the revocation of the license
issued pursuant to this article.
A. The holder of a license for a senior citizen mobile home park which is
actually in operation, and which is less than 80% occupied based upon
the approved number of sites permitted within the park by Zoning
Board or Planning Board approval, may convert such license to an adult
mobile home park license as provided for herein on the condition that
all provisions of this article are fully complied with. The number of
licenses permitted to be issued for the conversion of a senior citizen
mobile home park to an adult mobile home park shall not exceed three
in number. The holders of licenses for Oak Tree Mobile Home Park and
South Wind Mobile Home Park shall not be entitled to convert their
respective licenses to adult mobile home park licenses.
B. No such holder of a senior citizen mobile home park license shall be
permitted to apply for or receive approval for the converting of such
license to an adult mobile home park license on or after March 1, 1982.
[Added 3-15-1982 by Ord. No. 12-82]
A. Application for a mobile home park license shall be filed with the
Township Clerk, and such license shall be issued by the Township Clerk
after having received approval from the Township Committee. The
application shall be in writing, signed by the applicant, and shall
include the following:
§ 280-30 JACKSON CODE § 280-32
1:1282
§ 280-33. Mobile home park plan.
The mobile home park shall conform to the following requirements:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The location and legal description of the mobile home park.
(3) A complete plan of the park in conformity with the requirements of
this article.
(4) Plans and specifications of all buildings, improvements and
facilities constructed or to be constructed within the park.
(5) Such further information as may be requested by the Township
Clerk or the Township Board of Health.
B. Where an applicant is applying for a license for the construction of a
new mobile home park, the applicant shall submit appropriate plans
and specifications to all applicable state, county and municipal agencies
for necessary approvals. Plans for the providing of sewer and water
shall be submitted to the Municipal Utilities Authority for its review and
inspection for the purpose of assuring that such plans meet the
requirements of the State of New Jersey for sewers and water. Before
any license shall be issued hereunder, the applicant must secure the
approval of all applicable state, county and municipal agencies. This
approval may include the submission of performance guaranties as
construction on each section of the park is commenced that the
proposed facilities will be built in accordance with approved plans and
specifications. All sewer and water systems are to remain in the
ownership and control of the park operator, except that the park
operator may contract with the Municipal Utilities Authority for the
operation of such systems.
C. The Township Committee shall investigate the applicant and inspect the
application and proposed plans and specifications. The Township
Committee shall be the sole issuing authority under this article. If the
applicant is of good moral character and the mobile home park
complies with all the provisions of this article, the Zoning Ordinance188
and all other applicable ordinances, the Township Committee shall
authorize the issuance or renewal of a license under this article,
provided that the specific requirements of § 280-31 have been complied
with.
A. The park shall be located on a well-drained site, properly graded to
ensure rapid drainage and freedom from stagnant pools of water.
B. Mobile home spaces shall be provided, consisting of a maximum of
seven spaces for each acre of ground within the mobile home park.
188. Editor's Note: For zoning provisions, see Ch. 244, Land Use and Development Regulations.
§ 280-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-33
1:1283
§ 280-34. Water supply.
C. Mobile homes shall be so harbored on each space that there shall be at
least a twenty-five-foot clearance between mobile homes; provided,
however, that with respect to mobile homes parked end-to-end, the endto-
end clearance may be less than 25 feet but shall not be less than 20
feet. No mobile home shall be located closer than 50 feet away from any
building within the park or from any property line boundary of the park;
and no mobile home or building shall be located within 50 feet of any
boundary line of the park or within 75 feet of an existing public street or
roadway.
D. All mobile home spaces shall abut upon a driveway of not less than 30
feet in width, which shall have unobstructed access to a public street,
alley or highway.
E. Walkways not less than three feet wide shall be provided from the
mobile home spaces to the service buildings.
F. All driveways and walkways within the park shall be hard-surfaced and
lighted at night with lights spaced at intervals so as to illuminate
adequately all such driveways and walkways.
G. Each park shall provide service buildings to house such toilet, bathing
and other sanitation facilities and such laundry facilities as are
hereinafter more particularly prescribed.
H. An electrical receptacle, properly grounded, shall be provided for each
mobile home space, and each mobile home shall be waterproof and
shall be accessible to the parked mobile home. The receptacle shall
supply 115/230 volts with a minimum rated capacity of 50 amperes. A
properly sized overcurrent device shall be installed as an integral part
of each outlet.
A. An adequate supply of potable water, complying with the Potable Water
Standards established by the State of New Jersey, shall be provided in
each mobile home park. The water shall be obtained from an approved
public potable water supply, if available. If an approved public potable
water supply is not available, a water supply shall be developed in
accordance with Standards for the Construction of Water Supply
Systems for Realty Improvements promulgated by the State
Commissioner of Health pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 1954, c.
199,189 and approved by the Jackson Township Board of Health prior to
its use.
B. The water supply system shall be piped so as to provide service to all
buildings and to each mobile home space. An individual connection
shall be provided for each mobile home space and so installed that it
will not be damaged by the parking of mobile homes. The connection
189. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 58:11-23 et seq.
§ 280-33 JACKSON CODE § 280-34
1:1284
§ 280-35. Minimum requirements.
shall consist of a riser terminating at least four inches above the
ground surface, with a three-fourths-inch valve outlet threaded so that
a flexible tubing with a screw connection may be attached between the
riser and the home. If the mobile home is disconnected, the outlet shall
be disinfected and capped. The water system piping shall deliver water
to each mobile home space connection at six gallons per minute at 20
pounds per square inch:
C. Potable water shall be stored only in impervious tanks protected
against surface drainage. All tanks shall be provided with watertight
covers, and any overflow or ventilation openings shall be covered with a
metallic screen of not less than No. 16 mesh to prevent the entrance of
insects and vermin. No storage tank shall have a drainage connection
direct to a sewer.
D. Drinking fountains, if provided, shall be constructed of impervious
material and have an angle jet with the nozzle above the overflow rim of
the bowl. The nozzle shall be protected by a nonoxidizing guard. The
bowl shall be of easily cleanable design, without corners, and the bowl
opening equipped with a strainer.
A. Every mobile home park licensed under the provisions of this article
and every licensee, owner, operator or manager of such a mobile home
park shall comply with the minimum requirements of each and every
state, county and municipal law, code, ordinance and regulation
applicable to the ownership, occupancy and operation of mobile home
parks and trailer parks. Every licensee, owner, operator or manager of a
mobile home park licensed under the provisions of this article shall
maintain the same facilities and the same standards of service,
maintenance and equipment in the mobile home park as was provided
from the time the mobile home park commenced operation or as is or
was required by law, ordinance or regulation or by lease at the date the
lease was entered into.
B. Every licensee, owner, operator or manager of every licensed mobile
home park shall require that all occupants and residents conform to
proper standards of conduct, as such standards may be established by
such licensee, owner, operator or manager. Such standards shall be
submitted to the Township Committee for their approval prior to their
implementation. As a minimum, such standards shall prohibit any
occupant or resident from being so disorderly as to destroy the peace
and quiet of the mobile home park or the peace and quiet of the other
occupants or residents of the park; shall prohibit any occupant or
resident from willfully destroying, damaging or injuring the mobile
home park or any property of any other occupant or resident of the
park; shall prohibit any occupant or resident from committing any
illegal or immoral acts; and shall prohibit any occupant or resident from
constantly violating the rules and regulations governing the mobile
home park.
§ 280-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-36
1:1285
§ 280-36. Laundry facilities.
Laundry facilities shall be provided as follows:
§ 280-37. Service buildings and recreation areas.
A. There shall be not less than one single-tray laundry and one automatic
or semiautomatic-type washing machine for the first 25 dependent
mobile home spaces or any less number thereof, and for dependent
mobile home spaces in excess of 25, not less than one additional singletray
laundry and one additional automatic or semiautomatic-type
washing machine for every 25 additional mobile home spaces.
B. An ample number of electrical outlets shall be provided supplying
current sufficient to operate each washing machine. Drying spaces
shall be provided sufficient to accommodate the laundry of the mobile
home occupants if automatic drying equipment is not supplied.
C. The laundry facilities shall be either in a separate building or, if in the
same building where sanitation facilities are housed, shall be separate
from the rooms housing the sanitation facilities by a soundproof wall.
A. Service buildings housing sanitation and laundry facilities or any of
such facilities shall be permanent structures complying with all
applicable ordinances and statutes regulating buildings, electrical
installations and plumbing and sanitation systems.
B. The service buildings shall be well lighted at all times of the day and
night, shall be well ventilated with screened openings, shall be
constructed of such moistureproof material, including painted
woodwork, as shall permit repeated cleaning and washing, and shall be
maintained at a temperature of at least 68° F. during the period from
October 1 to May 1. The floors of the service buildings shall be of waterimpervious
material.
C. Service buildings housing sanitation facilities shall be located not closer
than 15 feet nor farther than 100 feet from any mobile home space upon
which a dependent home is harbored.
D. All service buildings and the grounds of. the park shall be maintained in
a clean, sightly condition and kept free of any condition that will
menace the health of any occupant or the public or constitute a
nuisance.
E. Every mobile home park shall provide at least 200 square feet of
recreation area for each mobile home space within the park. Said
recreation area shall be located entirely within one section of the park
unless the authority issuing the license permit shall permit the
recreational area to be divided into two or more locations. Such
recreation area shall be located so as to be convenient to the residents
of the mobile home park. In addition to the requirements set forth
herein, adult mobile home parks shall provide an ample and suitable
§ 280-36 JACKSON CODE § 280-37
1:1286
§ 280-38. Sewage and refuse disposal.
structure for the housing of recreational facilities. Any such
recreational clubhouses and other common facilities shall be made
available by the owner or operator of the park for any lawful purpose,
including, but not limited to, entertainment, recreational programs or
meetings of any groups or organizations made up solely of residents
of the park or guests of residents so engaged for representation or
information purposes. [Amended 12-28-1981 by Ord. No. 58-81]
A. Mobile home parks accommodating 60 mobile homes or fewer shall be
permitted to maintain individual sewage disposal systems consisting of
suitable septic tanks and laterals. No septic tank shall be connected by
laterals to more than seven mobile homes. Any mobile home park
accommodating more than 60 mobile homes shall be required to
discharge waste from stoves, bathtubs, flush toilets, urinals, lavatories,
slop sinks and laundries into a public sewer system or into a private
sewer and disposal plant. Notwithstanding the provisions of this
section, individual sewage disposal systems or other means of private
sewage disposal shall not be permitted where a public sanitary sewer is
available within 100 feet of the site of the mobile home park.
B. Where sewer lines are not to be connected to a public sewer system, an
individual sewage disposal system shall be constructed and installed in
accordance with Standards for the Construction of Sewerage Facilities
for Realty Improvements, promulgated by the State of New Jersey, and
shall be approved by the State Department of Health and the Jackson
Township Board of Health prior to use.
C. Each mobile home space shall be provided with a building sewer
installed in accordance with the requirements of the New Jersey State
Sanitary Code. The building sewer shall be at least four inches in
diameter, constructed of cast-iron extra strength.
D. The sewer inlet shall consist of a four-inch riser extending, as a
minimum, four inches above the surface of the ground in order that a
hose connection from the mobile home can be made. The riser shall be
embedded firmly in the ground and be protected against heaving and
shifting.
E. The sewer riser shall be equipped with a forty-five-degree ell or quarter
bend, fitted with a standard ferrule and close nipple and provided with
a screw cap. The screw cap shall be fastened by a durable chain to
prevent its removal while the sewer riser is in use. When the sewer
riser is not in use, it shall be capped.
F. The sewer connection (hose) shall be provided with suitable fittings to
permit a watertight junction. The connections between the mobile
home drain and the sewer shall be watertight, self-draining and shall be
effected by a noncollapsible, corrosion- and weather-resistant flexible
hose of suitable diameter to fit the drain and the building sewer.
§ 280-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-38
1:1287
§ 280-39. Garbage receptacles.
Metal garbage cans with tight-fitting covers shall be provided in quantities
adequate to permit disposal of all garbage and rubbish. Garbage cans shall
be located not further than 200 feet from any mobile home space. The cans
shall be kept in a sanitary condition at all times. Garbage and rubbish shall
be collected and disposed of as frequently as may be necessary to ensure
that the garbage cans shall not overflow.
§ 280-40. Occupancy limitations.
The occupancy of any mobile home in any adult mobile home park shall
be governed by the occupancy limits set forth in the Housing Code, and in
addition shall be limited to persons who are 42 years of age or over with the
following exceptions:
G. The mobile home park owner shall maintain in good repair several
spare connecting hoses to be used when privately owned hoses do not
meet the requirements of this article.
H. Sewer lines and appurtenances shall be laid in accordance with the
following requirements:
(1) Minimum size: six inches (except building sewer).
(2) Grade.
Pipe Size
(inches)
Minimum Grade
(percent)
6 0.65%
8 0.40%
10 0.29%
12 0.22%
(3) Construction. All sewer line joints, sewer connections and
manholes shall be watertight.
(4) Manholes: at the upper end of each sewer line; at intersections; at
changes in grade or alignment; at intervals of not more than 500
feet when the pipe is eight inches in diameter or greater. When the
pipe is less than eight inches in diameter, manholes or cleanouts
shall be at intervals of not more than 200 feet.
(5) Installation: preferably laid in trenches separated horizontally from
any potable water line by at least five feet of undisturbed or wellcompacted
earth. If laid in a common trench with the potable
waterline, the potable waterline shall be placed on firm foundation
at the side of the trench at least 12 inches above the sewer.
§ 280-38 JACKSON CODE § 280-40
1:1288
§ 280-41. Certificates of occupancy; concrete piers; inspection.
A. A husband or wife under age 42 who is residing with his or her spouse
who is of the age of 42 years or over.
B. Not more than two additional adults 20 years of age or over who are
children or bona fide members of the immediate family of the principal
occupant or occupants.
C. Such additional persons as may be authorized by Chapter 280,
§ 280-15, of the Jackson Code.
D. The age requirements set forth hereinabove are applicable not only to
occupants and residents of the park but are applicable in all respects to
all resident park managers, maintenance staff and other employees of
the park. In the event that any such resident of the park presently
residing within and occupying a mobile home located within does not
meet the age requirements set forth hereinabove, such manager,
officer, staff member or employee shall be permitted to remain in such
occupancy within the park for a period not to exceed five years from the
date of adoption of this provision. [Added 5-24-1982 by Ord. No.
19-82]
A. Certificates of occupancy.
(1) No mobile home located in a mobile home park, whether such
mobile home is sold or rented, shall be occupied by the vendee,
tenant or lessee, as the case may be, until a certificate of occupancy
has been secured from the Inspection Department of the Township
of Jackson certifying that said mobile home or trailer complies with
all applicable state laws and regulations, as well as with all
applicable provisions of the Jackson Code.
(2) Application shall be made to the Construction Code Official, on a
form to be provided, for a certificate of occupancy. Inspections shall
be made by the Construction Code Official or his designee. A fee of
$5 shall accompany such application. A certificate of occupancy
shall be issued if the mobile home or trailer complies with all
applicable laws, regulations and ordinances; otherwise, the owner
shall be notified in writing of any violations found. The inspections
shall be made and either a certificate of occupancy or a notice of
violation shall be issued within seven days from the date of
application.
(3) At the time of application for the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy under this section, there shall be submitted with the
application a statement signed and sworn to by both the mobile
home park owner and by any prospective tenants of the mobile
home, which shall be the subject of the issuance of the certificate of
occupancy, certifying that the prospective tenants and occupants of
said mobile home are in compliance with the age requirements set
§ 280-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-41
1:1289
§ 280-42. Register of occupants; enforcement of age regulations.
forth in § 280-40 of this article. In the event that such certification
does not accompany the application, the application for a
certificate of occupancy shall be deemed incomplete, and the
application for such certificate of occupancy shall be denied.
B. Concrete pier required. No mobile home shall be installed or occupied
in any mobile home park unless it is located upon and supported by a
concrete pier or platform of sufficient size and width to accommodate
the mobile home to be installed.
C. Inspection. No mobile home shall be occupied in any mobile home park
until an inspection is made by the Building Inspector or Code
Enforcement Officer of the Township certifying that said mobile home is
properly located upon and supported by a concrete pier or platform of
sufficient size and width as indicated above and that said mobile home
is otherwise acceptable for occupation in accordance with any
applicable laws, ordinances or regulations. Mobile homes shall not be
occupied in any mobile home park until said concrete pad for the mobile
units shall be provided with devices for anchoring the unit to prevent
overturning or uplift. A mobile home park owner shall anchor or cause
to be anchored all mobile units located on a concrete pier or platform.
All anchorage and tie-downs shall comply with the standards set forth
in the BOCA National Building Code, as amended and supplemented.
[Amended 9-26-1994 by Ord. No. 26-94]
A. It shall be the duty of each licensee to keep a current register
containing a record of all mobile home owners and occupants located
within the park. The register shall contain the following information:
(1) The name and address of each mobile home occupant.
(2) The name and address of the owner of each mobile home.
(3) The make, model, year and license number of each mobile home
and motor vehicle.
(4) The state, territory or jurisdiction issuing said licenses.
(5) The date of arrival and departure of each mobile home.
(6) Whether or not each mobile home is a dependent or an
independent mobile home.
(7) The ages of each occupant of every mobile home.
B. The licensee shall keep the register available at the park for inspection
at all times by law enforcement officers, public health officials, the
Township Clerk, the Code Enforcer and other officials whose duties
necessitate acquisition of the information contained in the register.
§ 280-41 JACKSON CODE § 280-42
1:1290
§ 280-43. Fire protection.
Every park shall be equipped at all times with fire-extinguishing equipment
in good working order, of such type, size and number and so located
within the park as to satisfy applicable reasonable regulations of the Fire
Department. No open fires shall be permitted at any place which may
endanger life or property. No fires shall be left unattended at any time.
§ 280-44. Roadways.
§ 280-45. Supervision.
The licensee or a duly authorized attendant or caretaker shall be in charge
at all times to keep the park, its facilities and equipment in a clean, orderly
and sanitary condition. The attendant or caretaker shall be answerable,
with the licensee, for the violation of any provision of this article to which
the license is subject.
§ 280-46. Compliance with other provisions.
In addition to the specifications and requirements set forth in this article,
every licensee shall comply with all applicable provisions and standards
of the New Jersey State Sanitary Code and all state, county and Jackson
Township statutes, codes, ordinances, rules and regulations.
C. It shall be the duty and obligation of each licensee to enforce the age
requirements set forth in § 280-40 of this article. In the event that an
occupant or occupants of a mobile home located in a mobile home park
licensed under this article are in violation of the age restrictions set
forth in § 280-40, it shall be the duty and obligation of the licensee to
take such action as may be necessary to abate the violation, including
but not limited to dispossess actions, eviction proceedings or actions for
possession of land.
A. Roads shall be designed so as to permit convenient and safe movement
of traffic and unobstructed access to a public street or highway. All
roads shall be provided with a smooth, hard, dense and dust-free
surface which shall be durable and well-drained under normal use and
weather conditions. Road surfaces shall be maintained free of holes and
free of snow and ice, and any such accumulation of snow or ice shall be
removed within a minimum of 24 hours after termination of the
precipitation which caused the snow or ice to accumulate.
B. No street, roadway or driveway located in a mobile home park shall
have a name which will duplicate or so nearly duplicate as to be
confused with the names of any other existing streets, roadways or
driveways, public or private, located within the Township of Jackson. All
such street names shall be subject to approval of the Township
Committee.
§ 280-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-47
1:1291
§ 280-47. Posting of license.
The license certificate shall be conspicuously posted in the office of or on
the premises of the park at all times.
§ 280-48. Advertising.
No owner, operator or manager of a mobile home park licensed under this
article or to which this article applies shall publicly advertise such a mobile
home park by any designation other than as an adult mobile home park.
§ 280-49. Revocation of license.
The Township Clerk may revoke any license to maintain and operate a park
when the licensee has been found guilty by a court of competent jurisdiction
of violating any provision of this article. After such conviction, the license
may be reissued if the circumstances leading to conviction have been
remedied and the park is being maintained and operated in full compliance
with law.
§ 280-50. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating this article shall be fined not more than $500 or be
imprisoned for a term not to exceed 90 days, or both, for each offense.
§ 280-51. Construal of provisions.
This article, being necessary for the welfare of the Township and its
inhabitants, shall be liberally construed to effectuate the purposes thereof.
§ 280-52. Applicability of rent control provisions.
It is hereby declared that the provisions of Chapter 334, Rent Control for
Apartments and Mobile Home Parks, of the Jackson Code shall apply to any
mobile home park authorized by this article.
§ 280-53. Emergency telephone. [Added 12-27-1989 by Ord. No.
49-89]
All mobile home parks licensed under this article shall post in a
conspicuous, public place an emergency phone number which will provide
twenty-four-hour access to the landlord or his agent or representative.
Said number shall also be placed on file with the Jackson Township Police
Department and in the Township Clerk's office.
§ 280-47 JACKSON CODE § 280-53
1:1292
Chapter 285
MOBILE HOMES AND TRAILERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use and development regulations — See
Ch. 244.
Mobile home dealerships — See Ch. 275.
Mobile home parks — See Ch. 280.
Rent control for mobile home parks — See Ch.
334.
Trailers and campsites — See Ch. 400.
§ 285-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and control trailers and mobile
homes occupied as dwellings, pursuant to the authorization contained in
N.J.S.A. 40:52-1, and to remedy and clarify the existing situation in the
Township of Jackson for the purpose of removing and phasing out illegal
trailers and establishing reasonable regulations and registration
requirements for legal trailers and mobile homes.
§ 285-2. Location of mobile homes restricted.
It shall be unlawful within the limits of the Township of Jackson for any
person to park or locate any trailer or mobile home on any street, alley
or highway or other public place or on any tract of land, occupied or
unoccupied, owned by any person, within the Township of Jackson, in the
County of Ocean, except as provided herein and as provided in Chapter 280,
Mobile Home Parks, and Chapter 400, Trailers and Campsites, of the Code
of the Township of Jackson.
§ 285-3. Criteria for removal of trailers.
Any mobile home or trailer located on any street, alley or highway or other
public place or on any tract of land owned by any person, for the purpose of
occupancy as a dwelling within the Township of Jackson, shall be permitted
to remain or shall be removed in accordance with the following:
A. Any mobile home or trailer which has been located on such public place
or tract of land on or before September 16, 1959, and has been
continuously occupied since that date shall be permitted to remain in
that location, provided the owner of said mobile home or trailer
complies in full with the requirements of this chapter and specifically,
with the requirements of §§ 285-5 and 285-6 hereof, and provided
further that such mobile home or trailer is not being used for rental
purposes.
B. Any mobile home or trailer which has been placed on such public place
or tract of land and has been occupied subsequent to September 16,
§ 280-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-3
1:1293
§ 285-4. Use of trailers or mobile homes in hardship situations.
[Added 5-9-1978 by Ord. No. 25-78]
By duly adopted resolution, the Township Committee may permit any owner
of real property to locate a mobile home or trailer on such property for
a period not to exceed six months, in the discretion of the Township
Committee, where such owner establishes to the satisfaction of the
Township Committee that there exists a hardship situation, as defined
herein. As used herein, the term "hardship situation" is defined as a
situation where the aforesaid owner of such real property has had his
dwelling and residence located on such property substantially destroyed by
flood, fire or other similar destructive occurrence and where such owner
has available no other place of dwelling or residence. In all such situations,
the standards, registration requirements and licensing fees set forth in
§§ 285-5, 285-6 and 285-7 of the Jackson Code shall apply.
1959, but prior to January 1, 1973, shall be permitted to remain in
that location for a period not to exceed 10 years from the date hereof,
provided the owner of said mobile home or trailer complies in full with
the requirements of this chapter and, in particular, complies with the
provisions of §§ 285-5 and 285-6 hereof, and provided further that such
mobile home or trailer is not being used for rental purposes; provided,
however, that the original owner or owners, listed on the application
form submitted pursuant to § 285-6, of any mobile home or trailer
which falls within the classification of this section shall be permitted to
continue to reside in and use such mobile home or trailer as a dwelling
on an indefinite basis after the expiration of the aforesaid ten-year
period. [Amended 9-14-1976 by Ord. No. 46-76]
C. Any mobile home or trailer which has been placed on a location on any
street, alley or highway or other public place or on any tract of land
owned by any person, for the purpose of occupancy as a dwelling within
the Township of Jackson, on or after January 1, 1973, shall be required
to be removed within six months of the effective date hereof; and it shall
be unlawful within the limits of the Township of Jackson for such a
mobile home or trailer to be parked or located on any street, alley or
highway or other public place or on any tract of land owned by any
person for such occupancy within the Township of Jackson after the
termination of said six-month period.
D. Any mobile home or trailer which has been placed on such public place
or tract of land and has been used for business purposes subsequent to
September 16, 1959, but prior to January 1, 1973, shall be permitted to
remain on that location and to be used in connection with such business
for a period not to exceed 10 years from the date hereof, provided that
the owner of said mobile home or trailer complies in full with any
applicable requirements of this chapter, and provided further that the
owner of such mobile home or trailer files the registration information
required by § 285-6 within 90 days of the date of adoption of this
provision. [Added 4-12-1977 by Ord. No. 13-77]
§ 285-3 JACKSON CODE § 285-5
1:1294
§ 285-5. Standards and requirements.
Any mobile home or trailer permitted or allowed to continue in its present
location for occupancy as a dwelling, under the provisions of § 285-3, shall
comply in all respects with the following requirements:
§ 285-6. Registration; compliance required.
A. Said mobile home or trailer shall be located on a well-drained, properly
graded site, free from stagnant pools of water.
B. Any such mobile home or trailer shall be connected to an approved
water supply system to supply running water for all sanitary and
washing fixtures, and drinking and domestic purposes, as required by
all applicable laws, ordinances and regulations.
C. Any such mobile home or trailer shall be connected to an approved
septic system or sanitary sewer system, in accordance with all
applicable laws, ordinances and regulations.
D. Electrical service to the mobile home or trailer shall be of adequate
capacity to serve the maximum connected load. Main service, fusing
and distribution shall comply with the applicable requirements of the
Electrical Code and shall be installed and maintained in accordance
with applicable laws, ordinances and regulations.
E. Mobile home units shall have a minimum floor area, inclusive of
kitchen, bath and closet area, of 140 square feet when occupied by not
more than two persons, and not less than 240 square feet when
occupied by three persons, with an additional 70 square feet per person
when occupied by more than three persons. The minimum height of
habitable spaces in mobile homes and trailers shall not be less than
seven feet. [Amended 9-14-1976 by Ord. No. 46-76]
F. Any mobile home or trailer located in the Township of Jackson must be
maintained in a state of repair, free of leakage and free of access by
rodent or insect infestation or the like.
A. All owners or occupants of mobile homes or trailers in the Township of
Jackson who are permitted to locate such mobile homes or trailers
within the Township for occupancy as a dwelling, under the provisions
of this chapter, shall be required to register their mobile homes or
trailers as individual trailer campsites with the Township of Jackson by
filing with the Township Clerk an application on a form to be furnished
to the applicant. Said application must be submitted within six months
of the effective date of this chapter. No application will be accepted
after the aforesaid six-month time period. Said application shall contain
the information required herein and any other pertinent information
required by said registration application for the purpose of providing a
permanent record of those trailer and mobile homes which are in
existence in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Said
§ 285-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-6
1:1295
application form shall be submitted and signed by the applicant and
shall require the following information:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The location, by reference to the Official Tax Map of the Township
of Jackson, of the mobile home or trailer.
(3) The date that the mobile home or trailer was first located on the
premises and occupied as a dwelling.
(4) The manufacturer, type, size and year of construction of the mobile
home or trailer.
(5) The serial number, identification number or registration number, or
the like, of the mobile home or trailer.
(6) The approximate outer dimensions of the trailer or mobile home
and the approximate dimensions of each interior room.
(7) The name and age of each occupant of the mobile home or trailer.
(8) Affirmation that the mobile home or trailer is connected to an
approved water supply and septic system, has approved electrical
service and is located on and affixed to a permanent foundation.
(9) Attached to the application shall be a map or sketch, which may be
hand-drawn, indicating the location and dimensions of the
premises upon which the mobile home or trailer is located, the
approximate location of the mobile home or trailer thereon and the
approximate location of any other permanent improvements
thereon.
B. After verification of the information contained in the registration
application by the appropriate municipal officials, the Township Clerk
shall issue a registration tag which the applicant shall immediately
prominently display in a window or door of the registered mobile home
or trailer. Said registration tags shall differentiate between those
trailers and mobile homes permitted under § 285-3A, and those which
are permitted for a period of five years under § 285-3B hereof.
C. The Township Clerk shall not issue a registration tag for any mobile
home or trailer which is not in full compliance in all respects with all
requirements of this chapter. Such registration tags shall not be
transferable to any replacement trailer or mobile home in any case.
D. Mobile homes and trailers located in the Township of Jackson that are
permitted to remain at their present location shall comply with all
requirements of this chapter within six months of the effective date of
this chapter. Failure to submit a proper application or to so comply with
all requirements herein within said six-month period shall cause such
trailer or mobile home to be illegally and unlawfully located within this
§ 285-6 JACKSON CODE § 285-6
1:1296
§ 285-7. License fee. [Amended 9-14-1976 by Ord. No. 46-76;
7-22-1991 by Ord. No. 29-91]
§ 285-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine up to but not exceeding $500 or by
imprisonment for a term up to but not exceeding 90 days, or both, in
the discretion of the Municipal Judge. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed for each day during or on which a violation occurs.
Chapter 291
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 80.
Animals — See Ch. 98.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 474.
§ 291-1. Declaration of findings and policy.
municipality and in violation of this chapter and shall be required to be
removed forthwith.
A. An individual trailer campsite license fee of $3 per week per trailer or
mobile home shall be paid to the Township of Jackson by the owner or
occupant thereof, which sum shall be paid monthly on or before the last
calendar day of each month. In addition, all real estate taxes shall be
paid up to date on the premises upon which the mobile home or trailer
is located. This individual trailer campsite license fee shall commence
on October 1, 1976. Where an individual mobile home or trailer is
located on premises qualified for a license under this chapter and the
owner pays the aforesaid license fee, said mobile home or trailer is
hereby declared to be personal property and shall not be subject to
assessment as real property.
B. This fee does not apply to the owner or occupant of a mobile home or
trailer located within the confines of a mobile home park as defined or
licensed under Chapter 280, Mobile Home Parks, of the Code of the
Township of Jackson.
A. Whereas excessive sound is a serious hazard to the public health,
welfare, safety, and the quality of life; and whereas a substantial body of
science and technology exists by which excessive sound may be
substantially abated; and whereas the people have a right to, and
should be ensured of, an environment free from excessive sound, now
therefore it is the policy of the Township of Jackson to prevent excessive
§ 285-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 291-1
1:1297
§ 291-2. Definitions.
The following words and terms, when used in this chapter, shall have the
following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. Terms
not defined in this chapter have the same meaning as those defined in
N.J.A.C. 7:29.
CONSTRUCTION — Any site preparation, assembly, erection, repair,
alteration or similar action of buildings or structures.
dBC — The sound level as measured using the "C" weighting network with
a sound level meter meeting the standards set forth in ANSI S1.4-1983 or
its successors. The unit of reporting is dBC. The "C" weighting network is
more sensitive to low frequencies than is the "A" weighting network.
DEMOLITION — Any dismantling, destruction or removal of buildings,
structures, or roadways.
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
EMERGENCY WORK — Any work or action necessary at the site of an
emergency to restore or deliver essential services including, but not limited
to, repairing water, gas, electricity, telephone, sewer facilities, or public
transportation facilities, removing fallen trees on public rights-of-way,
dredging navigational waterways, or abating life-threatening conditions or
a state of emergency declared by a governing agency.
IMPULSIVE SOUND — Either a single pressure peak or a single burst
(multiple pressure peaks) that has a duration of less than one second.
MINOR VIOLATION — A violation that is not the result of the purposeful,
reckless or criminally negligent conduct of the alleged violator; and/or the
activity or condition constituting the violation has not been the subject of
an enforcement action by any authorized local, county or state enforcement
agency against the violator within the immediately preceding 12 months for
the same or substantially similar violation.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any vehicle that is propelled other than by human or
animal power on land.
MUFFLER — A properly functioning sound dissipative device or system for
abating the sound on engines or equipment where such device is part of the
normal configuration of the equipment.
MULTI-DWELLING UNIT BUILDING — Any building comprising two or
more dwelling units, including, but not limited to, apartments,
condominiums, co-ops, multiple-family houses, townhouses, and attached
residences.
sound that may jeopardize the health, welfare, or safety of the citizens
or degrade the quality of life.
B. This chapter shall apply to the control of sound originating from
sources within the Township of Jackson.
§ 291-1 JACKSON CODE § 291-2
1:1298
MULTI-USE PROPERTY — Any distinct parcel of land that is used for more
than one category of activity. Examples include, but are not limited to:
NOISE CONTROL INVESTIGATOR (NCI) — An employee of a municipality,
county or regional health commission that has a Department-approved
model noise control ordinance and the employee has not received noise
enforcement training as specified by the Department in N.J.A.C. 7:29.
However, they are knowledgeable about their model noise ordinance and
enforcement procedures. A Noise Control Investigator may only enforce
sections of the chapter that do not require the use of a sound level meter.
The employee must be acting within his or her designated jurisdiction and
must be authorized to issue a summons.
NOISE CONTROL OFFICER (NCO) — An employee of a local, county or
regional health agency which is certified pursuant to the County
Environmental Health Act (N.J.S.A. 26:3A2-21 et seq.) to perform noise
enforcement activities or an employee of a municipality with a Departmentapproved
model noise control ordinance. All NCOs must receive noise
enforcement training as specified by the Department in N.J.A.C. 7:29 and
is currently certified in noise enforcement. The employee must be acting
within his or her designated jurisdiction and must be authorized to issue a
summons.
PLAINLY AUDIBLE — Any sound that can be detected by a NCO or an
NCI using his or her unaided hearing faculties of normal acuity. As an
example, if the sound source under investigation is a portable or vehicular
sound amplification or reproduction device, the detection of the rhythmic
bass component of the music is sufficient to verify plainly audible sound.
The NCO or NCI need not determine the title, specific words, or the artist
performing the song.
PRIVATE RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway,
sidewalk, alley or easement that is owned, leased, or controlled by a
nongovernmental entity.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway,
sidewalk, alley or easement that is owned, leased, or controlled by a
governmental entity.
PUBLIC SPACE — Any real property or structures thereon that are owned,
leased, or controlled by a governmental entity.
A commercial, residential, industrial or public service property having
boilers, incinerators, elevators, automatic garage doors, air
conditioners, laundry rooms, utility provisions, or health and
recreational facilities, or other similar devices or areas, either in the
interior or on the exterior of the building, which may be a source of
elevated sound levels at another category on the same distinct parcel
of land; or
A.
A building, which is both commercial (usually on the ground floor) and
residential property, located above, below or otherwise adjacent to.
B.
§ 291-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 291-2
1:1299
REAL PROPERTY LINE — Either (a) the vertical boundary that separates
one parcel of property (i.e., lot and block) from another residential or
commercial property; (b) the vertical and horizontal boundaries of a
dwelling unit that is part of a multi-dwelling unit building; or (c) on a
multi-use property as defined herein, the vertical or horizontal boundaries
between the two portions of the property on which different categories of
activity are being performed (e.g., if the multi-use property is a building
which is residential upstairs and commercial downstairs, then the real
property line would be the interface between the residential area and the
commercial area, or if there is an outdoor sound source such as an HVAC
unit on the same parcel of property, the boundary line is the exterior wall
of the receiving unit). Note: This definition shall not apply to a commercial
source and a commercial receptor which are both located on the same
parcel of property (e.g., a strip mall).
SOUND PRODUCTION DEVICE — Any device whose primary function is the
production of sound, including, but not limited to, any musical instrument,
loudspeaker, radio, television, digital or analog music player, public address
system or sound-amplifying equipment.
SOUND REDUCTION DEVICE — Any device, such as a muffler, baffle,
shroud, jacket, enclosure, isolator, or dampener provided by the
manufacturer with the equipment, or that is otherwise required, that
mitigates the sound emissions of the equipment.
WEEKDAY — Any day that is not a federal holiday, and beginning on Monday
at 7:00 a.m. and ending on the following Friday at 6:00 p.m.
WEEKENDS — Beginning on Friday at 6:00 p.m. and ending on the
following Monday at 7:00 a.m.
§ 291-3. Applicability.
A. This chapter model noise ordinance applies to sound from the following
property categories:
(1) Industrial facilities;
(2) Commercial facilities;
(3) Public service facilities;
(4) Community service facilities;
(5) Residential properties;
(6) Multi-use properties;
(7) Public and private right-of-ways;
(8) Public spaces; and
(9) Multi-dwelling unit buildings.
§ 291-2 JACKSON CODE § 291-3
1:1300
§ 291-4. Exemptions.
§ 291-5. Enforcement officers.
B. This chapter applies to sound received at the following property
categories:
(1) Commercial facilities;
(2) Public service facilities;
(3) Community service facilities (i.e., non-profits and/or religious
facilities);
(4) Residential properties;
(5) Multi-use properties;
(6) Multi-dwelling unit buildings.
C. Sound from stationary emergency signaling devices shall be regulated
in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:29-1.4, except that the testing of the
electromechanical functioning of a stationary emergency signaling
device shall not meet or exceed 10 seconds.
A. Except as provided in §§ 291-1 and 291-2 above, the provisions of this
chapter shall not apply to the exceptions listed at N.J.A.C. 7:29-1.5.
B. Sound production devices required or sanctioned under the Americans
with Disabilities Act (ADA), FEMA or other government agencies to the
extent that they comply with the noise requirement of the enabling
legislation or regulation. Devices which are exempted under N.J.A.C.
7:29-1.5 shall continue to be exempted.
C. Construction and demolition activities are exempt from the sound level
limits set forth in Tables I and II and III except as provided for in § 291-9
below.
A. Noise Control Officers shall have the authority within their designated
jurisdiction to investigate suspected violations of any section of this
chapter and pursue enforcement activities.
B. Noise Control Investigators shall have the authority within their
designated jurisdiction to investigate suspected violations of any
section of this chapter that do not require the use of a sound level meter
(i.e., plainly audible, times of day and/or distance determinations) and
pursue enforcement activities.
C. Noise Control Officers and Investigators may cooperate with NCOs and
NCIs of an adjacent municipality in enforcing one another's municipal
noise ordinances.
D. Golf course exemption. Any private or public golf course operating
within the Township shall be permitted to begin operations at 6:00 a.m.
§ 291-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 291-5
1:1301
§ 291-6. Measurement protocols.
§ 291-7. Maximum permissible sound levels.
any weekday or weekend without violating the provisions of this
chapter. [Added 2-26-2019 by Ord. No. 04-19]
A. Sound measurements made by a Noise Control Officer shall conform to
the procedures set forth at N.J.A.C. 7:29-2, except that interior sound
level measurements shall also conform with the procedures set forth in
§ 291-6B of this chapter and with the definition of "real property line" as
contained herein.
B. When conducting indoor sound level measurements across a real
property line, the measurements shall be taken at least three feet from
any wall, floor or ceiling and all exterior doors and windows may, at the
discretion of the investigator, be closed. The neighborhood residual
sound level shall be measured in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:29-2.9(b)2.
When measuring total sound level, the configuration of the windows
and doors shall be the same and all sound sources within the dwelling
unit must be shut off (e.g., television, stereo). Measurements shall not
be taken in areas which receive only casual use such as hallways,
closets and bathrooms.
A. No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit the operation of any
source of sound on any property listed in § 291-3A above in such a
manner as to create a sound level that equals or exceeds the sound level
limits set forth in Tables I, II or III when measured at or within the real
property line of any of the receiving properties listed in Tables I, II or III
except as specified in § 291-6B.
B. Impulsive sound. Between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., impulsive sound
shall not equal or exceed 80 decibels. Between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m., impulsive sound which occurs less than four times in any hour
shall not equal or exceed 80 decibels. Impulsive sound which repeats
four or more times in any hour shall be measured as continuous sound
and shall meet the requirements as shown in Tables I and II.
§ 291-5 JACKSON CODE § 291-7
1:1302
Table I
Maximum Permissible A-Weighted Sound Levels
When Measured Outdoors
Receiving
property
category
Residential property, or
residential portion of a multi-use
property
Commercial
facility, public
service facility,
nonresidential
portion of a
multi-use
property, or
community
Time 7:00 a.m.-10:00
p.m.
10:00 p.m-7:00
a.m.
24 hours
Maximum Aweighted
sound
level standard,
dB
65 50 65
Table II
Maximum Permissible A-Weighted Sound Levels
When Measured Indoors
Receiving
property
category
Residential property, or residential
portion of a multi-use property
Commercial
facility or nonresidential
portion of a
multi-use
property
Time 7:00 a.m.-10:00
p.m.
10:00 p.m.-7:00
a.m.
24 hours
Maximum Aweighted
sound
level standard,
dB
55 40 55
NOTE: Table II shall only apply when the source and the receptor are
separated by a real property line and they also share a common or
abutting wall, floor or ceiling, or are on the same parcel of property.
§ 291-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 291-7
1:1303
§ 291-8. Sound production devices.
No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit the operation of any sound
production device in such a manner that the sound crosses a property line
and raises the total sound levels above the neighborhood residual sound
level by more than the permissible sound level limits set forth in Table
IV when measured within the residence of a complainant according to
Table III
Maximum Permissible Octave Band
Sound Pressure Levels In Decibels
Residential property,
or residential
portion of a multiuse
property
Residential property,
or residential portion
of a multi-use
property
Commercial
facility,
public
service,
facility,
nonresidential
portion of a
multi-use
property, or
community
service
facility
Commercial
facility or
nonresidential
portion of a
multi-use
property
Receiving
property
category Outdoors Indoors Outdoors Indoors
Octave band
center
frequency, Hz.
Octave band sound
pressure level, dB
Octave band sound
pressure level, dB
Octave
band sound
pressure
level, dB
Octave band
sound
pressure
level, dB
Time 7:00
a.m.-10:00
p.m.
10:00
p.m.-7:00
a.m.
7:00
a.m.-10:00
p.m.
10:00
p.m.-7:00
a.m.
24 hours 24 hours
31.5 96 86 86 76 96 86
63 82 71 72 61 82 72
125 74 61 64 51 74 64
250 67 53 57 43 67 57
500 63 48 53 38 63 53
1,000 60 45 50 35 60 50
2,000 57 42 47 32 57 47
4,000 55 40 45 30 55 45
8,000 53 38 43 28 53 43
NOTE: When octave measurements are made, the sound from the source must be constant in
level and character. If octave band sound pressure level variations exceed plus or minus 2 dB in
the bands containing the principal source frequencies, discontinue the measurement.
§ 291-7 JACKSON CODE § 291-8
1:1304
the measurement protocol in § 291-6B of this chapter. These sound level
measurements shall be conducted with the sound level meter set for "C"
weighting, "fast" response.
Table IV
Maximum Permissible Increase in Total Sound Levels
Within a Residential Property
Weeknights All other times
10:00 p.m. — 7:00 a.m.
Weekend nights
11:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.
3 dB(C) 6 dB(C)
§ 291-9. Restricted uses and activities.
The following standards shall apply to the activities or sources of sound set
forth below:
A. Excluding emergency work, power tools, home maintenance tools,
landscaping and/or yard maintenance equipment used by a residential
property owner or tenant shall not be operated between the hours of
8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., unless such activities can meet the applicable
limits set forth in Tables I, II or III. At all other times the limits set forth
in Tables I, II or III do not apply. All motorized equipment used in these
activities shall be operated with a muffler and/or sound reduction
device.
B. Excluding emergency work, power tools, landscaping and/or yard
maintenance equipment used by nonresidential operators (e.g.,
commercial operators, public employees) shall not be operated on a
residential, commercial, industrial or public (e.g., golf course, parks,
athletic fields) property between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
on weekdays, or between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on
weekends or federal holidays, unless such activities can meet the limits
set forth in Tables I, II or III. At all other times the limits set forth in
Tables I, II or III do not apply. All motorized equipment used in these
activities shall be operated with a muffler and/or sound reduction
device.
C. All construction and demolition activity, excluding emergency work,
shall not be performed between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on
weekdays, or between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on
weekends and federal holidays, unless such activities can meet the
limits set forth in Tables I, II or III. At all other times the limits set forth
in Tables I, II or III do not apply. All motorized equipment used in
construction and demolition activity shall be operated with a muffler
and/or sound reduction device.
§ 291-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 291-9
1:1305
§ 291-10. Motor vehicles.
Violations of each subsection of this section shall be considered purposeful
and therefore non-minor violations.
D. Motorized snow removal equipment shall be operated with a muffler
and/or a sound reduction device when being used for snow removal. At
all other times the limits set forth in Tables I, II or III do not apply.
E. All interior and exterior burglar alarms of a building or motor vehicle
must be activated in such a manner that the burglar alarm terminates
its operation within five minutes for continuous airborne sound and 15
minutes for intermittent sound after it has been activated. At all other
times the limits set forth in Tables I, II or III do not apply.
F. Self-contained, portable, nonvehicular music or sound production
devices shall not be operated on a public space or public right-of-way in
such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet in any
direction from the operator between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00
p.m. Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., sound, operated on
a public space or public right-of-way, from such equipment shall not be
plainly audible at a distance of 25 feet in any direction from the
operator.
G. It shall be unlawful for any property owner or tenant to allow any
domesticated or caged animal to create a sound across a real property
line which unreasonably disturbs or interferes with the peace, comfort,
and repose of any resident, or to refuse or intentionally fail to cease the
unreasonable noise when ordered to do so by a Noise Control Officer or
Noise Control Investigator.
(1) Prima facie evidence of a violation of this section shall include but
not be limited to:
(a) Vocalizing (howling, yelping, barking, squawking, etc.) for five
minutes without interruption, defined as an average of four or
more vocalizations per minute in that period; or
(b) Vocalizing for 20 minutes intermittently, defined as an average
of two vocalizations or more per minute in that period.
(2) It is an affirmative defense under this subsection that the dog or
other animal was intentionally provoked to bark or make any other
noise.
A. No person shall remove or render inoperative, or cause to be removed
or rendered inoperative or less effective than originally equipped, other
than for the purposes of maintenance, repair, or replacement, of any
device or element of design incorporated in any motor vehicle for the
purpose of noise control. No person shall operate a motor vehicle or
motorcycle which has been so modified. A vehicle not meeting these
requirements shall be deemed in violation of this provision if it is
§ 291-9 JACKSON CODE § 291-10
1:1306
§ 291-11. Enforcement.
operated stationary or in motion in any public space or public right-ofway.
B. No motorcycle shall be operated stationary or in motion unless it has a
muffler that complies with and is labeled in accordance with the
Federal Noise Regulations under 40 CFR 205.
C. Personal or commercial vehicular music amplification or reproduction
equipment shall not be operated in such a manner that it is plainly
audible at distance of 25 feet in any direction from the operator
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
D. Personal or commercial vehicular music amplification or reproduction
equipment shall not be operated in such a manner that is plainly
audible at a distance of 50 feet in any direction from the operator
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
A. Violation of any provision of this chapter shall cause notice of violation
(NOV) or a notice of penalty assessment (NOPA) document to be issued
to the violator by the Noise Control Officer or Noise Control
Investigator.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to
a civil penalty for each offense of not more than $2,000. If the violation
is of a continuing nature, each day during which it occurs shall
constitute an additional, separate, and distinct offense.
C. Upon identification of a violation of this chapter, the Noise Control
Officer or Noise Control Investigator shall issue an enforcement
document to the violator. The enforcement document shall identify the
condition or activity that constitutes the violation and the specific
provision of this chapter that has been violated. It shall also indicate
whether the violator has a period of time to correct the violation before
a penalty is sought.
D. If the violation is deemed by the Noise Control Officer or Noise Control
Investigator to be a minor violation (as defined in § 291-2 of this
chapter) a NOV shall be issued to the violator.
(1) The document shall indicate that the purpose of the NOV is
intended to serve as a notice to warn the responsible party/violator
of the violation conditions in order to provide them with an
opportunity to voluntarily investigate the matter and voluntarily
take corrective action to address the identified violation.
(2) The NOV shall identify the time period (up to 90 days), pursuant to
the Grace Period Law, N.J.S.A. 13:1D-125 et seq. where the
responsible party's/violator's voluntary action can prevent a formal
enforcement action with penalties issued by the Township of
Jackson. It shall be noted that the NOV does not constitute a formal
§ 291-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 291-11
1:1307
§ 291-12. Consistency, severability and repealer.
enforcement action, a final agency action or a final legal
determination that a violation has occurred. Therefore, the NOV
may not be appealed or contested.
E. If the violation is deemed by the Noise Control Officer or Noise Control
Investigator to be a non-minor violation the violator shall be notified
that if the violation is not immediately corrected a NOPA with a civil
penalty of no more than $2,000 will be issued. If a non-minor violation is
immediately corrected a NOV without a civil penalty shall still be issued
to document the violation. If the violation occurs again (within 12
months of the initial violation) a NOPA shall be issued regardless of
whether the violation is immediately corrected or not.
F. The violator may request from the Noise Control Officer or Noise
Control Investigator an extension of the compliance deadline in the
enforcement action. The Noise Control Officer or Noise Control
Investigator shall have the option to approve any reasonable request for
an extension (not to exceed 180 days) if the violator can demonstrate
that a good faith effort has been made to achieve compliance. If an
extension is not granted and the violation continues to exist after the
grace period ends, a NOPA shall be issued.
G. The recipient of a NOPA shall be entitled to a hearing in a municipal
court having jurisdiction to contest such action.
H. The Noise Control Officer or Noise Control Investigator may seek
injunctive relief if the responsible party does not remediate the
violation within the period of time specified in the NOPA issued.
I. Any claim for a civil penalty may be compromised and settled based on
the following factors:
(1) Mitigating or any other extenuating circumstances;
(2) The timely implementation by the violator of measures which lead
to compliance;
(3) The conduct of the violator; and
(4) The compliance history of the violator.
A. If any provision or portion of a provision of this chapter is held to be
unconstitutional, preempted by federal or state law, or otherwise
invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions
of the chapter shall not be invalidated.
B. All ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent with any
provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed as to the extent of such
inconsistencies.
§ 291-11 JACKSON CODE § 291-12
1:1308
Chapter 298
PARADES AND ASSEMBLIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public use of buildings and facilities — See
Ch. 121.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 372.
C. No provision of this chapter shall be construed to impair any common
law or statutory cause of action, or legal remedy there from, of any
person for injury or damage arising from any violation of this chapter or
from other law.
§ 291-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 291-12
1:1309

ARTICLE I
Parades
[Adopted 5-2-1967 by Ord. No. 6-67 (Ch. 81, Art. I, of the 1972
Code)]
§ 298-1. Permit required.
From and after the passage of this article, no public meetings, assemblies or
parades in or upon the public streets, highways or other public places of the
Township of Jackson shall take place or be conducted until a permit therefor
shall first have been obtained from the Chief of Police or, as provided
hereinbelow, from the Jackson Township Committee.
§ 298-2. Application for permit; issuance; appeals.
Any person, persons or organizations wanting to conduct a public meeting,
assembly or parade at any public place in the Township of Jackson shall file
an application therefor with the Township Chief of Police at least five days
in advance of the proposed meeting, assembly or parade, which application
shall designate the proposed date, time and place and, if a parade, the
proposed route along which such parade is intended to march or travel and
the names of the persons in control of the same or responsible therefor.
The Chief of Police shall forthwith issue a permit upon said application
unless a prior application for said time and place shall have been made, in
which event the Chief of Police shall indicate another time and place, and,
upon the selection of said alternative time and place by the applicant, he
shall forthwith grant a permit therefor; provided, however, that the Chief
of Police may refuse a permit for said meeting, assembly or parade when
in his judgment the conditions of vehicular and pedestrian traffic or the
effect upon stores, offices or other places of business or upon residents in
the vicinity, all considered in relation to the comfort and convenience of
the public generally, as to peace and good order, shall so warrant. Upon
denial by the Chief of Police of any application made in pursuance of
this article, the applicant may appeal from the determination of the Chief
of Police within three days thereafter to the Township Committee of the
Township of Jackson, by filing said application with the Township Clerk of
the Township of Jackson, who shall thereupon promptly convoke a meeting
of said Township Committee for the purpose of acting upon said application.
Upon such appeal, said Committee may reverse, affirm or modify in any
regard the determination of the Chief of Police by a vote of a majority of
those present at said meeting. To carry out the judgment of said Township
Committee upon an appeal, the Township Clerk is directed to issue or deny
a permit in conformity with the judgment of the Township Committee.
§ 298-3. Public liability insurance; indemnification. [Added
8-24-1981 by Ord. No. 42-81]
Before any permit is granted pursuant to § 298-2, the person, persons
or organizations applying for such permit shall provide and deposit with
the Township of Jackson a certificate of public liability insurance in an
§ 298-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 298-3
1:1311
amount to be determined by the Township Committee, but in no event
less than the amount of $100,000, single limit, naming the applicant or
applicants and the Township of Jackson as co-insured. In addition thereto,
the person, persons or organizations applying for such permit shall execute
an agreement holding the Township of Jackson harmless from any and
all claims, judgments or demands of any kind whatsoever arising out of
the issuance of the permit. The form and contents of said hold harmless
agreement shall be approved by the Township Attorney.
§ 298-4. Exemptions.
This article shall not be construed to apply to funeral services or funeral
processions.
§ 298-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this article shall,
upon conviction by a court of competent jurisdiction, be punished by a fine
not to exceed $500 or imprisonment in the Ocean County Jail for a period
not to exceed 90 days, or both.
§ 298-3 JACKSON CODE § 298-5
1:1312
ARTICLE II
Rock Festivals
[Adopted 12-5-1972 by Ord. No. 12-72 (Ch. 81, Art. II, of the 1972
Code)]
§ 298-6. Special permit required.
§ 298-7. Application for permit; issuance; bond; fee.
The Township Committee may issue a special permit upon written
application made by such person, partnership, association or corporation,
or combination thereof, who proposes to maintain, conduct, promote or
operate such mass musical or public entertainment, or participation
therein, together with the owner, lessor or licensor who proposes to rent,
lease, license or otherwise permit such mass musical or public
entertainment, or participation therein, all hereinafter designated as the
"applicant."
A. No person, group of persons, partnership, association or corporation, or
any combination thereof, shall maintain, conduct, promote or operate
on any lands or premises within the Township of Jackson, other than in
established auditoriums or other places licensed or permitted for public
occupancy as limited by law, any use thereof for the purposes of mass
musical or public entertainment of various designations, or
participation therein, including but not limited to pop festivals, rock
music festivals, rock festivals, jazz festivals, rock and roll music
festivals, or such other combinations thereof, except pursuant to a
special permit issued therefor by the Township of Jackson as
hereinafter provided.
B. No owner, lessee, licensee or other person, partnership, association or
corporation having any right to or interest in any real property within
the jurisdiction of the Township of Jackson shall license, rent, lease or
otherwise permit the use of such real property or any part thereof for
the use of mass musical or public entertainment of various
designations, or participation therein, other than in established
theaters, auditoriums or other places licensed for public occupancy as
limited by law, except pursuant to a special permit issued therefor by
the Township Committee as hereinafter provided.
A. Application procedure. [Amended 7-11-1978 by Ord. No. 39-78]
(1) The applicant shall file a verified application with the Township
Clerk of the Township of Jackson at least 60 days prior to the date
or dates upon which such event is to take place. In the event that
the applicant is a corporation, the application shall be duly signed
and verified by a proper corporate officer and shall be accompanied
by a current corporate status report issued by the New Jersey
Secretary of State.
§ 298-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 298-7
1:1313
(2) The application shall be signed by all persons actually in charge of
the event and by the property owners on whose property the
proposed event is to take place.
(3) The application shall be accompanied by a diagrammatic sketch or
plan of the proposed site, showing dimensions of the parking area,
driveways and roads as they relate to traffic flow, traffic control and
parking.
(4) The application shall state:
(a) The number of persons expected to attend such event and the
location thereof. A certification from the ticket printer
certifying the number of tickets actually printed shall
accompany the application.
(b) The date or dates thereof.
(c) The duration of the event.
(5) The application shall further state, in specific detail, what
provisions are proposed for the accommodation of the persons
attending in the following particulars:
(a) Food and drink.
(b) Shelter, if overnight stay is requested.
(c) Toilet and other sanitary facilities.
(d) Medical and hospital care, including the name of a physician to
be present at the site at all times and the names of first aid and
ambulance services to be available.
(e) Parking of cars, indicating parking areas and means of ingress
and egress.
(f) Public safety, indicating the kind and number of guards or
special police assisting in the control of traffic and supervision
of those attending the event and indicating specific details as
to their posts and assignments.
(6) Each application shall have attached thereto the written
recommendations of the following with respect to the adequacy of
the provisions proposed under the items set forth in § 298-7A(5) of
the application procedure:
(a) The Chief of Police of the Township or his designee.
(b) The New Jersey State Police having jurisdiction of Jackson
Township.
(c) The Fire Chief of the fire district involved.
(d) The Township Board of Health or its designee.
§ 298-7 JACKSON CODE § 298-7
1:1314
§ 298-8. Exemptions. [Amended 7-11-1978 by Ord. No. 39-78]
This article shall not be applicable where there are to be less than 1,000
people attending such event and where such event does not exceed a period
of more than 12 consecutive hours, and provided further that the Chief of
Police of the Township, the New Jersey State Police and the Township Clerk
are notified of said event at least 48 hours in advance thereof by written
notice duly receipted by the Chief of Police, the New Jersey State Police and
the Township Clerk.
§ 298-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person, group of persons, partnership, association or corporation,
individually or collectively, who shall violate or aid in, take part in or assist
in the violation of this article shall be subject, upon conviction, to a fine of
not more than $500 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days, or
both. Each and every day that such violation occurs or continues to exist
shall be considered a separate and specific violation.
§ 298-10. Concurrent remedy.
Nothing contained herein shall be deemed or construed so as to prevent the
enforcement of any other remedy at law, concurrent or otherwise, available
to the Township of Jackson or other law enforcement authority to avoid or
prevent any violation or attempted violation of this article, such as but not
limited to an injunction or restraining order.
(e) The Township Health or Sanitation Officer.
(f) The Township Engineer.
B. The Township Committee, after public hearing thereon held within 30
days after submission of such application, held pursuant to the
publication of a notice of hearing published at least once in the official
newspaper of the Township at least 10 days prior to such hearing, after
considering the application and after causing due investigation and
report to it and after considering the facts and circumstances in the
premises and after giving due regard to the recommendations of the
State Police, the Fire Chief, the Sanitation Officer, the Board of Health
and the Township Engineer, may issue a special permit upon such terms
and conditions as it deems necessary and proper to ensure the public
health, safety and welfare.
C. The applicant, prior to the event, shall post a bond, suitable to the
Township Committee as to amount and surety, to ensure cleanup and
restoration of the area at which such event takes place within 48 hours
after the close of the event.
D. A fee of $100 shall accompany each application.
§ 298-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 298-11
1:1315
§ 298-11. Effect on other provisions.
This article is in addition to any other law, ordinance or regulation affecting
the subject matter herein and is not in limitation thereof.
§ 298-11 JACKSON CODE § 298-11
1:1316
Chapter 304
PARKS AND RECREATION FACILITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 98.
Public use of buildings and facilities — See
Ch. 121.
Campgrounds — See Ch. 145.
Land use and development regulations — See
Ch. 244.
Littering — See Ch. 262.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 310.
Zoological or animal exhibition parks — See
Ch. 443.
§ 298-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 298-11
1:1317

ARTICLE I
General Regulations
[Adopted 9-11-1973 by Ord. No. 49-73 (Ch. 82, Art. I, of the 1972
Code)]
§ 304-1. Prohibited conduct. [Amended 10-23-1973 by Ord. No.
60-73; 6-28-1977 by Ord. No. 36-77; 4-21-1980 by Ord. No. 14-80;
2-6-1984 by Ord. No. 3-84]
The following conduct shall be prohibited within the limits of public parks
and recreation facilities of the Township of Jackson, including neighborhood
parks, playgrounds, miniparks and other Township recreation facilities:
A. Cutting, injuring, defacing, removing, disturbing, marking or writing
upon any tree, shrub, building, fence, bench, sign or other structure,
apparatus or property and picking, cutting or removing any shrub,
bush, plant or flower.
B. No animal shall be permitted to run loose, except during pet shows or
similar special programs authorized by the Recreation Department of
the Township of Jackson. Subject to the conditions established by
§ 98-10 of this Code, leashed dogs are permitted in any Township park,
or hiking trail, as long as such dog is accompanied by a person over the
age of 12 years that is of sufficient strength to hold the dog, is
controlled by an adequate leash not to exceed six feet in length, and
remains on the leash at all times. [Amended 5-26-2015 by Ord. No.
14-15]
C. Sales or displays of or offers to sell goods or wares, except by special
permission of the Township Committee.
D. Distribution or posting of written or printed matter, except this article
or summaries hereof, official notices of the Recreation Department or
by special permission of the Township Committee.
E. Holding, conducting or addressing public assemblages or debates,
except such as are organized or sponsored by the Recreation
Department, without having first obtained a permit therefor.
F. Conducting exhibitions or entertainment, except such as are organized
or sponsored by the Recreation Department, without having first
obtained permission from the Township Committee.
G. Entry or presence upon or within a park during periods when the same
is closed to the public. Except for programs specifically scheduled by
the Recreation Department at other hours, parks shall be closed to the
public between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. Neighborhood
parks and neighborhood playgrounds, miniparks and other
neighborhood recreation facilities shall be closed to the public from
6:00 p.m. to 9:00 a.m., except that from Memorial Day to Labor Day,
§ 304-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 304-1
1:1319
such facilities shall have summer hours and shall be closed from 8:00
p.m. to 9:00 a.m.
H. Uttering of abusive or profane language.
I. Fighting and other conduct disturbing to others or disruptive of the
public peace.
J. Betting, gambling and gaming.
K. Playing of baseball and softball except at diamonds designated for such
play.
L. Use of golf or archery equipment except by groups supervised by
instructors approved by the Recreation Department.
M. Possession of guns, knives, slingshots or other dangerous weapons.
N. Driving or parking of motor vehicles or motorized vehicles within public
parks and recreation facilities, except the parking of duly licensed or
registered motor vehicles in designated parking areas while such park
or facility is open to the public.
O. Littering.
P. Making or maintaining fires, except in receptacles designated for such
purposes.
Q. Possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages except with the
permission of the Chief of Police, who shall issue a permit to any
qualified applicant applying for such permission, provided that the
applicant is 18 years of age or over.
R. Smoking. [Added 12-9-2002 by Ord. No. 51-02]
(1) Smoking is prohibited on all Township-owned property at all times,
including all park and recreational facilities.
(2) Violations and penalties.
(a) Any person who violates this subsection shall appear before
the Jackson Township Municipal Court and shall be subject to
punishment as follows:
[1] First offense: up to 15 hours of community service at a
place designated by the Municipal Court.
[2] Second offense: up to 30 hours of community service in a
place designated by the Municipal Court and/or a fine up
to $100.
[3] Third and subsequent offense: up to 50 hours of
community service in a place designated by the Municipal
Court and/or a fine up to $250.
§ 304-1 JACKSON CODE § 304-1
1:1320
§ 304-2. Use of facilities. [Added 8-9-1982 by Ord. No. 32-82190;
amended 5-26-2015 by Ord. No. 14-15]
(b) Community service may include participation in a nonsmoking
educational or support program approved by the Municipal
Court.
S. Buses, trucks, cargo vans, and shuttle buses in parks. [5-26-2015 by
Ord. No. 15-15]
(1) Buses, trucks, cargo vans, and shuttle buses that seat more than 10
people may not park at any Jackson Township-owned park,
playground or playing field without having obtained a permit from
the Jackson Township Recreation Department unless such bus is
related to a scheduled game with a team or organization having a
lease or permit from the Township of Jackson. Only persons who
have secured advance bus permits may park, load, or unload buses
within the Jackson Township-owned park, playground, or playing
field parking lot or adjacent areas.
(a) Applications must be completed and submitted with the proper
fee of $125. Applications for a bus permit must be submitted at
least 10 days in advance to allow the Township ample time to
process the application. If an application form is not received
within 10 days prior to arrival, there will be a late fee of $10.
(b) Permits shall be limited so that no more than two buses are
scheduled to park at the Township-controlled park,
playground, or playing field parking lot on any given day.
Permits must be displayed in the windshield of the bus while
the bus is within the Jackson Township owned park,
playground, or playing field parking lot.
(2) Persons who park, load, or unload buses within a Jackson
Township-owned park, playground, or playing field parking lot or
adjacent areas without first obtaining a permit shall, upon
conviction before the Jackson Township Municipal Court duly
authorized to entertain and hear such complaints, be subject to the
penalties as provided in any provision of this article or any other
Township ordinance or rule or regulation.
A. Any resident or taxpayer of the Township of Jackson and any other
person shall be entitled to use the facilities and fields of any Township
park, recreation area or recreation facility, except during those periods
when same is closed to the public when programs scheduled by the
Recreation Department are being held or for those periods when
permits to use the facilities of the recreation area have been issued by
the Recreation Department.
190. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed original § 82-2, Township Committee
authorized to formulate rules and regulations, of the 1972 Code, as amended 4-21-1980 by
Ord. No. 14-80.
§ 304-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 304-2
1:1321
§ 304-3. Permits for organized groups. [Added 8-9-1982 by Ord. No.
32-82]
No organization, organized group or other club, association or corporation
organized for the purpose of sports, recreation and entertainment, for the
promotion of sports or any other purpose shall be entitled to use the
facilities or fields of any Township park, recreation area or facility as an
organized group without having first been issued a permit to do so. Such
permits, when issued, shall be evidenced by a written instrument issued by
the Recreation Department and shall entitle the holder to use to facilities
and fields of the recreation area as designated in the permit and to be on
and about the facility only on those days and during those time periods for
which it is issued.
§ 304-4. Revocation of permit. [Added 8-9-1982 by Ord. No. 32-82]
A permit issued hereunder shall authorize use of the facility only insofar
as it may be performed in strict accordance with the rules and regulations
for its use set forth herein or as prescribed by the Township Committee.
Any violation by the holder of the permit of any such rules and regulations
shall constitute grounds for revocation by the agents or representatives of
the Township Committee, whose action therein shall be final. In the event
of the revocation of any permit issued hereunder, the holder of such permit
who violated such terms and conditions shall be liable to the Township for
all damages and losses suffered by it, but neither shall forfeiture nor the
recovery or collection thereof of such damages, or both, shall in any manner
relieve such person or persons from liability to punishment for any violation
of any provision of this article or any other Township ordinance or rule or
regulation.
§ 304-5. Terms and conditions of permit issuance. [Added 8-9-1982
by Ord. No. 32-82]
The provisions of this article and all rules and regulations enacted and
promulgated by the Township Committee as herein provided are hereby
declared to be considered as part of the terms and conditions of each permit
issued hereunder.
B. Leashed dogs are permitted in any Township park, or hiking trail, as
long as such dog is accompanied by a person over the age of 12 years, is
securely confined, is controlled by an adequate leash that is of sufficient
strength to hold the dog not to exceed six feet in length, and remains on
the leash at all times. No person owning, keeping, or harboring any dog
shall suffer or permit such dog to be upon sports fields, playground
areas, or buildings.
§ 304-2 JACKSON CODE § 304-6
1:1322
§ 304-6. Administration; promulgation of rules and regulations.
[Added 8-9-1982 by Ord. No. 32-82]
The Township Committee of the Township of Jackson shall administer all
Township recreational facilities and shall enact and promulgate reasonable
rules and regulations for the conduct and operation of such facilities, except
that same shall not be in conflict with this article or any statute of the
State of New Jersey. Such rules and regulations shall prescribe safety rules,
times of operations, duties of employees working at said facility and age of
persons using said facility.
§ 304-7. Enforcement. [Amended 4-21-1980 by Ord. No. 14-80]
The provisions, prohibitions and requirements of this article shall be
enforceable by the Police Department and the Recreation Department of the
Township of Jackson.
§ 304-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision or provisions of this article shall,
upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than $500 or imprisonment
not to exceed 90 days, or both.
§ 304-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 304-8
1:1323

ARTICLE II
Camp Joy Municipal Recreation Area
[Adopted 3-14-1978 by Ord. No. 17-78 (Ch. 82, Art. II, of the 1972
Code)]
§ 304-9. Permit required.
No person shall be entitled to use the facilities of the Camp Joy Municipal
Recreation Area or be on or about the recreation facility without having
first been issued a permit to do so. Such permit shall be evidenced by a
receipt showing that the person or persons using the facility have paid the
appropriate fees for such use as delineated in this article.
§ 304-10. Time limit for validity of permit.
Permits, when issued, shall entitle the holder to use the facilities of the
recreation area and to be on or about the facility only on the day when
issued.
§ 304-11. Permit fees.
A. All residents or taxpayers of the Township of Jackson shall be issued a
permit upon payment of a fee of $2 per day.
B. All nonresidents or nontaxpayers of the Township of Jackson shall be
accompanied by a Jackson Township resident and shall be issued a
permit upon payment of a fee of $2 per day.
C. All residents of the Township of Jackson 65 years of age and over, upon
proof of age, shall be issued a permit upon payment of fees as follows:
(1) Weekdays: $1 per day.
(2) Weekends and holidays: $2 per day.
D. All students who are residents of the Township may obtain a student
registration card upon the presentation of proof of enrollment and upon
the payment of a fee as set forth in § 304-12, and such students, upon
presentation of said student registration card, shall be issued a permit
upon payment of a fee of $1 per day on any day. Nonresident students
and students without a student registration card shall be issued a
permit upon payment of a fee of $2 per day.
E. Children under the age of five years, accompanied by a parent or adult
guardian, shall be admitted free of charge. No child of 12 years of age
or under shall be admitted to the facility unless accompanied by a
parent or adult guardian.
§ 304-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 304-12
1:1325
§ 304-12. Resident registration cards; fees. [Amended 4-21-1980 by
Ord. No. 14-80]
All residents and taxpayers of the Township of Jackson shall be entitled to
fees as enumerated above only upon submission of a resident registration
card which may be procured from the Recreation Department. Said
registration card will be issued only upon proof that the applicant is a
resident or taxpayer of Jackson Township and shall be valid until December
31 of the year in which it is issued. Registration cards shall be renewed
annually, and the fee for issuance of such registration card shall be $1, and
the fee for the annual renewal thereof shall be $1. If a registration card is
lost, a new one may be obtained from the Township for a fee of $0.50.
§ 304-13. Misuse of registration cards.
Any misuse of the registration card, including but not limited to loaning,
selling or renting it to another, shall subject the owner thereof to revocation
of the card without privilege to renew, and any unauthorized user thereof
shall be subject to revocation of privileges at the facility or to such other
penalties as may be prescribed herein. Penalties for any violation of this
section are in addition to any others prescribed herein or as otherwise
provided by law.
§ 304-14. Revocation of permit. [Amended 4-21-1980 by Ord. No.
14-80]
A permit issued hereunder shall authorize use of the facility only insofar as
it may be performed in strict accordance with the rules and regulations for
its use set forth herein or as prescribed by the Township Committee. Any
violation by the holder of the permit of any such rules and regulations shall
constitute grounds for revocation by the agents or representatives of the
Township Committee, whose action therein shall be final. In the event of the
revocation of any permit or card issued hereunder, all moneys paid for on an
account thereof shall be forfeited to and be retained by the Township, and
the holder of such permit or card who violated such terms and conditions
shall be jointly and severally liable to the Township for all damages and
losses suffered by it in excess of the moneys so forfeited and retained; but
neither such forfeiture and retention by the Township of the whole or any
part of such moneys nor the recovery or collection thereof of such damages,
or both, shall in any manner relieve such person or persons from liability
to punishment for any violation of any provision of this article or any other
Township ordinance or rule or regulation.
§ 304-15. Terms and conditions of permit issuance. [Amended
4-21-1980 by Ord. No. 14-80]
The provisions of this article and all rules and regulations enacted and
promulgated by the Township Committee as herein provided are hereby
declared to be considered as part of the terms and conditions of each permit
issued hereunder.
§ 304-12 JACKSON CODE § 304-16
1:1326
§ 304-16. Administration; promulgation of rules and regulations.
[Amended 4-21-1980 by Ord. No. 14-80]
The Township Committee of the Township of Jackson shall administer the
Camp Joy Recreation Facility and shall enact and promulgate reasonable
rules and regulations for the conduct and operation of said facility, except
that same shall not be in conflict with this article or any other Township
ordinance or any statute of the State of New Jersey. Such rules and
regulations shall include but shall not be limited to rules and regulations
prescribing safety rules, times of operation, duties of employees working at
said facility and age of persons using said facility.
§ 304-17. Advertising. [Amended 4-21-1980 by Ord. No. 14-80]
No person shall post, paint or distribute any circular or advertisement,
display any matter for advertising purposes or engage in any activity for
the purpose of attracting attention to any exhibition, show, performance or
other display without the permission of the Township Committee, with the
exception of any concession granted by the Township at the facility.
§ 304-18. Soliciting of alms. [Amended 4-21-1980 by Ord. No.
14-80]
No person, group or organization shall solicit alms or contributions for any
purpose without the permission of the Township Committee.
§ 304-19. Animals. [Amended 4-21-1980 by Ord. No. 14-80;
8-14-2007 by Ord. No. 25-07]
§ 304-20. Disorderly conduct.
No person shall utter loud and offensive or profane or indecent language; do
any obscene or indecent act; throw stones or other missiles; annoy, obstruct,
molest or interfere with any person; interfere with, encumber, obstruct or
render dangerous any drive, path, walk or public place; loiter or create
a disturbance while under the influence of intoxicating liquor; do any act
tending or amounting to a breach of the peace; enter or leave except at
established entranceways or exits; introduce, carry or fire any firecrackers,
torpedoes or fireworks; engage in, instigate, aid or encourage a contention
A. No person shall cause or permit any animal owned by him or in his
custody or under his control to go or be on the facility without the prior
consent of the Township Council, and each such animal so found at
large may be seized and disposed of as provided by the law or ordinance
covering the disposal of stray animals on highways or public property
then in effect.
B. Dogs on a leash can be brought in Johnson Park for use of the Dog Park
Facility in accordance with the rules and regulations established by the
Township Council by resolution, which rules and regulations will be
available for the public at the Township Clerk's office.
§ 304-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 304-20
1:1327
or fight or assault any person; play games of chance, participate in the
conduct of a lottery or use or operate any gaming machine, gaming table
or instrument; drink, take, use or have habit-forming drugs; spit upon any
walk, crossing, safety zone or the floors of any structure, bridge, platform or
stairway; cast, throw or deposit on any walk, crossing, path, floor or surface
any portion of any fruit, vegetable, foodstuff, paper, pasteboard, litter or
other substance; cast, throw or deposit on the waters any sticks or stones
or pollute the waters; enter upon any portion of the facility in disregard
of signs or posted notices forbidding the same; or fail to obey or interfere
with the facility or municipal employees in the proper performance of their
duties.
§ 304-21. Fires.
No person shall kindle, build, maintain or use a fire. No person shall throw
away or discard any lighted match, cigar, cigarette, tobacco, paper or other
material within or against any building, structure, car, vehicle or enclosure
or under any tree or in underbrush, unless it is to deposit the same in a
suitable container provided for the reception thereof.
§ 304-22. Loitering at night. [Amended 4-21-1980 by Ord. No.
14-80]
No person or vehicle shall loiter or remain in said facility while it is closed
except in an emergency and after notifying a police officer or a Township
Committee representative and except when, where and for whom
permission has been granted by the Township Committee for a group
gathering, activity or function.
§ 304-23. Sale of merchandise. [Amended 4-21-1980 by Ord. No.
14-80]
No person shall sell or offer for sale any object or merchandise, or any
other thing, except pursuant to a permit, license or concession issued by the
Township Committee.
§ 304-24. Vehicles.
No person shall drive or operate any vehicle other than authorized vehicles
upon the grounds of the facility. Vehicles shall be permitted only upon the
driveways, roads and parking lots of the facility.
§ 304-25. Parking.
No owner or driver shall cause or permit his vehicle to stand anywhere
outside designated parking spaces, except for a reasonable time in a drive
to take up or set down passengers.
§ 304-20 JACKSON CODE § 304-26
1:1328
§ 304-26. Restricted traffic.
When a road, drive or area shall be restricted as to traffic or use or closed
and duly marked by signs, markings or barricades, it shall be a violation of
this article to fail to observe and obey such signs, markings or barricades.
§ 304-27. Damage to property and equipment.
No person without a permit shall injure, deface, displace, remove, fill in,
destroy or tamper with any part of the facility; take up or remove or carry
away any sod, stone, gravel, sand, clay or earth or make an excavation of
any kind, name or nature; harvest, cut, injure or remove any ice; or injure,
deface, displace, remove or destroy any structure, building or any other
property or equipment, real or personal, owned by or under the jurisdiction
or control of said Township, or appertaining to the creation, government,
use or maintenance of said facility; or injure or in any way interfere with
the operation of any machine or instrument used in said facility; or injure,
deface, displace, remove or destroy any sign, inscription, post or monument
erected or marked for any purpose.
§ 304-28. Trees, shrubs and grass.
No person shall destroy, cut, break, deface, mutilate, injure, sever from the
ground or remove any plant, flower, shrub, tree or other growing thing.
§ 304-29. Pollution of waters.
No person shall throw, cast or discharge into any of the waters of the facility
any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which may result in the
pollution of said waters.
§ 304-30. Rubbish and refuse.
No person shall throw, cast or discharge unto the grounds or into any of the
waters of the facility any papers or other refuse matter.
§ 304-31. Violations and penalties.
Any person convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this article
shall suffer a penalty of a fine of not more than $500 or imprisonment in
the County Jail of the County of Ocean for a term not exceeding 30 days, or
both.
§ 304-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 304-31
1:1329

ARTICLE III
Skateboarding/In-Line Skating Facility
[Adopted 5-9-2005 by Ord. No. 24-05 (Ch. 82, Art. III, of the 1972
Code)]
§ 304-32. Purpose.
The purpose of the within article is to establish rules, regulations and
scheduling for the Township's skateboarding/in-line skating facility.
§ 304-33. Safety equipment required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to use the skateboard/in-line skating
facility without the wearing of proper safety equipment, including personal
helmets, elbow pads and kneepads.
§ 304-34. Scheduled use.
The use of the skateboard/in-line skating facility will be on a schedule basis
for skateboard/in-line skating established by the Recreation Director.
§ 304-35. Prohibitions.
Bicycles, razor boards and motorized or nonmotorized scooters are
prohibited inside the facility and shall remain outside the fenced-in area.
Bicycles used for transportation are required to be left outside of the
skating area and parked in the designated area. There will be no loitering.
§ 304-36. Signage.
The Recreation Director will post signs containing rules, regulations and
scheduling of the facility outside the fenced-in area for public review.
§ 304-37. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this article may be subject to a fine
not to exceed $300 and/or community service up to 30 days.
§ 304-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 304-37
1:1331

ARTICLE IV
Recreation Event Fees
[Adopted 6-26-2007 by Ord. No. 19-07; amended in its entirety
5-12-2010 by Ord. No. 14-10 (Ch. 82, Art. IV, of the 1972 Code)]
§ 304-38. Recreation fees. [Amended 12-28-2010 by Ord. No. 44-10;
5-10-2011 by Ord. No. 19-11; 6-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-13;
3-11-2014 by Ord. No. 04-14; 3-8-2016 by Ord. No. 04-16; 2-14-2017
by Ord. No. 01-17; 2-27-2018 by Ord. No. 01-18; 3-12-2019 by Ord.
No. 06-19]
Program Fee
Volleyball:
Registration $75 to $100
Summer camp:
Registration:
Camp only 1st child: $450
2nd child: $425
3rd child: $400
4th child: $375
5th child: $350
With morning care 1st child: $525
2nd child: $500
3rd child: $475
4th child: $450
5th child: $425
With after care 1st child: $550
2nd child: $525
3rd child: $500
4th child: $475
5th child: $450
Full day 1st child: $625
2nd child: $600
3rd child: $575
4th child: $550
5th child: $525
Late registration fee - summer camp
(after June 1) $50
T-shirts 2 included in above ($5
additional shirt)
§ 304-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 304-38
1:1333
Program Fee
Trip fees $5 to $61
Transportation $125
Summer camp late pickup:
First offense
Up to the first 1/2 hour $15 per child
After 1/2 hour up to one hour $25 per child
Second offense $30 per child
Third offense $40 per child
Fourth offense $50 per child
Travel camp
Registration fee $125
With before care $200
With after care $225
Full day $300
Late registration fee - travel camp
(after June 1) $50 (additional)
Theater arts:
Theatre I $80 to $100
Theatre camp $80 to $125
Multi-sports camp:
Registration $120 to $150
Basketball:
Winter league $75 to $100
Camp $75 to $100
Wrestling:
Registration $50 to $90
Singlet fee (charge imposed for failure to
return uniform)
Price/cost of singlet
Teen dance:
Tickets $8
Lost ID card $5
Father/daughter dance $18 to $35
Mother/daughter dance $18 to $35
Hip hop classes $30
Special events vendor $275
Jackson Day:
§ 304-38 JACKSON CODE § 304-38
1:1334
Program Fee
Booth fees $5 to $250
Soft drink fee $30
Five-K run and fun run $8 to $20
Tennis:
Summer registration $50 to $75
Pickleball:
Registration $10 to $30
Trips:
Registration $25 to $150
Adult fitness:
Registration $35 to $75
Special events (children):
Registration $10 to $25
Cheerleading, per child $15 to $25
Division of Senior Services:
Monthly socials:
Registration $5 to $15
Arts and crafts:
Registration $2 to $10
Trips:
Registration $2 to $100
Refund fee (applicable to refunds of all
fees authorized by this chapter) $10
Transaction fee (applicable to all credit
card transactions for fees authorized by
this chapter)
$5
Nonresident fee (all programs) Registration fee plus
additional $25
§ 304-39. Sponsorships. [Added 2-8-2011 by Ord. No. 05-11;
amended 9-27-2011 by Ord. No. 29-11]
The Director of Recreation and Senior Services may determine that the
Township pursue specified sponsorships to support Department activities.
Upon notification from the Director, the Township Purchasing Agent shall
procure such sponsorships in accordance with the provisions of the Local
Public Contracts Law.191
191. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.
§ 304-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 304-39
1:1335
Type of Sponsorship Fee
Combined girls softball banner and
uniform sponsorship
$350 to $500
Girls softball uniform sponsorship $200 to $300
§ 304-40. Special events/programs. [Added 2-8-2011 by Ord. No.
05-11]
The Director of Recreation and Senior Services may determine to conduct
and charge appropriate fees for such nonrecurring special events/programs
as deemed desirable to further the goals of the Department. Such special
events/programs shall require the prior approval of the Mayor. All
reoccurring special events/programs shall continue to require adoption of a
fee-setting ordinance by the Township Council.
§ 304-39 JACKSON CODE § 304-40
1:1336
ARTICLE V
Administrative Fees
[Adopted 9-23-2008 by Ord. No. 35-08 (Ch. 82, Art. V, of the 1972
Code)]
§ 304-41. Fees for cancellations.
A. Any person who registers for a Recreation Department program and
subsequently cancels 10 days prior to the start of the program shall be
assessed an administrative fee of $10. The administrative fee may be
deducted from any refund due upon cancellation.
B. No refunds shall be given if a cancellation occurs after the Recreation
Department program has begun.
C. Should the Township cancel a program for any reason at any time, a full
refund will be given.
§ 304-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 304-41
1:1337

ARTICLE VI
Rules and Regulations for Spray Park Facility
[Adopted 10-13-2015 by Ord. No. 22-15]
§ 304-42. Purpose.
The purpose of the within article is to establish rules and regulations for the
Township's spray park facility.
§ 304-43. Rules and regulations.
A. Spray parks are intended for children 12 years of age and under.
Children must have adult supervision at all times.
B. Bathing suits must be worn when in the spray park area.
C. Footwear (water shoes, not flip flops highly recommended) is
recommended at all times for your safety and enjoyment.
D. Surfaces may be hot; please inspect the play area before starting play.
E. Avoid drinking the water.
F. Do not climb or hang on fixtures.
G. Do not place face, hands or objects near or on the spray feature
openings.
H. Glass containers are strictly prohibited.
I. No running or rough play is permitted.
J. No spitting or nose blowing allowed on the spray pad.
K. Persons with skin, eye, ear, or respiratory infections are not allowed on
the spray pad.
L. Persons with open lesions or wounds are not allowed on the spray pad.
M. Persons wearing diapers must wear a swim diaper. Regular disposable
or cloth diapers are not allowed.
N. No water balloons, water guns, food, drinks, beach balls, pool noodles,
etc., are allowed on the pad.
O. No skateboards, bicycles, scooters, rollerblades, or strollers are
allowed.
P. No animals, except for service animals, or pets are allowed.
Q. Please exit the spray park area when thunder and/or lightning are
audible or visible.
R. Use the spray park at your own risk.
§ 304-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 304-43
1:1339
§ 304-44. Signage.
The Recreation Director will post signs containing rules, regulations and
scheduling of the facility outside the fenced-in area for public review.
§ 304-45. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this article may be subject to a fine
not to exceed $300 and/or community service up to 30 days.
S. The Township of Jackson reserves the right to close the spray park and
immediate area due to maintenance requirements, health and safety
reasons, and inclement weather.
T. Do not enter or remain in the spray park area when the park is closed to
the public.
U. Individuals and families are welcome. No organized groups are allowed,
with the exception of Jackson Township Recreation sponsored groups.
[Amended 2-14-2017 by Ord. No. 01-17]
V. Having fun is permissible and highly encouraged.
W. For emergencies, call 911.
X. Report violations to the Department of Recreation at 732-928-1260.
Y. For other inquiries, please call the Department of Recreation at
732-928-1260.
§ 304-43 JACKSON CODE § 304-45
1:1340
ARTICLE VII
Parks and Playgrounds Fund
[Adopted 5-14-2019 by Ord. No. 11-19192]
§ 304-46. Establishment.
The Township of Jackson hereby establishes the Jackson Township Parks
and Playgrounds Fund.
§ 304-47. Purpose.
§ 304-48. No credit toward property taxes.
Donations made for the fund shall not be credited toward local, county, or
any other property tax, but the account shall provide for donations that are
income tax deductible for the sponsors.
§ 304-49. Administration of fund.
The Chief Financial Officer of Jackson Township shall administer the
Jackson Township Parks and Playgrounds Fund in accordance with state
law.
A. The purpose of the Jackson Township Parks and Playgrounds Fund is to
allow individuals and entities to sponsor specific sections of Townshipowned
and -maintained parks or playgrounds each year for an initial
sponsorship of two years, with one-year subsequent sponsorships. Once
a two-year donation is made, a sign shall be erected at the facility
identifying the sponsor. When the individual or entity ends its
donations, the sponsorship of the facility may be requested by another
individual or entity.
B. This fund shall be dedicated solely to purchases and maintenance of
Jackson Township-owned and -maintained parks and playground
equipment, recreational sports facilities services, benches, picnic
tables and equipment, including but not limited to basketball, tennis,
bocce, volleyball and pickleball courts, baseball, softball, football,
soccer, field hockey, and lacrosse turf fields, back stops and bleachers,
hockey rinks, spray parks, skate parks and dog parks. A reasonable cost
for the solicitation of donations and signage for each facility shall also
be paid out of the fund.
192. Editor’s Note: This ordinance was originally adopted as Ch. 304A but was renumbered for
organizational purposes.
§ 304-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 304-49
1:1341
Chapter 310
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junk and junk dealers — See Ch. 239.
Secondhand dealers — See Ch. 338.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 372.
§ 310-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CANVASSING — Door-to-door soliciting or soliciting by the use of circulars,
visitations, or any other means, where the canvasser or his or her employer
has not been invited or requested by the owner (as defined below), to obtain
a listing of real property or to confer with the owner regarding a real estate
transaction. This applies to private, personal and professional activity alike.
COMMERCIAL SOLICITATION or SOLICITATION — The act of asking,
bartering, or communicating in any other such manner, whether orally, or
by written or printed material, direct or implied, by an individual or group of
individuals for a for-profit purpose, including the purchase or intimidation
of residents to sell their real property. Solicitation is not communication
that is political, religious, or charitable in nature and does not involve
solicitation of money, funds, contributions, or anything of value.
ITINERANT VENDOR — Any person who sets up or operates a temporary
business on privately owned property, whether improved or unimproved, in
the Township, soliciting, selling, or taking orders for, or offering to sell or
take orders for, any goods or services. A temporary business is one that
continues for 45 days or less and exists whether solicitation is from a stand
or a vehicle, or freestanding. Any business that exists more than 45 days
shall be deemed to be a permanent occupancy and is required to obtain a
certificate of occupancy from the Building Inspection Department.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any vehicle used for the displaying or storing of
articles offered for sale by a vendor, and which is required to be registered
with the New Jersey Department of Motor Vehicles.
OWNER — The lessee, sublessee, assignee, managing agent or other person
having the right of ownership or possession or to sell, rent, or lease any real
property.
PERSON — Any individual, but not a corporation, partnership, or any form
of business entity.
PURCHASER — Any occupant, prospective occupant, lessee, prospective
lessee, buyer, prospective buyer, or any agent thereof.
§ 304-49 JACKSON CODE § 310-1
1:1342
RESIDENCE — Any separate living unit occupied for residential purposes
by one or more persons, contained within any type of building or structure.
VENDING UNIT — Any vehicle or device which may be moved without
assistance of a motor; is not required to be registered with the New Jersey
Department of Motor Vehicles; and is used for the displaying, storing or
transporting of articles offered for sale by a vendor.
VENDOR — Any person who goes from house to house or place to place,
by foot or any means of conveyance, selling goods or services or soliciting
orders for future delivery of goods or services. "Vendor" shall mean the
same as "peddler," "hawker" and "solicitor."
§ 310-2. License and notice requirements.
A. Any person, corporation, partnership, limited liability company, or other
institution or entity that canvasses in order to obtain listings of real
property, or to bring about the sale, lease, or purchase of real property,
must provide advanced written notice to the Township Clerk before
engaging in such activities. The advanced notice must provide the
following information:
(1) The names and addresses of the persons engaging in the
canvassing, itinerant vending, or soliciting.
(2) The names and addresses of the individuals or companies by which
such persons are employed.
(3) A listing of the street or streets in the Township in which the
canvassing, itinerant vending, or soliciting will take place and
when.
(4) The starting and ending dates in which the canvassing, itinerant
vending, or soliciting will take place.
(5) The applicant's places of residence for the preceding five years.
(6) A complete description of any vending unit to be used, including
the make, model, and serial number.
(7) A complete description of any motor vehicle to be used, including
the make, model, color and registration number and all insurance
information, including the name and address of the carrier, policy
number and type of coverage.
(8) Whether or not the applicant has ever had an application to
conduct a vending business denied or revoked and, if so, the details
thereof.
(9) Proof of an insurance policy issued by a New Jersey licensed
company protecting the applicant and the Township from all claims
or damages to property and bodily injury, including death, which
may arise in connection with the applicant's vending business
§ 310-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-2
1:1343
activities. Said policy shall name the Township of Jackson as an
additional insured and shall provide that the policy may not be
terminated prior to the expiration date without at least 30 days'
advance written notice to the office of the Township Clerk. The
minimum amounts of insurance coverage to be maintained are:
(a) Personal injury: $100,000 per person; $300,000 per
occurrence.
(b) Property damage: $50,000.
(10) A copy of the certificate of inspection issued by the Ocean County
Board of Health in the case of vendors seeking to engage in the
business of vending food and/or beverages.
(11) Two one-inch-square photographs showing the applicant's face
shall accompany the application.
B. The notice required hereunder must be filed with the Township Clerk no
less than 14 business days prior to the scheduled start date.
C. Provided the notice requirements have been satisfied, the Township
Clerk shall issue a permit allowing the canvassing or soliciting to take
place. This permit shall be valid for a period not to exceed 30 days from
the date of issuance. Once expired, the permit must be renewed
following the same notice requirements.
D. All itinerant vending or vending registration certificates shall be valid
for a period of one year from the date of issue and are not transferable
or assignable. Each vendor shall operate only one vending unit at a
time. All vendors shall notify the Township, in writing, within 30 days, of
any changes in the information contained in the registration
application.
E. When any application is submitted for a solicitation permit, an
administrative fee of $35 must be paid to the Township of Jackson. Only
one payment per applicant is required per calendar year. [Amended
11-10-2015 by Ord. No. 26-2015]
F. Upon issuance of the permit, a registration certificate shall be issued to
the applicant. The canvasser, itinerant vendor or solicitor shall carry
the registration certificate at all times and shall include:
(1) The signature of the Township Clerk;
(2) The name and address of the canvasser, itinerant vendor, or
solicitor;
(3) If applicable, the type of vending business engaged in, including
the description of goods or services being offered;
(4) The date of issuance and expiration; and
§ 310-2 JACKSON CODE § 310-2
1:1344
§ 310-3. Time, place, and manner restrictions.
§ 310-4. Suspension or revocation of registration.
Any registration issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter
may be suspended or revoked by the Jackson Township Municipal Court for
any of the following reasons:
§ 310-5. Vending regulations.
The business of vending shall be subject to the following regulations:
(5) If applicable, a description of any vending unit and/or motor vehicle
used in the vending business, including any identifying registration
and/or serial numbers.
G. Any certificate of health compliance required by the Ocean County
Board of Health shall be displayed on the vending unit and/or motor
vehicle in plain view of the public at all times.
A. No individual that has been given a license to canvass, be an itinerant
vendor, or solicit may operate beyond the timeframe outlined below:
(1) 10:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday.
(2) 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m. on Sunday.
B. Further, no individual or group of individuals may knowingly enter
private property that has displayed a "no knock" sticker or is on the No
Knock Registry.
A. Fraud or misrepresentation in the application process.
B. Fraud or misrepresentation made during the course of conducting
canvassing, itinerant vending, or soliciting.
C. Conducting the business of canvassing, itinerant vending, or soliciting
in such a manner as to create a public nuisance or jeopardize the
public's health, safety or welfare.
D. Operating beyond the time, place, and manner restrictions outlined in
§ 310-3.
A. The business of vending may be conducted between the hours of 7:00
a.m. and 9:00 p.m., and all vending units shall be off the streets and
sidewalks of the Township between 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
B. All vending units must be mobile.
C. There shall be no vending within 200 feet of any school, church,
synagogue or other house of worship while the same is in session.
D. No vending units or motor vehicles shall be left unattended for any
reasons on the streets or sidewalks of the Township.
§ 310-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-5
1:1345
§ 310-6. No-Knock Registry.
E. All vendors in the business of selling food and/or beverages shall have a
litter receptacle available for public use. All litter and refuse shall be
collected and taken away by the vendor when he or she leaves the
location.
F. All materials and merchandise related to the vending business must be
located on the vending unit.
G. No vendor shall offer for sale any merchandise other than that
described in his/her registration.
H. No vendor shall have an exclusive right to any location in the public
streets, nor shall he/she be permitted to vend from a permanent public
location.
I. No vendor shall be permitted to operate in any area where such
operation might unreasonably impede traffic, jeopardize the public's
health, safety or welfare or create a public nuisance.
J. No vendor shall place his or her vending unit within 500 feet of any
location already being used by another vendor or established merchant.
A. The Township Clerk shall prepare a list of addresses of those premises
where the owner and/or occupant has notified the Clerk that
canvassing, peddling, itinerant vending, and door-to-door sales
enterprises are not permitted on the premises (hereinafter referred to
as the Jackson Township "No-Knock" Registry"). Notification shall be
completion of a form available at the Township Clerk's office during
normal business hours. The list shall be updated monthly.
B. Any owner and/or occupant who has requested enlistment on the
Jackson Township No-Knock Registry pursuant to Subsection A herein
shall be able to procure from the Clerk's office a sticker for display at
his/her/its premises indicating enlistment on the Jackson Township No-
Knock Registry. The first sticker shall be provided free of charge and
may be picked up in person during regular business hours. If a
replacement sticker is required, the individual may pick up a
replacement at the Clerk's office at no charge. All previously issued
stickers that reference Jackson Township Ordinance No. 41-08 shall
remain in full force and effect. [Amended 10-25-2016 by Ord. No.
25-16]
C. The Township Clerk shall distribute the current Jackson Township No-
Knock Registry to a licensee at the time of issuance of a license to
peddle, canvass, itinerant vend or otherwise door-to-door sell, pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter. The licensee shall not peddle, canvass,
itinerant vend or conduct door-to-door sales at any premises identified
on the then-current Jackson Township No-Knock Registry.
§ 310-5 JACKSON CODE § 310-6
1:1346
§ 310-7. Prohibited acts.
No person shall engage in the following acts:
D. Although the most current list of registrants on the Jackson Township
"No Knock" Registry shall be provided by the Township Clerk, it is the
responsibility of the canvasser, itinerant vendor, or solicitor to have the
most up-to-date list prior to performing their business.
E. Any canvasser, peddler, itinerant vendor, or owner or employee of a
door-to-door sales enterprise who violates any provision of this section,
if convicted, shall be:
(1) Subject to a maximum ordinance violation fine of $1,250 for the
first offense;
(2) Subject to 90 days in the county jail or in any place provided by the
municipality for the detention of prisoners, for any term not
exceeding 90 days for any offense thereafter; and
(3) Subject to a permanent revocation of any license issued under the
within chapter.
F. Current Jackson Township No-Knock registrants are protected against
the canvassing, itinerant vending, or soliciting activities regulated by
this chapter without having to reregister.
A. The promoting, influencing, or attempting to promote or influence a
property owner, occupant, or tenant to list for sale, sell, or remove from
a lease real property by referring to race, color, sexual orientation,
ethnicity, or religious affiliation of neighbors, prospective buyers, or
other occupants of prospective occupants of real property.
B. Induce directly or indirectly, or attempt to induce directly or indirectly,
the sale or listing for sale of real property by representing that the
presence or anticipated presence of persons of any particular race,
religion, or national origin in the area has resulted or may result in:
(1) The lowering of property values;
(2) A change in the racial, religious, or ethnic composition of the block,
neighborhood, or area in which the property is located;
(3) An increase in criminal or antisocial behavior in the area;
(4) A decline in the quality of the schools serving in the area.
C. Make any representation (or misrepresentations) concerning the listing
for sale or the anticipated listing for sale or the sale of any real property
in any residentially zoned areas for the purpose of inducing or
attempting to induce the sale or listing for sale of other real property in
such area.
§ 310-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-7
1:1347
§ 310-8. Enforcement.
D. Make any representation to any prospective purchaser that any block,
neighborhood or area has, will, or might undergo an adverse change
with respect to the religious, racial, or ethnic composition of the block,
neighborhood or area for the purpose of discouraging the purchase of
property in a particular area.
E. Place a sign purporting to offer for sale any property that is not in fact
offered for sale.
F. Advertise for sale or rental a property which is nonexistent or which is
not actually for sale or rental.
G. Engage in or hire or conspire with others to commit acts or activities of
any nature, the purpose of which is to coerce, cause panic, incite
unrest, create or play upon fear with the purpose of inducing or
attempting to induce the sale or listing for sale of real property.
H. To solicit or canvass any owner whose name and property address is
included on the list maintained by the Township Clerk of persons
requesting that they not be canvassed or solicited.
I. To engage in any economic reprisal or any other form of intimidation
against any person because that person has filed a complaint, testified,
assisted or participated in any manner in any investigation, proceeding
or conference under the terms of this chapter.
J. To aid, abet, incite, compel or coerce any person to engage in any of the
practices forbidden by this chapter or to obstruct or prevent any person
from complying with the provisions of this chapter.
K. Refer, directly or indirectly, or by implication, to race, color, creed,
ethnicity, or sexual orientation in any advertisement or other
solicitation offering real property for sale or rental.
L. Solicit or attempt to solicit the sale or rental or the listing for sale or
rental of real property without furnishing in written form to the owner
or occupier of such real property the name of the person or
organization soliciting such sale, rental, or listing.
A. The Jackson Township Police Department is charged with enforcing the
provisions of this chapter.
B. Any persons claiming to be aggrieved by an alleged unlawful practice
forbidden by any section of this chapter may, by themselves, or by their
attorney-at-law, make, sign, and file a complaint directly with the Police
Department, or with the Township Clerk, who shall forward the
complaint to the Police Department for a full investigation.
C. In addition to any other enforcement actions, the Police Department or
the Township Clerk may refer the complaint to the Real Estate
§ 310-7 JACKSON CODE § 310-8
1:1348
§ 310-9. Health and sanitation requirements.
Vendors of food and beverages shall comply with all standards and
regulations set by the Ocean County Board of Health and shall provide the
Township with copies of all certificates of inspection issued in accordance
with the same.
§ 310-10. Appeals.
A person denied a permit or who has had a permit removed may appeal
that action to the Mayor, or his or her designee, by submitting a letter to
the Township Clerk within 10 days of the complained action. A hearing on
such appeal will then be scheduled within seven days after the receipt of
the appeal, with the hearing to be held within 30 days after receipt of the
appeal. The Mayor, or his or her designee, shall render a decision on the
appeal within seven days after the date of the hearing which shall be final.
§ 310-11. Violations and penalties.
As stated under § 310-6E(1) through (3) of this chapter, any canvasser,
peddler, itinerant vendor, or owner or employee of a door-to-door sales
enterprise who violates any provision of this section, if convicted, shall be:
§ 310-12. Exemptions.
This chapter does not apply to real estate that is publicly advertised for sale
or to "open houses" sponsored by the owner or listed by real estate agents
for a specific home on a specific date and at a specific time.
Chapter 315
PERMIT PARKING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 103. Handicapped parking — See Ch. 227.
Commission, the New Jersey Division of Civil Rights, or any other
appropriate state or federal agency for disposition.
A. Subject to a maximum ordinance violation fine of $1,250 for the first
offense;
B. Subject to 90 days in the county jail or in any place provided by the
municipality for the detention of prisoners, for any term not exceeding
90 days for any offense thereafter; and
C. Subject to a permanent revocation of any license issued under the
within chapter.
§ 310-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 315-1
1:1349
§ 315-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to designate certain parking locations within
the Township of Jackson as permit parking areas and to regulate the use
of such parking locations in a manner which encourages use by Township
residents.
§ 315-2. Public parking lots.
There are hereby created and established in the Township of Jackson
facilities or zones for the parking of motor vehicles on lots now or hereafter
owned or rented by the Township for that purpose.
§ 315-3. Permits; fees; renewal.
A. Any person who desires to park a motor vehicle in a municipal lot or
zone shall purchase from the Township Clerk, or designee, a permit
which shall be displayed on the back of the rearview mirror of each
vehicle parked in a municipal parking lot in such a manner as to be
clearly visible thereon. The Clerk shall have the authority to determine
the form of said permits. An applicant for such a permit may request a
duplicate permit for another motor vehicle which is registered in the
same name. Only one duplicate per permit is allowed. Said duplicate
permit shall be distinguishable from the original permits issued by the
Clerk. The Clerk is authorized to issue replacement permits where a
permittee wishes to substitute a vehicle different from the one for
which the original permit was issued. In a case where a motor vehicle
with a permit must be in a repair shop for any lengthy period of time, a
temporary thirty-day sticker may be issued.
B. Permit fees.
(1) There shall be no permit fee for Township residents. Resident
permit applicants shall show to the Clerk, or designee, satisfactory
evidence of Township residence.
(2) The annual permit fee for nonresidents shall be $200. Said permit
shall terminate on December 31 of the year of issuance. The Clerk
is permitted to adjust and prorate fees on a quarterly basis within
the calendar year for which the permit is sought beginning April 1
of the year of issuance. This provision shall not empower the Clerk
to issue permits for less than the balance of the year for which the
permit is sought. The fee for the issuance of a duplicate permit is
$5, and the fee for the issuance of a replacement permit is $3. In
the case of a temporary permit to be issued to a permit holder, the
fee shall be $2. A one-day daily permit may also be issued for a fee
of $10. [Amended 4-8-2014 by Ord. No. 06-14]
C. Annual renewal. Persons desiring to purchase a permit for the next
ensuing calendar year may purchase same on and after December 1 of
the proceeding year.
§ 315-1 JACKSON CODE § 315-4
1:1350
§ 315-4. Limitations; application requirements; effect of other
provisions.
§ 315-5. Signage.
The Director of Public Safety is hereby directed to prepare and erect proper
signs calling attention to the provisions of this chapter along those streets
or portions thereof located within the designated parking areas.
§ 315-6. Exemptions.
The following vehicles shall be exempt from this chapter:
A. The permit shall only authorize the parking of vehicles at the
designated locations weekdays.
B. The permits to be sold by the Clerk under the terms of this chapter are
intended to apply to one parking space, and no person shall park a
motor vehicle of such size or in such a manner as to occupy more than
one such parking space. Further, motor vehicles shall be parked head-in
into the parking space so that the rear bumper of the vehicle abuts
traffic aisles. The issuance of a duplicate permit by the Clerk shall not
entitle the permittee to park more than one vehicle in a parking facility
at one time.
C. Each person applying for a parking permit hereunder shall complete an
application form to be prepared by the Clerk which shall set forth the
name, address, and driver's license number of the applicant for the
motor vehicle to which the permit is to apply, including a description of
each motor vehicle by year, make, model, color, and license plate
number. At the time of applying for said permit, an applicant shall
present to the Clerk the current New Jersey motor vehicle registration
and insurance identification card for which a permit is sought. (Vehicles
must be registered to one person.) Under no circumstances will a
refund or rebate be granted for any unused portion of the annual pro
rated parking fee.
D. The permit stickers issued shall be affixed only to the motor vehicles
described in the application and shall not be transferable to any other
vehicle.
E. Wherever parking has been restricted in any portion of a designated
parking lot or zone by other ordinances or resolutions presently in
effect regulating parking (such as ordinances establishing metered
areas), then said portions of the above zones shall continue to be
regulated parking areas as provided in such respective other
ordinances or resolutions, notwithstanding the provisions of this
chapter.
A. Contractors, service and delivery vehicles. Contractors, service and
delivery vehicles bearing the name and address of a commercial
business and registered and licensed to do business in the Township of
§ 315-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 315-6
1:1351
§ 315-7. Violations and penalties.
Jackson, if required, and exhibiting commercial license tags may park
without a permit between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. during
the time that the operator and/or occupants of said vehicle are actually
rendering service, repairs or improvements to a residence or other
property located within the designated parking areas. Any commercial
vehicle parked overnight shall be deemed in violation of this chapter.
B. Any vehicle lawfully parked in a parking space governed by a parking
meter, where the required coins have been deposited in said meter.
C. Emergency vehicles. Emergency vehicles and public service, telephone
and other utility vehicles may park without a permit during the time
that they are rendering service or repairs in the area. Proof of service,
e.g., an invoice or other written document, must be furnished upon
request of an officer enforcing parking regulations. Any public utility
vehicle parked overnight and not providing service shall be deemed in
violation of this chapter.
A. Any person who parks a vehicle or who permits a vehicle to be parked in
a municipal parking lot or facility in violation of the terms of this
chapter shall be subject to a fine of not more than $20 in the discretion
of the Municipal Court Judge. Further, all enforcement officers are
hereby authorized to arrange for the towing of any such illegally parked
vehicles and the owner of said vehicle shall remain liable for all towing
and storage charges associated therewith. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed each day during or on which the violation occurs
and/or continues.
B. It shall be prohibited for any individual, corporation or other entity to
whom parking permits have been issued to duplicate, sell or lease or
otherwise transfer any permit in a manner not provided for in this
chapter. Any individual or business to whom a parking permit has been
issued that is found to have duplicated, sold, leased or otherwise
unlawfully transferred said parking permit will be subject to a fine of
$100 and/or imprisonment up to 30 days upon conviction. In addition,
all future parking privileges provided for in this chapter shall be
revoked for said individual or business.
C. Any vehicles found to have parking permits which have been
duplicated, sold or leased or otherwise unlawfully transferred shall be
towed at the owner's expense. The owner of said vehicle shall receive a
summons for a violation of this chapter and be subject to a penalty as
provided in Subsection A above.
§ 315-6 JACKSON CODE § 315-7
1:1352
Chapter 322
RAFFLES AND BINGO
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusements — See Ch. 92. Licensing — See Ch. 251.
§ 322-1. Issuance of licenses.
Under and subject to the terms, conditions and restrictions of this chapter,
the Raffles Licensing Law (P.L. 1954, c. 5193), the Bingo Licensing Law
(P.L. 1954, c. 6194), the Legalized Games of Chance Control Law (P.L. 1954,
c. 7195) and the rules and regulations adopted and promulgated or to be
adopted and promulgated hereafter by the Legalized Games of Chance
Control Commission of the State of New Jersey, licenses shall be issued in
this municipality to bona fide organizations or associations as described in
said laws.
§ 322-2. Investigation of qualifications of applicants. [Amended
10-12-2016 by Ord. No. 23-16]
The Township Clerk of this municipality shall make an investigation of
the qualifications of each applicant and the merits of each application
as directed in Paragraph 4 of each of said licensing laws.196 In this
municipality, the Chief of Police is and shall be charged with the duty and
responsibility of making the initial investigation and reporting thereon in
writing to the Township Clerk.
§ 322-3. Licensing restrictions.
No license, under either licensing law, shall be:
§ 322-4. Hearings. [Amended 10-12-2016 by Ord. No. 23-16]
No application for the issuance of a license shall be refused by the Township
Clerk until after a hearing is held on due notice to the applicant, at which
the applicant shall be entitled to be heard upon the qualifications of the
applicant and the merits of the application.
A. Issued for a period of more than one year.
B. Issued for the holding, operation and conduct of any game of chance
which may be licensed under the other of said licensing laws.
193. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 5:8-50 et seq.
194. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 5:8-24 et seq.
195. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 5:8-1 et seq.
196. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A 5:8-27 and N.J.S.A. 5:8-53.
§ 315-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-5
1:1353
§ 322-5. Forms of license.
Each license shall be in such form as shall be prescribed in the rules and
regulations promulgated by the State Control Commission.
§ 322-6. Control and supervision. [Amended 10-12-2016 by Ord. No.
23-16]
The Township Clerk of the municipality issuing any license under this
chapter and either of said licensing laws shall have and exercise control and
supervision over all games of chance so licensed in accordance with the said
licensing laws.
§ 322-7. Participation by minors unlawful.
No person under the age of 18 years shall be permitted to participate in
any game or games of chance held, operated or conducted pursuant to any
license issued by this municipality.
§ 322-8. Frequency of games; service of alcoholic beverages.
[Amended 10-12-2016 by Ord. No. 23-16]
No licensed game or games of chance shall be held, operated or conducted
on more than six days in any calendar month, or in any room or outdoor
area where alcoholic beverages are sold or served during the progress of
the game or games.
§ 322-9. Sunday games. [Added 7-6-1966 by Ord. No. 11-66;
amended 10-12-2016 by Ord. No. 23-16]
The Township Clerk may permit a game or games of chance to be conducted
on a Sunday, which permission shall be indicated upon the license issued by
the Township Clerk.
§ 322-10. Purpose and intent.
It is not the purpose or intent of this chapter to include herein all conditions,
restrictions, regulations or rules relating to the licensing and conduct of
games of chance, since same are and will be fully covered by said Raffles
Licensing Law, Bingo Licensing Law, Legalized Games of Chance Control
Law and the rules and regulations of said State Control Commission, to all
of which any applicant may and should refer.
§ 322-11. Duties of Township Clerk.
The Township Clerk shall, on behalf of the municipality:
A. File with the Legalized Games of Chance Control Commission a
certified copy of this chapter within 10 days after the adoption.
B. On or before the first day of February in each year, or at any other time
or times which said Commission may determine, make report to the
§ 322-5 JACKSON CODE § 322-11
1:1354
§ 322-12. License fees for raffles. [Amended 4-10-1995 by Ord. No.
11-95; 7-22-1996 by Ord. No. 17-96; 9-26-2006 by Ord. No. 25-06]
There is hereby established the following license fees for raffles, which will
take effect October 2, 2006:
Commission of the number of licenses issued in this municipality under
each of said licensing laws, and the names and addresses of the
licensees, the aggregate of the license fees collected, the names and
addresses of all persons convicted of violation of each of said laws or of
the rules and regulations adopted by the State Control Commission, of
all persons prosecuted for such violations and the result of each such
prosecution and the penalties imposed therein, during the preceding
calendar year or the period the report is required.
A. Twenty dollars for each day upon which a raffle is held with respect to
which all tickets or rights to participate are sold only to persons present
at the time of the drawing or allotment of prizes (on-premises raffles).
This fee shall not apply to all registered nonprofit organizations that
shall be considered exempt from a licensing fee for any on-premises
draw raffle awarding cash prizes (50/50s) having a value of $400 or less
or merchandise prizes having a combined retail value of less than $400.
B. Twenty dollars for each $1,000 of the value of prizes awarded in each
raffle with respect to which tickets or rights to participate may be sold
in advance of the occasion of the drawing or allotment of prizes (offpremises
raffle).
C. Twenty dollars for nondraw raffles, being carnival games/wheels and
games, to be charged at a rate of $20 for each wheel or game conducted
on any day or series of six consecutive days in one week.
D. Twenty dollars for off-premises draw raffles awarding cash as a prize
(50/50s), $20 per $1,000 or part thereof of retail value of the awarded
prize(s).
E. Special door prizes: no fee and no license, provided the merchandise is
wholly donated and has a retail value of less than $50. (Note: Cannot be
conducted when other games of chance are being conducted, held or
operated.)
F. Twenty dollars for calendar raffle per $1,000 or part thereof of retail
value of the awarded prize.
G. Twenty dollars for instant raffle for each day on which instant raffle
tickets are sold or offered for sale or $750 for a one-year license.
H. Twenty dollars for golf hole-in-one for each $1,000 or part thereof of
retail value of ancillary prize(s).
I. Fifty dollars for armchair races per licensed day of operation.
J. One hundred dollars for casino nights per occasion.
§ 322-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-13
1:1355
§ 322-13. License fees for bingo. [Amended 4-10-1995 by Ord. No.
11-95; 9-26-2006 by Ord. No. 25-06]
There is hereby established the following license fees for bingos, which will
take effect October 2, 2006: License fees for bingo shall be $20 for each
occasion upon which any game or games are to be conducted under such
license.
§ 322-14. Payment of license fees. [Amended 4-10-1995 by Ord. No.
11-95; 9-26-2006 by Ord. No. 25-06]
All license fees set forth herein are payable to the Township of Jackson. This
is in addition to and not part of a separate fee to be payable to the State
Legalized Games of Chance Control Commission through the administrative
collection process of the Township of Jackson. Fees for bingo licenses and
raffle licenses in categories above referenced in § 322-12A, B, C, D, E, F,
G, H, I, and J are due in full at the time the application is filed with the
municipality. For raffle licenses in § 322-12D, F and H, the fee is due at the
time the application is filed, and, if the awarded prize(s) exceeds $1,000,
the additional fee as set forth in said section is due upon the filing of the
report of operations.
§ 322-15. Unlicensed games prohibited.
No person, organization, club, company or squad shall conduct, operate,
run, participate in or attend any unlicensed raffle or bingo game in this
municipality.
§ 322-16. Prohibited conduct.
No person, organization, club, company or squad shall violate any of the
terms or provisions of any one or more of the following:
§ 322-17. Suspension or revocation of license.
A conviction hereunder shall also be proper grounds, in the discretion of the
licensing body, to suspend or revoke the license if any has been issued and
is outstanding.
A. Bingo Licensing Law, P.L. 1954, c. 6.197
B. Raffles Licensing Law, P.L. 1954, c. 5.198
C. Legalized Games of Chance Control Law, P.L. 1954, c. 7.199
D. This chapter.
197. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 5:8-24 et seq.
198. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 5:8-50 et seq.
199. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 5:8-1 et seq.
§ 322-13 JACKSON CODE § 322-18
1:1356
§ 322-18. Violations and penalties.
Any person, organization, club, company or squad convicted of a violation
of any of the provisions of this chapter shall suffer a penalty of:
Chapter 331
REGISTRATION OF PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unsafe buildings and structures — See Ch.
133.
Housing standards — See Ch. 233.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 474.
A. If a person, not more than 90 days' imprisonment in the Common Jail of
the County of Ocean or a fine of not more than $500, or both fine and
imprisonment, at the discretion of the Judge before whom such
conviction is had; or
B. If an organization, club, company or squad, a fine of not more than
$500, at the discretion of the Judge before whom the conviction is had.
§ 322-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-18
1:1357

ARTICLE I
Properties Pending Foreclosure
[Adopted 7-22-2014 by Ord. No. 12-14]
§ 331-1. Purpose.
The intent of this article is to provide for the enforcement of Township
property maintenance standards and State Housing Code against vacant
properties pending foreclosure.
§ 331-2. Service of notice; contents.
§ 331-3. Violation of state or local law at property on list;
responsibility of creditor.
A. A creditor serving a summons and complaint in an action to foreclose on
a mortgage on residential property located within the Township of
Jackson shall serve the Municipal Clerk with a notice indicating that a
summons and complaint in an action to foreclose on a mortgage has
been filed against the subject property. The notice may contain
information about more than one property and shall be provided by mail
or electronic communication at the discretion of the municipal clerk.
B. The notice shall be served within 10 days of service of a summons and
complaint in an action to foreclose on a mortgage against the subject
property.
C. Within 60 days of the adoption of this article, any creditor that has
initiated a foreclosure proceeding on any residential property which is
pending in Superior Court shall provide to the Municipal Clerk a notice
as described below for all residential properties in the Township for
which the creditor has pending foreclosure actions.
D. The notice shall contain:
(1) The name and contact information for the representative of the
creditor who is responsible for receiving complaints of property
maintenance and code violations;
(2) Whether the property being foreclosed on is an affordable unit
pursuant to the Fair Housing Act;200
(3) The street address, lot and block number of the property; and
(4) The full name and contact information of an individual located
within the state authorized to accept service on behalf of the
creditor.
A. If the owner of a residential property vacates or abandons any property
on which a foreclosure proceeding has been initiated or if a property is
200. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq.
§ 331-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 331-3
1:1359
§ 331-4. Notification of violation.
In the event of a violation of state or local ordinance, the municipality
shall serve the creditor with a notice that shall include a description of the
condition(s) that gave rise to the violation with the notice and shall provide
a period of not less than 30 days from the creditor's receipt of the notice for
the creditor to remedy the violation.
§ 331-5. Repair by Township.
If the Township expends public funds in order to abate a nuisance or
correct a violation on a residential property in which the creditor was given
notice pursuant to the provisions of § 331-4 but failed to abate the nuisance
or correct the violation as directed, the municipality shall have the same
recourse against the creditor as it would have had against the title owner of
the property, including but not limited to the recourse provided at N.J.S.A.
55:19-100.
§ 331-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-25-2014 by Ord. No.
21-14]
Any person, firm or corporation found to be in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction by a court of competent
jurisdiction, be subject to a fine of $1,500 for each day of the violation. Any
fines imposed pursuant to this section shall commence 31 days following
receipt of the notice, except if the violation presents an imminent risk to the
public health and safety, in which case any fines shall commence 11 days
following receipt of the notice.
§ 331-7. Out-of-state creditor; appointment of in-state
representative; violations [Added 11-25-2014 by Ord. No. 21-14]
otherwise vacated subsequent to the filing of the summons and
complaint, but prior to the vesting of title in any third party; and
B. If the property is found to be nuisance or in violation of any applicable
state or local code, the local public officer shall notify the creditor;
C. The creditor shall have the responsibility to abate the nuisance or
correct the violation in the same manner and to the same extent as the
title owner of the property, to such standard or specification as may be
required by state law or municipal ordinance.
A. An out-of-state creditor shall provide the full name and contact
information of an in-state representative or agent who shall be
responsible for the care, maintenance, security and upkeep of the
exterior of the property if it becomes vacant and abandoned in the
notice required to be provided pursuant to § 331-2.
B. An out-of-state creditor found to be in violation of this requirement by
the municipal court of the Township of Jackson or any other court of
§ 331-3 JACKSON CODE § 331-7
1:1360
competent jurisdiction shall be subject to a fine of $2,500 for each day
of the violation.
C. Such fines shall commence on the day after the ten-day period required
by § 331-2B.
§ 331-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 331-7
1:1361

ARTICLE II
Vacant or Abandoned Property List
[Adopted 7-12-2016 by Ord. No. 14-16]
§ 331-8. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABANDONED PROPERTY — As defined in accordance with the Abandoned
Properties Rehabilitation Act, N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq., shall mean the
following:
EVIDENCE OF VACANCY —
Except as provided in N.J.S.A. 55:19-83, any property that has not been
legally occupied for a period of six months and which meets any one
of the following additional criteria may be deemed to be abandoned
property upon a determination by the public officer that:
The property is in need of rehabilitation in the reasonable judgment
of the public officer, and no rehabilitation has taken place during
that six-month period;
(1)
Construction was initiated on the property and was discontinued
prior to completion, leaving the building unsuitable for occupancy,
and no construction has taken place for at least six months as of the
date of determination by the public officer pursuant to this section;
(2)
At least one installment of property tax remains unpaid and
delinquent on that property in accordance with Chapter 4 of Title
54 of New Jersey Statutes as of the date of a determination by the
public officer pursuant to this section; or
(3)
The property has been determined to be a nuisance by the public
officer in accordance with the standards set forth at N.J.S.A.
55:19-82.
(4)
A.
A property which contains both residential and nonresidential space
may be considered abandoned pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq.,
so long as 2/3 or more of the total net square footage of the building
was previously legally occupied as residential space and none of the
residential space has been legally occupied for at least six months at
the time of the determination of abandonment by the public officer and
the property meets the criteria of either Subsection A(1) or Subsection
A(4) of this definition.
B.
Any condition that on its own or combined with other conditions
present would lead a reasonable person to believe that the property
is or has been vacant for three or more months. Such evidence would
include, but is not limited to, evidence of the existence of two or more
of the following conditions at a property: overgrown or dead vegetation;
accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers or mail; past-due utility
A.
§ 331-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 331-8
1:1363
OWNER — Shall include the title holder, any agent of the title holder
having authority to act with respect to a vacant property, any foreclosing
entity subject to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51, or any other entity
determined by the Township of Jackson to have authority to act with respect
to the property.
VACANT PROPERTY — Any building used or to be used as a residence which
is not legally occupied or at which substantially all lawful construction
operations or residential occupancy has ceased for a period of at least three
months, and any commercial property that has not been legally occupied
or at which substantially all lawful construction operations have ceased for
a period of at least three months. Any property that contains all building
systems in working order, is being maintained on a regular basis, has not
been cited by the Township for any violation of municipal ordinance within
such time and is being actively marketed by its owner for sale or rental shall
not be deemed vacant.
§ 331-9. General requirements.
notices or disconnected utilities; accumulation of trash, junk or debris;
the absence of window coverings such as curtains, blinds or shutters;
the absence of furnishings or personal items consistent with residential
habitation; statements by neighbors, delivery agents, or government
employees that the property is vacant or abandoned; infestation by
insects, vermin, rats or other pests; windows or entrances that are
boarded up or closed off; multiple window panes that are damaged,
broken or unrepaired; doors that are smashed, broken, unhinged or
continuously unlocked; or any uncorrected violation of a municipal
building, housing or similar code during the preceding year.
Property determined to be "abandoned property" in accordance with
the meaning of such term in the Abandoned Properties Rehabilitation
Act, N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq., shall also be deemed to be vacant
property for the purposes of this article.
B.
A. The owner of any vacant property as defined herein shall, within three
days after the building becomes vacant property or within 30 days after
assuming ownership of the vacant property, whichever is later, file a
registration statement for each such vacant property with the Jackson
Township Office of Code Enforcement on forms provided by the Office
of Code Enforcement for such purposes. The registration shall remain
valid until the end of the calendar year. The owner shall be required to
renew the registration annually, no later than January 31, as long as the
building remains vacant property and shall pay a registration or
renewal fee in the amount prescribed in this article for each vacant
property registered.
B. Any owner of a building that meets the definition of a "vacant property"
prior to the effective date of this chapter shall file a registration
statement for that property on or before August 1, 2016. The
registration statement shall include the information required under this
§ 331-8 JACKSON CODE § 331-9
1:1364
§ 331-10. Registration statement requirements; property
inspection.
article, as well as any additional information that the Office of Code
Enforcement may reasonably require.
C. The owner shall notify the Office of Code Enforcement within 30 days of
any change in the registration information by filing an amended
registration statement on a form provided by the Office of Code
Enforcement for such purpose.
D. The registration statement shall be deemed prima facie proof of the
statement therein contained in any administrative enforcement
proceeding or court proceeding instituted by the Township of Jackson
against the owner or owners of the building.
A. After filing a registration statement or a renewal of a registration
statement, the owner of any vacant property shall provide access to the
Jackson Township Code Enforcement Official if requested, following
reasonable notice, during the period covered by the initial registration
or any subsequent renewal. If an inspection is required of the interior of
the property due to complaints or other cause, the fee for such
inspection shall be the same as that for a certificate of occupancy
inspection, as provided in the applicable provisions of the Code of the
Township of Jackson.
B. The registration statement shall include the name, street address, email
address and telephone number of a natural person 21 years of age or
older, designated by the owner or owners as the authorized agent for
receiving notices of code violations and for receiving process in any
court proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding, on behalf
of such owner or owners in connection with the enforcement of any
applicable code. The designated agent must have a contact number that
will be available 24 hours per day on an emergency basis. The
statement shall also include the name of the person responsible for
maintaining and securing the property, if different from the designated
agent.
C. An owner who is a natural person and who meets the requirements of
this section as to availability of a contact number on a twenty-four-hour
emergency basis may designate himself or herself as agent.
D. By designating an authorized agent under the provisions of this section,
the owner consents to receive any and all notices of code violations
concerning the registered vacant property and all process in any court
proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding brought to
enforce code provisions concerning the registered building by service
of the notice or process on the authorized agent. Any owner who has
designated an authorized agent under the provisions of this section
shall be deemed to consent to the continuation of the agent's
designation for the purpose of this section until the owner notifies the
§ 331-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 331-10
1:1365
§ 331-11. Fees.
The initial registration fee for each building shall be $250. The renewal fee
for each building shall be $250.
§ 331-12. Owner requirements.
The owner of any building that has become vacant and abandoned, and any
person maintaining, operating or collecting rent for any such building that
has become vacant, shall immediately:
§ 331-13. Violations and penalties.
Township of Jackson of a change of the authorized agent or until the
owner files a new annual registration statement. The designation of an
authorized agent in no way releases the owner from any requirement of
this section.
A. Post a sign affixed to the inside of the building indicating the name,
street address, email address and telephone number of the owner, the
owner's authorized agent for the purpose of service of process, and the
person responsible for the day-to-day supervision and management of
the building, if such person is different from the owner holding title or
authorized agent. The sign shall be of a size and placed in such a
location so as to be legible from the nearest public street or sidewalk,
whichever is nearer, but shall be no smaller than 15 inches by 17
inches;
B. Enclose and secure the building against unauthorized entry as provided
in the applicable provisions of the Code of the Township of Jackson and
maintain the sign required in Subsection A above until the building is
again legally occupied or demolished or until repair or rehabilitation of
the building is complete;
C. Make provision for the maintenance of the lawn and yard, including
regular grass cutting, as required by the applicable provisions of the
Code of the Township of Jackson;
D. Make provision for the cessation of the delivery of mail, newspapers
and circulars to the property;
E. Make provision for the winterizing of the property by the cessation of
water service to the property and the draining of water lines;
F. Make provision for the cessation of electric or gas utility services to the
property; and
G. Make provision for the regular maintenance of the exterior of the
property.
A. Any owner who is not in full compliance with this section or who
otherwise violates any provision of this section or of the rules and
§ 331-10 JACKSON CODE § 331-13
1:1366
regulations issued hereunder shall be subject to a fine of not less
than $500 and not more than $1,000 for each offense. Every day that
a violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
Fines assessed under this section shall be recoverable from the owner
and shall be a lien on the property.
B. For purposes of this section, failure to file a registration statement in
time, failure to provide correct information on the registration
statement, failure to comply with the provisions of § 331-12, or such
other matters as may be established by the rules and regulations of the
Council of the Township of Jackson shall be deemed to be violation of
this section.
§ 331-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 331-13
1:1367
Chapter 334
RENT CONTROL FOR APARTMENTS AND MOBILE HOME
PARKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing standards — See Ch. 233.
Mobile home parks — See Ch. 280.
Mobile homes and trailers — See Ch. 285.
Trailers and campsites — See Ch. 400.
§ 331-13 JACKSON CODE § 331-13
1:1368
ARTICLE I
Rent Leveling Board
§ 334-1. Abolishment of Boards.
The Apartment Rent Leveling Board and Mobile Home Park Rent Leveling
Board shall be abolished as of January 1, 2001, at the same time as the
creation of an Apartment and Mobile Home Park Rent Leveling Board as
provided for below.
§ 334-2. Creation; membership; terms; compensation;
qualifications. [Amended 4-14-2015 by Ord. No. 08-15]
§ 334-3. Powers and duties.
A. There is hereby created an Apartment and Mobile Home Park Rent
Leveling Board within the Township of Jackson, effective January 1,
2001.
B. The Board shall consist of nine members and three alternate members
who shall serve in the event of absence or disqualification of a regular
member. The members of the Board and the alternate members shall be
appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Township
Council, and their terms of office shall be for a period of three years
each, commencing on January 1 of the year in which they are appointed.
Each member shall serve without compensation. Each member shall be
a resident of the Township. One member and one alternate member
shall be a tenant of a mobile home park, and one member and one
alternate member shall be a tenant of a housing or rental unit, as that
term is defined in § 334-5.
A. The Rent Leveling Board is hereby granted and shall have and exercise,
in addition to other powers herein granted, all of the powers necessary
and appropriate to carry out and execute the purposes of this chapter,
including but not limited to the following:
(1) To issue and promulgate such rules and regulations as it deems
necessary to implement the purposes of this chapter, which rules
and regulations shall have the force of law until revised, repealed
or amended, from time to time, by the Board in the exercise of its
discretion, provided that such rules are filed with the Township
Clerk.
(2) To supply information and assistance to landlords, owners and
tenants to aid them in complying with the provisions of this chapter.
(3) To hold hearing and adjudicate applications for additional rentals
or such other relief as herein provided.
B. The Board shall give both the landlord or owner and tenant reasonable
opportunity to be heard before making any determination and shall
base its determination on the relevant credible evidence before it.
§ 334-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-3
1:1369
§ 334-4. Appeal procedure.
C. The Board shall meet twice per month. In the event that there are no
pending applications, the Board Chairman shall cancel a scheduled
meeting and shall provide public notice of such cancellation.
A. Any owner or tenant who is or may be affected by any action of the Rent
Leveling Board may appeal the final decision or order of said Board to
the Township Committee. Such appeals shall be made by filing a notice
of appeal within 10 days of the date of decision or order of the Rent
Leveling Board, which notice of appeal shall specify the grounds
thereof and the name and address of the appellant or his attorney. In
the event that such appeal is filed by the owner, the owner must mail to
the tenants a copy of the notice of appeal. In the event that the appeal is
filed by a tenant, the tenant shall be required to mail to the owner a
copy of the notice of appeal within seven days of the filing thereof with
the Township Clerk.
B. Such appeal shall be decided by the Township Committee only upon the
record established before the Rent Leveling Board, and it shall be the
obligation of the person filing the appeal to provide a verbatim
transcript of the proceedings or the official minutes of the proceedings
(or an agreed-to statement of proceedings in lieu of a transcript or
minutes) before the Rent Leveling Board within 15 days of the date of
filing the appeal to the Township Committee, unless extended by the
Township Committee by good cause.
C. The Township Committee shall take final action on the appeal within 15
days of its receipt of the complete transcript (or statement) of
proceedings before the Rent Leveling Board. In its discretion, the
Township Committee may affirm, modify or reverse the decision or
order of the Board, or take such other action as it may deem
appropriate. In the event that the Township Committee determines that
it will modify or reverse a decision or order of the Rent Leveling Board,
it shall be required to specify those facts and reasons upon which it
bases its modification or reversal, and it shall deliver a written
statement of the reasons for its modification or reversal both to the
Rent Leveling Board and to the appellant within seven days of the
adoption of such reasons.
D. In the event that the Township Committee takes no action on the appeal
of the decision or order of the Rent Leveling Board within 15 days of the
date of delivery to the Township Clerk of the complete transcript or
statement of proceedings before the Rent Leveling Board, the action
taken by the Rent Leveling Board shall be deemed to be affirmed by the
Township Committee.
E. The filing of an appeal with the Township Committee shall not stay the
effect of any decision or order of the Rent Leveling Board; provided,
however, that any rents or other increases collected during the
pendency of an appeal with the Township Committee shall be deposited
§ 334-3 JACKSON CODE § 334-4
1:1370
by the owner in an interest-bearing escrow account, and such rent or
other increase shall be refunded by the owner with interest in the event
that the increase is modified or reversed.
§ 334-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-4
1:1371

ARTICLE II
Rent Control Provisions
[Amended 6-28-2004 by Ord. No. 28-04; 3-27-2006 by Ord. No.
06-06; 6-24-2008 by Ord. No. 23-08]
§ 334-5. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the terms used herein are defined as
follows:
AVAILABLE FOR RENT TO TENANTS — Fit for rental as defined by the
statutes, codes and ordinances in effect in the State of New Jersey, County
of Ocean and Township of Jackson and occupied or unoccupied and offered
for rent.
BASE RENT — The payable rent charged and received for the housing
unit or rental unit or mobile home rental space over the previous twelvemonth
period, exclusive of any and all of the following: all real property
taxes or license fees charged by the Township; any tax surcharges; and any
increases for major capital improvements.
CAPITAL EXPENDITURE OR IMPROVEMENT — Any amount paid out or
to be paid out for permanent improvements made to increase the value of
property and useful life in a manner greater in size, amount or importance
than ordinary expenses or normal repairs as defined under the Internal
Revenue Service Code and Regulations, provided that said expenditures are
entitled to be depreciated under the applicable provisions of the Internal
Revenue Service Code and Regulations.
CONSUMER PRICE INDEX — That consumer price index (all items) for all
urban consumers of the United States published periodically by the Bureau
of Statistics of the United States Department of Labor as generally reported
January 15.
DWELLING — Includes any building or structure, rented or offered for rent
to one or more tenants or family units, and not otherwise exempt under the
provisions of this chapter.
ECONOMIC LIFE — The estimated period over which it is anticipated that
a property may be profitably used.
ENFORCEMENT — Any violations of this chapter shall be reported by the
Board to the Township Council and Zoning Officer for the Township. The
Zoning Officer and/or Code Enforcement Officers are specifically granted
authority to sanction violations of this chapter by a summons in Municipal
Court or any other court permissible by law.
HOUSING UNIT or RENTAL UNIT — Includes a building or that portion of
a building rented or offered for rent for living and dwelling purposes to an
individual or family unit, together with all privileges, services, furnishings,
furniture, equipment and facilities and improvements connected with the
use or occupancy of such portion of the property.
§ 334-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-5
1:1373
LANDLORD — An owner, lessor, sublessor, receiver, trustee, executor,
assignee or other person receiving or entitled to receive rent for the use or
occupancy of a mobile home rental space or of the whole or a part of any
housing unit or rental unit.
MOBILE HOME RENTAL SPACE — That portion of a trailer or mobile home
park rented or offered for rent for the purposes of parking a trailer or
mobile home for living and dwelling purposes to one individual or family
unit, together with all privileges, services equipment, facilities and
improvements connected with the use or occupancy of such portion of
the property. Mobile home rental spaces which are vacant or are newly
constructed and rented for the first time are exempted, and the initial rent
may be determined by the owner. All subsequent rents will be subject to the
provisions of this chapter.
PROFESSIONAL FEES — Fees paid to an attorney, an engineer or an
accountant.
REASONABLE AND NECESSARY OPERATING EXPENSES — All expenses
actually incurred and paid by a landlord during the period reflected in gross
income computed in accordance with the provisions and limitations of this
chapter. In computing reasonable and necessary operating expenses, the
following limitations shall apply in all cases:
RENT — Any and all sums paid by a tenant for the use of a dwelling,
including the services in connection therewith. "Rent" shall not include
sums paid into or collected from coin-operated machines. "Rent" shall also
not include any amounts paid pursuant to a separate written agreement
entered voluntarily by and between a landlord and tenant for use of
furnishings and the like, exclusive of stoves, ranges, ovens, refrigerators
and air-conditioning units. Such agreements shall be independent of and
separate from the leasehold agreement.
Operating expenses shall not include mortgage amortization, mortgage
or other interest, depreciation, fines or penalties.
A.
Taxes should be limited to amounts actually paid solely on the mobile
home park or dwelling less the amounts of any tax surcharges paid by
tenants.
B.
Repair and maintenance expenses shall not include expenditures for
capital improvements.
C.
Professional fees, including legal and accounting expenses, shall be
limited to actual costs for the day-to-day operation of the park or
dwelling. Legal and accounting expenses resulting solely from an
application made pursuant to this chapter or resulting from legal
attacks on this chapter shall not be considered reasonable and
necessary operating expenses as defined in this chapter.
D.
Management expenses shall be limited to amounts paid for actual
services performed by a manager or management firm. In no event shall
a fee for management services exceed 5% of the gross income.
E.
§ 334-5 JACKSON CODE § 334-5
1:1374
SERVICES — Repairs, decorating and maintenance, the furnishing of
equipment, appliances, light, steam, heat, hot and cold water, telephone,
elevator service, cleaning service, linen service, janitor service, the removal
of refuse and any other utility facility or privilege connected with and
furnished by the landlord for the use or occupancy of the housing unit.
TENANTS — Mobile home owners and occupants who rent or lease a mobile
home rental space from the mobile home park owner, or occupants who rent
or lease a housing or rental unit from a landlord.
§ 334-6. Establishment of rents.
Establishment of rents for mobile home rental spaces and rents between
a landlord and a tenant for housing or rental units used as dwellings,
and which are available for rent to tenants and to which this chapter is
applicable, shall hereafter be determined by the provisions of this chapter.
§ 334-7. Disclosure of rents.
§ 334-8. Rental increases.
No landlord may demand, request or receive a rental increase for the
occupancy of a mobile home rental space or housing or rental unit unless
authorized pursuant to and in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. Any rental increase at any time in excess of that authorized by
the provisions of this chapter shall be void. Any rental increase must be
approved by the Rent Leveling Board after application and review in
accordance with the standards set forth in this chapter. Any rental increase
implemented by a landlord without such review and approval by the Rent
Leveling Board shall be void.
§ 334-9. Exemptions; vacancy decontrol.
A. The landlord shall provide and disclose to all new tenants, in writing
upon execution of a lease, the sums allocated in the gross rent paid to
the landlord for the following items:
(1) Base rent.
(2) Tax surcharge.
(3) License fee.
(4) Any other special expense.
B. A copy of said disclosure shall be filed with the Rent Leveling Board
within 30 days of execution of the same.
A. Exemptions. The following are exemptions from the provisions of this
chapter to the extent set forth below:
(1) Hotels, motels, boardinghouses and all other premises if they
primarily serve transient guests.
§ 334-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-9
1:1375
(2) Public housing units.
(3) New construction. Any person, firm, corporation or entity placing
on the rental market for the first time any newly constructed
residential housing space within the Township shall be entitled to
charge any rent to any tenant that may be obtained by an
agreement between the parties, and said unit shall remain exempt
from the provisions of this chapter for seven years from the date of
the initial certificate of occupancy for the unit. However, the
landlord shall, during the exempt period, notify all prospective
tenants, in writing, prior to commencement of any tenancy:
(a) That the unit is exempt from rent control pursuant to this
chapter.
(b) The date upon which said exemption terminates.
(4) Existing housing space placed on the rental market for the first
time. Any person, firm, corporation or entity placing on the rental
market for the first time any existing residential housing space
within the Township shall be entitled to charge any rent to any
tenant that may be obtained by an agreement between the parties,
and thereafter said unit shall remain exempt from the provisions of
this chapter for seven years from the date of the initial certificate of
occupancy for the unit. However, the landlord shall, during the
exempt period, notify all prospective tenants, in writing, prior to
commencement of any tenancy:
(a) That the unit is exempt from rent control pursuant to this
chapter.
(b) The date upon which said exemption terminate(s).
(5) School dormitories.
(6) Apartment complexes containing 20 rental units or fewer.
(7) Rental units owned by a nonprofit corporation that is exempt from
municipal taxation pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:4-3.6.
(8) Government subsidized units.
(a) Existing units. The rent of any rental unit or mobile home
rental space governed by this chapter and occupied by a tenant
whose rent is subsidized by a governmental program, such as
the Department of Housing and Urban Development Section 8
Housing Program, may be increased once a year, without
applying to the Rent Leveling Board, in excess of the annual
increases permitted by § 334-10 herein, provided that the
increase is permissible under the rules and regulations of the
government subsidy program and the tenant's share of the rent
is not increased at a greater percentage than would be
permitted by this chapter. Should the unit subsequently by
§ 334-9 JACKSON CODE § 334-9
1:1376
occupied by a tenant whose rent is not subsidized, the rent
for that unit shall be immediately reinstated to an amount that
would have been permitted if this subsection did not govern.
(b) Rehabilitated units.
[1] The rent of any rental unit rehabilitated pursuant to a
governmental housing rehabilitation/rent supplemental
program, such as the Department of Housing and Urban
Development Section 8 Moderate Rehabilitation Program,
may be increased once, upon completion of the
rehabilitation, in excess of the annual percentage increase
permitted by § 334-10 herein, for the establishment of a
new base rent, without applying to the Rent Leveling
Board, provided that:
[a] The increase is permissible under the rules and
regulations of the governmental rehabilitation/subsidy
program; and
[b] The rent is established in accordance with the rent
calculation formula prescribed by the program
regulations.
[2] After the establishment of a new base rent for
rehabilitated units, subsequent annual increases shall be
treated as in Subsection A(8)(b)[1] above.
(9) Substantially rehabilitated buildings. An occupied building may be
exempt from the provisions of this chapter if the landlord
rehabilitates the building as to result in a fifty-percent increase in
the assessed value thereof. The building shall be entitled to
exemption from the provisions of this chapter, provided that the
landlord makes application to the Rent Leveling Board for
exemption pursuant to this subsection and the Rent Leveling Board
determines that the building has been substantially rehabilitated so
as to increase the assessed value thereof 50% over the assessment
in effect immediately prior to the date the rehabilitation work was
commenced. The exemption shall be for five years from the date of
the Rent Leveling Board decision. The exemption permitted by this
subsection shall not be granted to any substantially rehabilitated
building if the rehabilitation is compelled by state or local health,
building or housing laws, regulations or requirements.
(10)Office buildings, commercial buildings and similar type buildings in
which 1/3 or more of the occupied floor space is used for
commercial purposes.
(11) Where a landlord or owner and an individual tenant or several
tenants mutually agree or negotiate a rental in excess of the rent
permitted by this chapter, provided that any tenant or tenants who
enter into any such agreement shall personally appear before the
§ 334-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-9
1:1377
Rent Leveling Board or an official designated by the Board and
shall affirm that the agreement is voluntary and uncoerced. Any
such rental agreement shall be solely between such individuals
and shall be deemed to be an exception to the provisions of this
chapter, and is hereby authorized. Under no circumstances shall
such agreement be applicable for any other purpose whatsoever.
(12) Where the landlord or owner of a rental property and the tenants
thereof agree to a negotiated settlement of rents by the agreement
of 2/3 of all occupied units in the rental property to such a
negotiated settlement, on the basis of one vote per occupied
housing or rental unit in the rental property, all tenants having
been given an opportunity to agree thereto, such negotiated
settlement shall have the effect of authorizing the landlord or
owner to increase rentals at a percentage which is the same for all
housing or rental units in the rental property. Such negotiated
settlements shall take effect in accordance with the terms and
conditions thereof, and a copy of any such negotiated settlement
shall be filed with the Rent Leveling Board.
(13) The landlord of a newly constructed mobile home rental space, or
of a mobile home that was obtained by the landlord through
repossession, eviction or abandonment, or of a mobile home rental
space being rented for the first time, or being rented as a result of
the vacating of the mobile home rental space by a previous tenant
by the removal by that tenant of his or her mobile home shall not be
restricted in the rental he or she charges. Any subsequent rental
increases to the tenant who takes possession, however, shall be
subject to the provisions of this chapter. In addition, a landlord of a
space rented by an individual who does not live in the mobile home
community, but who rents a mobile home lot as a business for the
purpose of renting homes to others, shall not be restricted in the
rent he or she charges. [Amended 10-12-2010 by Ord. No.
23-10]
(14) All designated newly developed affordable housing inclusionary
sites with a set-aside of a minimum of 15% of affordable housing
shall be exempt from the rent control provisions of this chapter for
any units receiving an initial certificate of occupancy after March
15, 2016. Mobile home parks shall not be eligible for this
exemption. [Added 6-28-2016 by Ord. No. 13-16]
B. Vacancy decontrol.
(1) Upon the voluntary, uncoerced vacation of a mobile home by any
tenant for which rent increases are controlled by this Chapter 334,
and upon compliance with this section, at the time of rerental of a
lot pursuant to this section, a landlord may charge the succeeding
tenant a new rent which is no higher than 7.5% of the highest rent
in the park added to the prior tenant's rent for a single-wide or
double-wide home, as applicable. This vacancy decontrol provision
§ 334-9 JACKSON CODE § 334-9
1:1378
shall not apply to circumstances wherein the unit is inherited
by a spouse, parent or child of the former owner. [Amended
10-12-2010 by Ord. No. 23-10; 3-11-2014 by Ord. No. 05-14]
(2) The landlord must file with the Rent Leveling Board, and provide a
copy to the tenant in occupancy, if any, a vacancy decontrol
certification within 15 days after entering into a lease agreement
and accepting a deposit from a new tenant, which shall include the
following information:
(a) Property address.
(b) Apartment number.
(c) Vacating tenant's monthly base rent.
(d) New tenant's monthly rent.
(e) Name of landlord.
(f) Address of landlord.
(g) Telephone number of landlord.
(h) A statement certifying that the vacancy was uncoerced or as a
result of court-ordered eviction, which statement shall be
provided to any tenant then occupying the subject housing or
rental unit or mobile home.
(3) Vacancy decontrol certifications and the statement provided to any
tenant then in occupancy shall be approved by the Rent Leveling
Board unless a written objection to the certification is filed with the
Rent Leveling Board within 10 days of the filing of a complete
certification. In the event an objection is filed, a hearing shall be
held and conducted in accordance with the applicable procedures
of § 334-22.
(4) Once a unit has received vacancy decontrol pursuant to this
section, it shall be subject to the remaining provisions of the
chapter, and any future rental increases for the tenant in
occupancy are limited to those increases permitted under the
chapter.
(5) Anti-harassment provision. It shall be unlawful for a landlord, or his
or her agents, to willfully do, or commit or cause to be done or
committed, any of the following: any harassment, intimidation or
other similar action to a tenant with the intent to have a tenant
vacate the rental unit; any reduction by the landlord in services
which causes the tenant to vacate the premises; and any vacation
of the premises which is coerced; provided, however, that this
provision shall not limit a landlord, or his or her agents, from any
act specifically authorized under the laws of the State of New
Jersey.
§ 334-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-9
1:1379
§ 334-10. Annual increase; decreases.
(6) Violation of anti-harassment provision.
(a) In addition to the penalties set forth in § 334-32, a willful
violation of this section shall subject the landlord to:
[1] On the first offense, loss of privilege to apply for vacancy
decontrol for any housing or rental unit or mobile home
rental space at the subject property for a period of not less
than one year;
[2] On the second offense, loss of privilege to apply for
vacancy decontrol for any housing or rental unit or mobile
home rental space at the subject property for a period of
not less than two years;
[3] Upon a finding of any further offenses, loss of privilege to
apply for vacancy decontrol for any housing or rental unit
or mobile home rental space at the subject property for a
period of five years.
(b) A complaint for the violation of this provision shall be brought
in Municipal Court. A complaint may be initiated by the Rent
Leveling Board or an affected tenant.
A. Computation of increases; limits.
(1) A landlord may receive on an annual basis a percentage increase
for the occupancy of a mobile home park space or rental/housing
unit, which increase is to be computed based upon the annualized
percentage increase in the consumer price index (CPI) average for
the prior year, as reported in January of the year in which an
application is made. In no event shall such annual percentage
increase exceed a maximum of 4.25%. The percentage of allowable
increase calculated hereunder shall be applied to the tenant's
existing base rent.
(2) The fair rental may be increased by only a maximum of 4.25% in
each twelve-month period, said annual increases to be compounded
annually.
B. Service of notice of request for increase.
(1) Any landlord seeking such an increase in rent shall serve notice
upon the tenants and the Rent Leveling Board at least 60 days prior
to the effective date of the increase of the calculations involved in
computing the increase by advising them of the percentage
increase in the consumer price index, the allowable rental increase,
the amount of base rent before and after the proposed increase and
the effective date of the proposed increase.
§ 334-9 JACKSON CODE § 334-10
1:1380
(2) In addition, the landlord shall submit to the Rent Leveling Board
copies of all leases, together with the names and addresses of each
individual or entity which owns 5% or more of the mobile home
park, or housing and rental unit. The application shall also name
any individual or entity with an ownership interest owning a
dwelling in the particular mobile home park or housing and rental
unit. The applicant shall also certify that the rental property is in a
safe, sanitary condition and that the landlord is in full compliance
with all state and local laws pertaining to tenant rights. The failure
of the landlord to provide the tenant and the Rent Leveling Board
with this information shall make any increase void, and the tenant
shall recover any increase which the tenant may have paid.
C. Notice of the landlord's request for an increase shall also be posted in a
prominent place within the mobile home park or dwelling. Proof of
compliance with the notice request and service of the notice required in
Subsection B above shall be submitted to the Rent Leveling Board.
D. In the event of a decrease in the consumer price index, any tenant may
receive from the landlord on an annual basis a percentage decrease in
the amount of base rent being charged for the occupancy of a mobile
home rental space or housing or rental unit, which decrease is to be
computed based upon the percentage decrease in the consumer price
index average for the prior year. Said percentage decrease shall then be
applied to the tenant's existing base rent.
E. Any tenant seeking such a decrease in rent shall notify the landlord and
the Rent Leveling Board thereof at least 30 days prior to the effective
date of the decrease of the amount of base rent before and after the
proposed decrease and the effective date of the proposed decrease. The
failure of the tenant to provide the landlord and the Rent Leveling
Board with this information shall make any decrease void, and the
landlord shall recover any such decrease.
F. Annual increases pursuant to this section may be obtained by a landlord
on an interim basis during the pendency of an application for a rental
increase under any other provision of this chapter.
G. Landlords who supply the tenants with heat shall be permitted to raise
rents on rental units governed by this chapter once a year at a flat rate
increase of 1.5% over the consumer price index. Landlords who do not
supply tenants with heat shall be permitted to raise rents on rental
units governed by this chapter once a year at a flat rate increase equal
to the consumer price index calculation.
H. Optional two-year rental increase.
(1) Should the landlord and tenant mutually agree at the inception of
any rental period, the parties may enter into a two-year lease
agreement with rentals to be set at 3.5% over the consumer price
index and 2.2% over the consumer price index where the landlord
does not supply heat. The rental during the two-year term of said
§ 334-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-10
1:1381
§ 334-11. Landlord's rate of return.
lease agreement shall remain at the rates set forth herein above,
and the landlord shall not be entitled to any hardship or usual
expense increases as would otherwise be permitted under this
chapter. The landlord shall, however, be entitled to obtain a tax
surcharge or the tenant shall be entitled to a tax decrease, as the
case may be, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. In
addition, at the termination of the two-year tenancy as set forth
herein, the landlord shall not be entitled to an accumulation of
that portion of the rental increase which would have otherwise
been permitted pursuant to a one-year tenancy. The landlord shall,
however, be entitled to the normal rental increase in effect at the
time of the expiration of the two-year lease agreement.
(2) Should an initial two-year tenancy terminate prior to the expiration
of the two-year term, then and in that event the landlord may
charge a new tenant that amount that is permitted by Subsection A
of this section, but may also make an application to the Rent
Leveling Board for such other increases as are permitted pursuant
to this chapter.
A. It is expressly recognized that an efficient landlord is entitled to a just
and reasonable rate of return from his property. To that end, a landlord
is permitted to make application to the Rent Leveling Board for rental
increases on the basis that rents allowed by this chapter prevent the
landlord from receiving a just and reasonable rate of return. Landlords
shall have the burden of proof as established through expert testimony
or otherwise that the rate of return is unjust and unreasonable in
accordance with the formula set forth herein. This formula shall be the
exclusive formula for determining a just and reasonable rate of return.
B. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FAIR NET OPERATING INCOME — Gross maximized annual income,
less reasonable and necessary operating expenses, such expenses not
to exceed 57.5% of the gross maximized annual income.
GROSS MAXIMIZED ANNUAL INCOME — The gross maximum
potential rent roll, less a maximum deduction of 3.5% for vacancies and
uncollectibles, or the annual sum of rents collected, whichever amount
is larger, and includes all income resulting, directly or indirectly, from
the operation of a property or building, including, but not limited to,
all rent received or collectible, all earnings from commissions, vending
machines, deductions from security deposits, late fees, pet fees,
parking fees and any and all other fees or income derived from
operation of the rental premises.
C. Permitted increase. Whenever a landlord shall determine that the
reasonable and necessary operating expenses computed in accordance
with the provisions of this section are greater than 57.5% of the gross
§ 334-10 JACKSON CODE § 334-11
1:1382
maximized annual income, he may make application to the Rent
Leveling Board for an increase in rent in order to reestablish the fiftyseven-
and-five-tenths-percent relationship. Any increase so granted
shall be prorated to all of the units within the structure or on the
property, and further, provided that, where a written lease is in effect
for a property or for any portion thereof, no increase for that property
or portion shall be permitted until the expiration of such written lease
unless the following preconditions have been complied with:
(1) The written lease agreement contains a provision permitting the
landlord to make application for and collect from the tenant any
increase in rental permitted pursuant to this section of this chapter.
(2) Service upon the tenant of a notice advising the tenant of his right
to serve upon the landlord at any time after the granting of an
increase pursuant to this section a written notice terminating the
lease agreement effective 30 days thereafter.
(3) Indication in the separate notice referred to hereinabove of the
landlord's right to file an application for rent increase pursuant to
this section of this chapter.
D. Application requirements.
(1) In any application under this section, the landlord shall, in addition
to those requirements mandated by other sections of this chapter,
specifically certify that:
(a) He/she is an efficient operator of the residential rental
property.
(b) The residential rental property is in a safe and sanitary
condition.
(c) The owner (he or she) is in full compliance with all state and
local laws pertaining to tenants' rights.
(d) He/she is not earning a fair net operating income pursuant to
the formula set forth herein.
(2) The landlord shall submit with the application the following:
(a) Proof of compliance with notice and service requirements.
(b) The amount of increase and percentage of increase requested.
(c) Detailed statements of income and expenses for the past two
fiscal years.
E. At the time of the application, the landlord shall serve written notice, to
include the date, time and location of the formal hearing, on all tenants
that an application is being made and is available to any tenant
requesting the same. The landlord shall also post the notice in a
prominent place in the park or dwelling. The owner shall also make
§ 334-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-11
1:1383
available to the tenants, at reasonable times, and the Rent Leveling
Board all records and books supporting the application. If at any time
during the course of consideration of an increase pursuant to the
provisions of this section the Rent Leveling Board shall determine
that a landlord is not in substantial compliance with any or all of the
application requirements, the Board may temporarily withhold further
consideration of the application for an increase until such time as the
landlord has corrected any such deficiency.
F. Computation. In computing reasonable and necessary operating
expenses under this section, the following limitations as appropriate for
a mobile home park or apartment dwelling shall apply in all cases:
(1) Taxes shall be limited to those amounts actually due and owing at
the time of the application. If the landlord is imposing a tax
surcharge, only the base-year taxes may be included.
(2) Repairs and maintenance shall be limited to arm's-length
transactions and shall be reasonable and necessary so as not to
cause over-maintenance of the premises. The cost of service
contracts shall be prorated over the period covered. Painting costs
shall be prorated over the number of years of the actual painting
cycle in the building, but in no event shall painting be prorated for
a period of more than three years for the interior of dwelling units
or five years for the exterior and common areas. In the event the
landlord determines to perform maintenance and repairs, at least
three written quotes from other vendors shall be provided to the
Rent Leveling Board to evidence the monetary value of said work.
(3) Purchase of replacement appliances and equipment shall be
prorated over the useful life of the item.
(4) Legal and auditing expenses shall be limited to those reasonable
and necessary costs for the operation of the property. No legal
expense or audit expense shall be allowed as a deduction that does
not directly result from the landlord-tenant relationship. A landlord
may not deduct expenses incurred in litigating any declaratory or
injunctive relief as to his rights in the nature of a writ of
mandamus. All costs shall be itemized on this application.
(5) Management fees shall be limited to the actual services performed,
including the resident manager's salary, telephone expenses,
postage, office supplies, stationery and the value of the apartment
provided, if included in income. Where the landlord performs his
own management and/or superintendent services, the amount
allocated therefor shall be limited to the actual value of services
performed. In no event shall management fees exceed 5% of the
gross maximized income.
(6) Salaries for superintendents not included in management fees shall
be limited to actual services performed and shall be reasonable and
comparable to amounts paid for similar positions in the area,
§ 334-11 JACKSON CODE § 334-11
1:1384
including rental value of any apartment provided, if included in
income, and expenses and wages and benefits paid.
(7) Advertising shall be limited to actual costs that are reasonable to
ensure occupancy only.
(8) Utilities, including, but not limited to, gas, electric, water and oil,
shall derive from arm's-length transactions, and the landlord shall
demonstrate that all reasonable efforts to conserve energy and
fuels have been used.
(9) Insurance shall derive from arm's-length transactions prorated
over the life period of the policy and shall not include any person's
life, medical or other personal policies.
(10) No penalties, fines or interest for any reason shall be allowed.
(11) The history of the income and expenses shall be consistent with the
application or fully documented as to any changes.
(12) Reserve for replacement shall be permitted as an expense only if:
(a) The landlord produces at the hearing a savings account
passbook or similar account verifying the existence of a
reserve.
(b) The landlord submits as part of his application a detailed
explanation of how the reserve for replacement amount was
arrived at, including particularly the useful lives of each capital
item involved and the dollar amount attributable to them.
(c) The landlord submits, as part of his application, documentation
to show that the reserve fund has been utilized where
replacement of any of the capital items has occurred and that
replacement of capital items has, in fact, occurred as their
useful lives have expired.
(d) The landlord submits to the Board annually thereafter a
certification from the bank, savings and loan association or
similar institution as to the amount in the reserve account and
further submits a certified and detailed explanation of any
withdrawals made from said account.
(e) Should application for rental increase be made pursuant to this
section, then and in that event, at the time of any sale of the
rental property, the landlord shall submit to the Board a
detailed accounting of the disposition or transfer of the reserve
account. In no case shall the annual reserve for replacement
exceed 5% of the gross annual income from rent.
G. In order to provide the Rent Leveling Board with sufficient time to
review the required financial data and schedule a hearing, it is required
that an applicant submit an application for a rental increase under this
§ 334-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-11
1:1385
section at least 90 days prior to the effective date of the proposed rental
increase.
H. The most recent current rents being charged by a landlord on
uncontrolled rental spaces are admissible in evidence against such
landlord at any hearings held in connection with applications for rental
increases under this section, and such rates create a rebuttable
presumption that the charging of the same rent on all rental spaces
would provide the landlord with sufficient funds to pay all reasonable
and necessary operating and maintenance expenses and provide the
permitted rate of return.
I. In the event that the financial information submitted by the landlord
reveals a loan made by the landlord (or by a shareholder if the landlord
is a corporation) to the mobile home park, the interest expense on any
such loan shall be computed based on a rate which is the current
prevailing savings rate being paid on thirty-month savings institution
certificates.
J. Payment of permitted increase. Any increases permitted by the
Township Rent Leveling Board pursuant to this section shall be effective
retroactive to the first rental pay period at the expiration of 30 days
from the date of the landlord's application for an increase is filed with
the Board. Should the landlord revise his application for an increase
based upon the submission of expenses not related, in whole or in part,
to the premises in question; or because the original application is
substantially incorrect or incomplete or deviates from accepted
accounting norms; or resulting in an increase in the amount of relief
sought, then and in that event the increase permitted by the Board shall
be retroactive to the first rental pay period subsequent to 30 days from
the date the revised application is submitted to the Board. Any
application revised by the applicant or the Board for reasons other than
as set forth hereinabove shall be deemed to have been submitted in its
revised form on the original submission date. Any retroactive portion of
the increase permitted by the Board as set forth hereinabove shall be
payable by the tenant in three equal monthly portions, commencing
with the first rental pay period subsequent to the Board's decision. Said
staggered payments shall be in addition to the prospective increased
payments for which the tenant shall be responsible as a result of the
Board's decision.
K. Improper use of reserve for replacement. Should a landlord have been
granted an increase in rent pursuant to this section of this chapter after
having alleged a reserve for replacement as an expense item and,
thereafter, a tenant believes that the landlord has failed to make proper
use of the reserve for replacement as set forth in this section, then and
in that event the tenant may make application to the Rent Leveling
Board for appropriate relief.
L. No landlord shall be permitted to receive an increase under this section
until such time as the landlord has owned and operated the rental
§ 334-11 JACKSON CODE § 334-11
1:1386
§ 334-12. Hardship increase.
property for a period of at least 12 months or until the close of the first
complete fiscal year of ownership by the landlord, whichever occurs
first.
M. Increases authorized under this section shall be based only on financial
information for the twelve-month period which closed immediately
prior to the date of application under this section. Losses carried over
from prior years or unrealized income for prior years shall not be
included in computing interest under this section, except for secondyear
or subsequent-year losses incurred as a result of rental
agreements exceeding one year.
N. Except for second-year or subsequent-year losses incurred as a result of
rental agreements exceeding one year, no rental increase may be
obtained by a landlord under any provision of this chapter to cover
operating losses incurred in prior years resulting from the failure of the
landlord to either apply for or obtain rental increases or surcharges
under this chapter or resulting from the owner's charging of rents
under § 334-27 which are insufficient to meet operational requirements
and obtain a reasonable rate of return. The failure of the landlord to
either apply for or obtain such rental increases or surcharges within
three months of the close of the fiscal year in which the operating losses
are incurred or in which the reasonable rate of return is not realized or
the landlord's charging of such insufficient rents under § 334-27 during
the fiscal year shall be deemed a waiver of the owner's right to such
additional rents or surcharges.
A. When an efficient landlord finds that the gross maximized income from
his property is insufficient to cover the cost of interest payments on a
first mortgage or purchase money mortgage, and on any subsequent
mortgages, the proceeds of which have been used to improve and
upgrade the rental property; for reasonable and necessary operating
expenses incurred in connection with the rental property or mobile
home park; or for unusual or unexpected increases in the cost of
providing heat or utilities or in the making of capital expenditures or
improvements which may require a substantial investment or
expenditure by the landlord to offset such expenses, such landlord may
seek a hardship rental increase. The Rent Leveling Board may grant a
hardship rent increase to meet these payments. For purposes of this
section, "gross maximized income" shall be defined and calculated in
accordance with the provisions of § 334-11 of this chapter.
B. The Rent Leveling Board shall consider all relevant evidence, including
conditions of the premises, the degree of hardship to the landlord and
financial records explaining the mortgage, tax or maintenance expense.
Any landlord seeking a hardship surcharge shall petition the Rent
Leveling Board after serving notice upon the tenants, in accordance
with § 334-31, of his intent to seek a hardship surcharge and after full
disclosure of all relevant financial information to them. The Rent
§ 334-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-12
1:1387
Leveling Board shall give reasonable opportunity to be heard to both
the landlord and the tenant before making a determination.
C. Any application based upon unusual or unexpected increases shall be
allowed only for good cause shown. Clear proof of the cost must be
furnished. If the increase sought concerns a capital expenditure, capital
improvement or major repair requiring a substantial investment, the
landlord shall prove the normal economic life expectancy of the
expenditure, improvement or repair and shall determine the average
cost per year of economic life. This average cost of the capital
expenditure, improvement or repair may be apportioned among the
tenants in the dwelling in accordance with the formula set forth in tax
surcharge-ratio of square footage occupied by each tenant to the whole.
In no event shall the cost of expanding or enlarging the rental property
or a portion thereof be borne by the tenants. If the increase sought is
the result of an increase in the cost of providing a utility service
regulated by the Board of Public Utilities of the State of New Jersey, the
landlord shall prove that the cost of providing such utility service has
increased by more than 6.5% per annum. Upon such proof, the landlord
may be entitled to a rental increase equal to the amount by which the
cost of providing such utility service exceeds 6.5% more than the prior
years cost. The landlord shall also present evidence in seeking an
increase pursuant to this section concerning the actual rent being
charged for each unit, a profit-and-loss statement for the premises for
the past two fiscal years, the condition of the premises, the rate of
return on the landlord's investment and the steps taken to provide safe,
healthful and adequate housing, in addition to any other evidence that
will assist the Board in making a fair decision. The Rent Leveling Board
shall utilize all of the above information in determining whether or not
to permit the additional rent increase sought.
D. Any increases permitted by the Board pursuant to this section shall be
effective retroactive to the first rental period at the expiration of 30
days from the date the landlord's application for an increase is filed
with the Board. Should the landlord revise his application for an
increase based upon submission of expenses not related, in whole or in
part, to the premises in question; or because the original application is
substantially incorrect or incomplete or deviates from accepted
accounting norms; or resulting in an increase in the amount of relief
sought, then and in that event the increase permitted by the Board shall
be retroactive to the first rental period subsequent to 30 days from the
date the revised application is submitted to the Board. Any applications
revised by the applicant or the Board for reasons other than as set forth
hereinabove shall be payable by the tenant in three equal monthly
portions, commencing with the first rental pay period subsequent to the
Board's decision. Said staggered payments shall be in addition to the
prospective increased payments for which the tenant shall be
responsible as a result of the Board's decision.
§ 334-12 JACKSON CODE § 334-12
1:1388
§ 334-13. Tax surcharge.
Upon application to the Rent Leveling Board, a landlord may obtain a tax
surcharge based upon an increase in municipal property taxes pursuant to
the following provisions:
E. Where a written lease is in effect for a property or for any portion
thereof, no increase for that property or portion thereof shall be
permitted until the expiration of such written lease, unless the
following preconditions have been complied with:
(1) The written lease agreement contains a provision permitting the
landlord to make application for and collect from the tenant any
increase in rental permitted pursuant to this section.
(2) Service upon the tenant of a notice advising the tenant of his right
to serve upon the landlord at any time after the granting of an
increase pursuant to this section of this chapter a written notice
terminating the lease agreement effective 30 days thereafter.
(3) Indication in the separate notice referred to hereinabove of the
landlord's right to file an application for rent increase pursuant to
this section of this chapter.
F. No landlord shall be permitted to receive an increase under this section
until such time as the landlord has owned and operated the rental
property or mobile home park for a period of at least 12 months or until
the close of the first complete fiscal year of ownership by the landlord,
whichever occurs first.
A. Formula.
(1) Housing/rental units. The tax surcharge shall not exceed that
amount authorized by this section. The landlord shall divide the
increase in the present property tax over the property tax of the
base year by the number of square feet in the entire building. The
tenant shall not be responsible for a tax surcharge exceeding the
tax increase per square foot multiplied by the number of square
feet occupied by the tenant; provided, however, that all common
areas of the demised premises shall be included in the portion of
the premises rented by each tenant on a pro-rata basis.
(2) Mobile home parks. The tax surcharge shall be equivalent to the
increment of the current year's taxes over the preceding year's
taxes divided by the total number of tenants residing in the mobile
home park as of August 1 of the current year. In addition, the
previous year's total taxes charged per resident shall be
recalculated when there is a change in the total number of tenants
in order to reflect the adjusted pro rata charge of real estate taxes
to each tenant for the prior year's taxes. The sum of the current
year's surcharge per tenant plus the adjusted pro rata charge of
real estate taxes for the prior years shall be the total real estate
§ 334-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-13
1:1389
§ 334-14. Rental charges for capital improvements.
charge to be assessed to each tenant. In no event may the total
taxes paid by the tenants to the landlord exceed the total real
estate taxes assessed.
B. An applicant for a tax surcharge shall comply with the notice
requirements of § 334-10B and C and the application shall include the
documents required in § 334-10B.
C. The tax surcharge each tenant is liable for shall be paid in 12 monthly
payments.
D. Tenancies of less than one year. The tax surcharge for tenancies of less
than one year shall be computed in the same manner as provided in
Subsection A, but no tenant shall be liable in any month for more than
1/12 of the tax surcharge so computed.
E. Surcharge not considered rent. The tax surcharge shall not be
considered rent for purposes of computing rental increases.
F. Tax appeal. In the event of a tax appeal, the portion of the tenant's tax
surcharge not being paid by the landlord to the Township will be held in
an interest-bearing account. If the appeal is successful and the taxes
reduced, the tenant will receive 50% of the money held in escrow,
together with the accrued interest on the total amount. Payment will be
in the form of a credit against the monthly rent or a check made payable
to the tenant. If the tax appeal is successful, the landlord may maintain
50% of the escrow amount as reimbursement for all expenses
connected with the tax appeal.
A. A landlord may apply to the Rent Leveling Board for additional rental
charges for the payment of the reasonable cost of capital improvements
which are necessary for the proper operation of the park or housing/
rental unit, upon completion of said capital improvements. A landlord
may file an application to seek a determination whether proposed
improvements would be subject to this section. The Board shall then
review the concept of the application only and render a decision as to
the applicability of the proposed capital improvement to this section. In
the event the landlord determines to perform maintenance and repairs,
at least three written quotes from other vendors shall be provided to
the Rent Leveling Board to evidence the monetary value of said work.
B. A landlord seeking additional rent for a capital improvement shall apply
within six months of the completion of said capital improvement for said
additional rent to the Rent Leveling Board, which shall determine, after
the landlord has served notice to the aforesaid tenants of a hearing
date, if said improvement is a necessary major improvement and, if so,
the amount of the increase granted for such major improvement, and
which shall establish the terms and conditions of such increase.
§ 334-13 JACKSON CODE § 334-14
1:1390
C. At least seven days prior to the hearing by the Board on an application
for additional rental charges under this section, the landlord must serve
the individual tenants, in accordance with § 334-31, a notice of the
application setting forth the date, time and location of the hearing and
setting forth total cost of the completed capital improvement, number
of useful years of the life of the improvement as established by Federal
Internal Revenue guidelines using the straight line method and as
claimed by the landlord for purposes of depreciation for income tax
purpose, the average cost, including that service of the improvements
(calculated by dividing the cost of the capital improvement by the total
number of completed mobile home spaces in the mobile home park or
total of rental/housing units in the building) and the capital
improvement increase the landlord is seeking from each tenant.
D. Following a hearing, the Board may grant to the landlord an additional
rental charge under this section for a specific period of time after
considering the proofs presented by the landlord. If said increase is
granted, it shall not be considered rental income and shall not be used
in calculating allowable increases as otherwise set forth in this chapter.
Any increase granted by authority of this section shall be paid over the
period of the useful life of the completed capital improvement as
established by Federal Internal Revenue guidelines.
E. In order to provide the Rent Leveling Board with sufficient time to
review the required financial data and schedule a hearing, it is required
that an applicant submit an application for additional rental charges
under this section at least 90 days prior to the effective date of the
proposed additional rental charges.
F. Where a proposed capital improvement exceeds $50,000 in cost and
said capital improvement is not required by any law, ordinance or
regulations, the tenants may disapprove the making of such capital
improvement by a simple majority of those tenants who actually vote on
such proposal on the basis of one vote per occupied mobile home or
housing/rental unit, all tenants having been given an opportunity to
vote thereon.
G. The cost of expanding or enlarging a mobile home park or apartment
dwelling or a section thereof shalt not be borne by the tenants or
utilized in computing additional rental charges under this section.
H. In connection with any application for rental increases or charges
under this section and for the information of the tenants, the landlord
shall serve on each individual tenant, within 30 days of the filing of such
application, a summary of the basis for the rental increase, a statement
of the amount of the proposed increase and its effective date and a
statement breaking down the existing and proposed rent among
property taxes, license fees, tax surcharges, if any, capital improvement
charges, if any, operating expenses and return from property totaling
the amount of rent currently paid and proposed to be paid by the
tenant. In addition, the notice shall include the information required by
§ 334-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-14
1:1391
§ 334-15. Financial information and statements.
§ 334-14C. Said notice shall be served on individual tenants in
accordance with § 334-31.
A. In any matter considered by the Rent Leveling Board under § 334-11 or
334-12, the landlord shall be required to submit the following financial
information and statements:
(1) A statement of financial condition.
(2) A statement of operations (income and expense statements).
(3) A statement of retained earnings.
(4) A statement of changes in financial position.
(5) Such other financial data and information as may be required by
the Board.
B. The financial statements, data and information which are required to be
submitted shall be based upon financial data and information which are
sworn to and verified by the landlord who has actual knowledge of the
income, expenses and operations of the park or building, and in the
case of applications under § 334-11, all such financial statements shall
be certified and audited. Said financial statements shall be prepared,
itemized, audited and signed by a certified public accountant or by a
public accountant who is licensed by the State of New Jersey, Division of
Consumer Affairs, and such statements will be sworn as to their
accuracy to the best of his or her knowledge. Each financial statement,
or other financial data, shall be accompanied by a written statement
executed by the certified or licensed public accountant indicating that
he or she has reviewed the financial data and information, that they are
true, accurate and correct and that they reflect the actual financial
condition of the park for the period shown. Any person who willfully and
intentionally submits or supplies false figures, makes gross
misrepresentations or misstates such actual facts or material required
by this section to obtain any rental increase whatsoever shall be
considered acting to defraud such tenants.
C. Certification of substantial compliance. All landlords of housing/rental
units only making application to the Board for a rental increase or any
other relief shall submit, at the time of filing of said application, a
certification from the Township Housing/Building Inspection
Department that the buildings' dwelling units and grounds are in
substantial compliance with applicable housing, building and health
codes. "Substantial compliance" means that the housing space and
dwelling are free from all heat, hot water, elevator and all health, safety
and fire hazards, as well as 90% qualitatively free of all other violations
of all applicable codes.
§ 334-14 JACKSON CODE § 334-16
1:1392
§ 334-16. Notice of decision.
The landlord shall, not less than 14 days after adoption of a resolution, serve
tenants with a copy of the resolution of the Rent Leveling Board denying or
modifying a requested rental increase and shall make due proof of service
thereof by filing an affidavit of mailing with the Board.
§ 334-17. Reductions in taxes or other charges.
§ 334-18. Tax appeals.
A. It is hereby recognized that there may be major reductions in taxation
of real property that would give a landlord an unexpected and unfair
profit, especially taking into consideration that his overall rental
basically includes a sum allowable for cost of real estate taxes.
Therefore, should the landlord receive a reduction in real estate taxes
for a rental premises, projector mobile home park in any one year not
caused by extraordinary depreciation, such as loss by fire, storm and
the like, the amount of such reduction shall be apportioned among the
number of units or mobile home rental spaces, and such reduction shall
then be proportionately credited to each unit or mobile home space to
reduce the rental of each individual unit or mobile home rental spaces.
A tenant shall be permitted to make application to the Rent Leveling
Board in the event of an extraordinary reduction in the cost of fuel,
utilities or of any other specific service upon which the rental is based is
discontinued, reduced or eliminated, thereby affecting the maintenance
of services as set forth in § 334-23. Any reduction in rent shall be equal
to the value of the services or amenity that has been discontinued,
reduced or eliminated or cost reduced as determined by the Rent
Leveling Board.
B. Where a mobile home park or housing/rental unit or any part thereof is
being operated in violation of municipal codes and where such violation
adversely affects habitability, any affected tenant or tenants may apply
to the Board for a reasonable reduction in rent, commensurate with any
such effect on habitability. Upon receipt of such application, the Board
shall schedule the matter for a hearing and notify the owner thereof. If,
as a result of such a hearing, the Board determines that a violation of a
municipal code exists and that such violation affects habitability, it may
grant a reasonable reduction in rent to the affected tenant or tenants,
which rent shall remain in effect until the owner corrects said violation
or violations.
A. In the event that a successful municipal property tax appeal is taken by
the landlord, the tenants involved shall receive 50% of said reduction
after the landlord's costs of securing said tax reduction have been
deducted. The landlord shall receive the remaining benefits of the tax
reduction. Thereafter, in succeeding years, the benefit of each
successful tax appeal shall be divided evenly between the tenants and
the landlord.
§ 334-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-18
1:1393
§ 334-19. Miscellaneous fees.
§ 334-20. Decontrol by trailer movement; document to be provided
to new tenants; discrimination.
§ 334-21. Prehearing conferences.
There shall be a prehearing conference in all matters involving a rental
increase under § 334-11 or 334-14 rental decreases, unless the Board
B. Any such successful landlord shall serve the tenants, within 30 days
after receipt of the judgment, with a notice of the calculations involved,
including an itemization of the costs of securing a reduction and the
reduction each tenant is entitled to, determined by dividing 1/2 of the
remainder of the amount of said tax reduction by the number of
completed mobile home spaces in the mobile home parks or number of
housing/rental units in the dwelling.
A. Fees assessed by a landlord upon tenants for miscellaneous items,
including but not limited to, parking, extra persons and pets, shall not
be considered as part of the base rent for purposes of this chapter.
B. Tenants may be charged a parking fee for vehicles parked in a common
area. Said fee shall not exceed $10 per month. This provision shall not
apply to a separate agreement for the storage of recreational vehicles,
boats, or similar vehicles.
C. An extra person fee shall not exceed $40 per person, per month, or $50
per month for each extra person when the landlord provides water or
sewer service. There shall be no charge, however, for a credit check on
any extra person. Furthermore, there shall be no extra person fee for a
person who is a guest and remains 60 days or less in any one-year
period.
D. A mobile home landlord may assess a pet fee not to exceed $10 per pet,
per month, with a maximum fee in the amount of $20 per month. In a
housing or rental unit a pet fee may not exceed $25 per pet, per month,
or a maximum amount of $50 per month.
E. There shall be no other nonrefundable fees in connection with any fees
assessed pursuant to this section.
A. A landlord is prohibited from gaining decontrol of rent by the movement
of a trailer within a mobile home park.
B. A landlord shall disseminate the Federal Truth-in-Renting Law to all
prospective tenants.201
C. In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 10:5-4, tenants shall not be
subject to discrimination.
201. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:8-43 et seq.
§ 334-18 JACKSON CODE § 334-21
1:1394
accountant determines that such a conference is unnecessary or not
required. The following procedures and requirements shall apply in the
event that a prehearing conference is held:
§ 334-22. Hearings.
A. The Board's Secretary shall give notice to the applicant of the date
scheduled for the prehearing conference at least 14 days prior to the
date thereof, and the applicant shall be required to post at a
conspicuous location within the mobile home park or dwelling, as
appropriate, a notice of the schedule of said prehearing conference at
least 10 days prior to the date hereof.
B. The prehearing conference shall be attended by one or more members
of the Rent Leveling Board, by the accountant for the Board, by the
applicant or his representative and by the accountant for the applicant.
Tenants or representatives of the tenants who will be affected by any
rental increase, including the tenant's accountant, shall be permitted to
attend and participate.
C. The purpose of the prehearing conference shall be to informally review
the financial data and information upon which the application is based
in an effort to narrow the issues to be brought before the Board. For this
purpose, the parties are urged to stipulate such facts, financial data and
information as are not in dispute.
D. The Board, its representatives or the Board accountant may require the
applicant to submit additional data and information as a result of the
prehearing review of the financial data. In addition, the Board may
require an applicant to respond to additional inquiries which may be
raised at the prehearing conference for the purpose of clarifying the
application.
E. At the conclusion of the prehearing conference, or within 10 days
thereafter, the accountant for the Board shall submit to the Board all
matters stipulated between the parties, all facts and information which
have been established as a result of the prehearing conference and
shall further provide to the Board said Board accountant's professional
review and recommendations as to any mailers which may be at issue
before the Board. These recommendations shall be considered by the
Board in its review of the application but shall not be binding.
A. The Rent Leveling Board shall be required to hold all necessary public
hearings and make a determination on any application under §§ 334-10,
334-11, 334-14 and 334-17B within 90 days of the filing of a completed
application by any applicant unless such applicant consents in writing
to the extension of the ninety-day time period for an additional period.
If, due to no fault of the landlord, the Rent Leveling Board does not
render a decision on a properly filed and completed application for a
rental increase within 90 days of receipt of same, the landlord shall be
entitled to have any rental increase granted on said application applied
§ 334-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-22
1:1395
§ 334-23. Maintenance standards.
retroactively to the first rental payment period 90 days after the filing
of said application.
B. Prior to the hearing by the Board on any such application, the landlord
must serve upon each tenant and must post, in a conspicuous place in
or about the rental property, a notice of the hearing, setting forth the
basis for said application and the date, time and location of the hearing.
Said notice must be served and posted at least 14 days prior to the
proposed date of the hearing. In order to provide the Rent Leveling
Board with sufficient time to review the required financial data and to
schedule a hearing, it is required that an applicant submit an
application for a rental increase pursuant to these sections at least 90
days prior to the effective date of the proposed rental increase.
C. The Rent Leveling Board shall review all notices for annual increases
under § 334-10, for surcharges under § 334-13, for reductions under
§ 334-17 and for negotiated settlements under § 334-9A(12) for
completeness and accuracy within 45 days of the date of its receipt
thereof. In the event that the Board finds that the notices or
computations are incomplete, inaccurate or erroneous, it may make
such order as it deems necessary and proper to correct such notices or
to correct the rental increase or surcharge to the proper amount or to
the proper effective date. The effect of the rental increase, surcharge or
negotiated settlement shall not be stayed by this procedure, but shall be
effective in accordance with its original terms until such time as it is
corrected by the duly adopted order of the Board.
D. The Board shall keep and maintain minutes of its hearings and
meetings. The Board shall provide for the stenographic or electronic
recording of its hearings. The Board shall be required to specify those
facts and reasons upon which it bases any decision.
E. No application for a rental increase of any type shall be considered by
the Board unless such application and all necessary supplementary
material is filed at least 10 days prior to a regularly scheduled meeting
of the Board.
F. Tenants are encouraged to provide written notice of any concerns or
complaints to both the Landlord and Rent Leveling Board at least 10
days prior to the scheduled hearing.
A. During the term of this chapter, a landlord shall maintain the same
facilities and standards of services, maintenance, furniture, furnishings
and equipment in the housing unit or mobile home park, as appropriate,
as he/she provided or was required to provide by law or lease at the
date the lease was entered into.
B. Any individual tenant or group of tenants who is not receiving
substantially the same standards of services, maintenance, furniture,
§ 334-22 JACKSON CODE § 334-23
1:1396
§ 334-24. Conflict with other provisions.
§ 334-25. Posting of rents; filing of leases or decontrolled rent
statements.
furnishings or equipment may have the Rent Leveling Board determine
the reasonable rental value as full payment for rent until the landlord
demonstrates to the Rent Leveling Board that the deficiency has been
corrected.
C. A provision of a lease or other agreement whereby any provision of this
section is waived shall be deemed against public policy and shall be
void.
D. Any individual tenant or group of tenants who are required by the
landlord to convert the energy source of their housing or rental unit
(e.g., a conversion from oil heat to gas heat) may be entitled to a
reduction in rent. The Rent Leveling Board shall determine the amount,
if any, of the reduction, taking into account the costs of the conversion
(including equipment, labor, materials and permits) and any other
relevant factors. In making its decision, the Rent Leveling Board shall
consider the future increased costs of energy, the impact on the health,
safety and welfare of the tenants, and the ability of the tenants to pay
the new heating costs.
E. No mobile home park owner shall require any individual tenant or any
group of tenants to pay any costs related to the removal, filling or
destruction of underground storage tanks in the park, unless such
tenant or tenants installed said underground tank or tanks. No mobile
home park owner may make the removal, filling or destruction of an
underground storage tank a condition of approving the sale of a mobile
home for any individual tenant or group of tenants.
F. Any willful violation of any of the provisions of this section shall be
punishable in accordance with § 334-32 herein.
A. The permissible rental increases pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter shall not apply where they exceed or conflict with the increases
allowed by any other statute or rule of the federal government, state
government, county government or any agencies thereof.
B. A landlord shall not enter into a lease with any tenant which contains
provisions contradictory to any provision of this chapter. [Added
8-26-2008 by Ord. No. 32-08]
A. Each landlord shall post with the Township Clerk on or before July 1 of
each year a list of the rentals being paid for each unit of dwelling space
rented to a tenant, the date of the last increase and the amount of the
last increase.
B. No later than January 31 of each year, a landlord shall file with the Rent
Leveling Board a copy of the lease or occupancy agreement for each
§ 334-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-25
1:1397
§ 334-26. Rental increases prohibited; exception.
§ 334-27. Additional rent increases.
Only one rental increase of any type shall be permitted in any twelvemonth
period. This provision shall not only apply to surcharges authorized
by § 334-13 or 334-14, but to rental increases authorized by § 334-28 or
to interim increases obtained during the pendency of an application for a
rental increase under any section of this chapter, provided that any such
increase shall be reduced by the amount of the interim increase, and the
interim increase shall be deemed to be an initial installment on any such
increase.
§ 334-28. Payment of taxes and fees prior to increases.
housing/rental unit or mobile home space. In addition, a mobile home
park landlord shall file a statement which includes the decontrolled rent
for the present year.
A. No landlord shall, after the effective date of this chapter, charge any
rents in excess of what he was receiving at the effective date of this
chapter, except for increases as authorized by this chapter.
B. No new tenant shall be assessed any rental increase for the twelvemonth
period preceding the start date of occupancy. This shall not
prevent a landlord, through appropriate application, from increasing
rent as a result of real estate tax increases.
A. No annual increase under § 334-9, no rental increase under § 334-11
and no rent charge for capital improvements under § 334-14 shall be
applied for, considered or approved by the Rent Leveling Board or
received by a landlord or operator of a mobile home park until all real
property taxes and license fees for the current year are paid in full. No
tax surcharge under § 334-13 shall be approved by the Rent Leveling
Board or received by the owner or operator of a mobile home park until
all real property taxes, except that portion of the taxes which are the
subject of the tax surcharge, and all license fees are paid in full for the
current year.
B. In addition to the foregoing requirements, when considering
applications for an annual increase under § 334-10, rental increase
under § 334-11 and rent charge for capital improvements under
§ 334-14, the Rent Leveling Board may consider, for jurisdictional
purposes or otherwise, whether.
(1) A valid license has been issued and is effective for the mobile home
park; and
(2) No outstanding violations are pending before the Township
Municipal Court for code or zoning violations in the mobile home
park which are the responsibility of the landlord and/or owner.
§ 334-25 JACKSON CODE § 334-29
1:1398
§ 334-29. Recalculation of charges.
Whenever a landlord seeks an increase in either the monthly rental or other
payments from the tenants under any of the provisions of § 334-10, 334-11,
334-13 or 334-14, and there has been an increase in the total number of
tenants, the landlord shall be obligated to recalculate each tenant's pro rata
share of license fees, taxes, tax surcharge, mandated expense surcharge
or other fixed expense which is passed through to the tenants. No rental
increase under any of the aforementioned sections shall be effective unless
such recalculation has been made by the landlord and the monthly rental
has been adjusted accordingly.
§ 334-30. Application form; fees.
§ 334-31. Notice to tenants.
A. All applications required by this chapter shall be on a form provided by
the Municipal Clerk. All applications shall be submitted to the Clerk and
shall be in compliance with the application form and include all
required documentation.
B. There shall be no fee for tenant applications. Landlords shall only pay a
fee for hardship and capital improvements applications in the amount of
$500.
A. In connection with any application for rental increases or charges
under § 334-10, 334-11, 334-12, 334-13 or 334-14 of this chapter, and
for the information of the tenants, the landlord, prior to filing an
application with the Rent Leveling Board, shall personally serve a copy
of the application on each tenant affected by the application. In
addition, the applicant shall include a notice that the documents,
records and other information upon which the application is based are
available for inspection at a specified location within the Township
during normal business hours, provided that reasonable notice of a
request to review is given the applicant. The applicant shall submit
proof to the Rent Leveling Board that service has been made in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. In addition, each tenant
shall be provided a summary of the basis for the rental increase, a
statement of the amount of the proposed increase and its effective date
and a statement breaking down the existing and proposed rent among
property taxes, license fees, tax surcharge, if any, capital improvement
charges, if any, operating expenses and the landlord's return, totaling
the amount of rent currently paid, and the amount of rent proposed to
be paid by the tenant.
B. In addition to the requirements of Subsection A above, the notice to all
mobile park tenants shall include the decontrolled rent for the present
year.
C. Personal service of the application may be accomplished by any or all of
the following means on any one application so long as each and every
§ 334-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-31
1:1399
§ 334-32. Violations and penalties.
A willful violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, including but not
limited to the willful filing with the Rent Leveling Board of any material
misstatement of fact, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $2,000
or imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both. A violation affecting
more than one rental space shall be considered a separate violation as to
each rental space.
§ 334-33. Construal of provisions.
This chapter, being necessary for the welfare of the Township and its
inhabitants, shall be liberally construed to effectuate the purposes
thereof.202
tenant is personally served with the application by one of the following
methods of service:
(1) Personally delivering a copy of the application to the tenant or
tenants and having said tenant or tenants acknowledge receipt of
same in writing.
(2) Mailing a copy of the application to the tenant or tenants by a
constable or other official authorized to serve process by the State
of New Jersey or any political subdivision thereof
(3) Serving a copy of the application upon the tenant or tenants by
ordinary mail in accordance with the provisions set forth
hereinbelow. If ordinary mail is used, the applicant must bring a list
of all tenants affected by the application to the Township Clerk's
office, along with a complete copy of the application and the sealed,
addressed and stamped envelopes to be mailed containing the
application. The Township Clerk or a representative thereof shall
check the envelopes against the list of tenants to verify that each
tenant is being mailed an application and, if satisfied, shall deposit
said envelopes in the mail and forward the master list of tenants or
landlords to the Rent Leveling Board Secretary with written
confirmation that all tenants shall have been mailed an application.
D. In addition to the notice requirements above under Subsections A and
B, if a hearing for which a landlord was required to give notice is
canceled, postponed or otherwise rescheduled, the landlord is required
to give additional notice for the rescheduled date by any of the methods
in Subsection C. [Added 3-11-2014 by Ord. No. 05-14]
202. Editor's Note: Original Art. III, Rent Control for Mobile Home Parks, of the 1972 Code, as
amended, which immediately followed, was repealed 6-24-2008 by Ord. No. 23-08.
§ 334-31 JACKSON CODE § 334-33
1:1400
Chapter 336
SANITARY SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 162.
Housing standards — See Ch. 233.
Land use and development regulations — See
Ch. 244.
Water — See Ch. 437.
Individual sewage disposal systems — See Ch.
493.
§ 336-1. Connection requirements; exemptions.
A. Sewer connection. The owner of every house, building or structure now
existing or hereafter constructed, assembled or moved onto any lot or
lots in the Township of Jackson intended for residential or commercial
use or professional occupancy and located on any street along the line
of any public sewer system now or hereafter constructed, where the
property line of such premises having the house, building or structure is
located not more than 100 feet from the line of such public sewer
system, shall connect such house, building or structure with the public
sewer system within 180 days after notice that such sewer system is
available to said premises, except as provided in Subsection E of this
section. Connection to the Jackson Township MUA sewer system shall
be made pursuant to the rules and regulations of the Jackson Township
MUA and shall be at the property owner's expense.
B. Meters. In the event that any property subject to Subsection A above is
not serviced by the public water supply system, the property owner
shall install meters on each private well on the property as may be
required by the rules and regulations of the Jackson Township MUA. All
meters, if required, shall be installed prior to or at the time of
connection to the public sewer system.
C. On lots where there are multiple structures, each such structure
containing water or sewer drains or facilities shall be separately
connected to the sewer system with its own service line.
D. Every building permit issued for the construction of any new building
adjoining any public street in the Township of Jackson in which a public
sewer line is available at the time of application for said building permit
shall be conditioned upon connection to the public sewer system,
regardless of the distance between the proposed building and the
public sewer line. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until said
connection has been completed in compliance with the rules and
regulations of the Jackson Township Municipal Utilities Authority.
E. Exemptions.
§ 334-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 336-1
1:1401
§ 336-2. Operation and maintenance of private sewage disposal
systems.
After 180 days from service of notice that such public sewer is available,
the operation and maintenance of any private sewage disposal system is
declared to be a health hazard and a nuisance, except for those exempt
properties as set forth in § 336-1E.
§ 336-3. Connection specifications.
Any and all connections with the public sewer system shall be made by a
qualified, licensed plumber in full compliance with the rules and regulations
of the Jackson Township MUA and all relevant local, county, state and
federal requirements. The appropriate connection fees shall be paid for
each connection pursuant to the Jackson Township MUA rules and
regulations.
§ 336-4. Tampering with system.
It shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by the Jackson Township
MUA to tamper with, alter or injure any part of the public sewer system.
Anyone violating this provision shall be subject to the penalties set forth in
§ 336-9 and any other penalties permitted by law.
(1) Single-family residential properties (including home-based
businesses) served by properly functioning septic systems shall be
exempt from the mandatory connection requirements set forth in
this section upon execution of an acknowledgment and release
form by those individuals and/or entities as set forth in Resolution
2001-128 of the Jackson Township MUA.
(2) Any and all exemptions granted hereunder shall terminate
immediately upon the failure of the property owner's private septic
system.
(3) Nothing herein stated shall be construed to allow or permit owners
of properties currently or hereafter connected to the public sewer
system to disconnect therefrom, nor will anything herein be
construed to allow new homes to be constructed with private septic
systems when public sewer facilities are available.
(4) Nothing herein stated shall be construed to exempt premises
located within a subdivision wherein new homes are constructed
adjacent to dry lines from the obligation to connect to public sewer
facilities as and when said dry lines are connected to public sewer
facilities and become available for use as determined by the
Jackson Township MUA. Developers installing dry lines at the
direction of the Jackson Township MUA shall provide notice to
home purchasers of their requirement to connect to the public
sewer system upon availability of service by express language set
forth in all contracts of sale as well as by deed recitals.
§ 336-1 JACKSON CODE § 336-5
1:1402
§ 336-5. Lien.
Charges for sewer service, or any connection to the public sewer system,
shall be a lien upon the premises as provided for by N.J.S.A. 40:14B-42 and
40:14B-45.
§ 336-6. Installment payments.
Owners of properties containing preexisting residential dwellings,
residential apartments and/or tax-exempt buildings or structures with
properly functioning private septic systems shall be entitled to pay sewer
connection fees imposed by the Jackson Township MUA in 12 equal
quarterly installments. Nevertheless, in the event that title to any subject
premises is transferred or conveyed prior to payment of the total amount
of connection fees, the outstanding balance thereof shall be accelerated
and made immediately due and payable at the time of such transfer or
conveyance of title.
§ 336-7. Notice requirements.
Upon a determination that the public sewer system is available to serve
any house, buildings and structures on any property in the Township, each
owner of property shall be directed by the Jackson Township MUA to
connect each house, building, and structure on said property with the public
sewer in accordance with the terms of this chapter and the rules and
regulations of the Jackson Township MUA, except as set forth in § 336-1E.
§ 336-8. Service of notices.
Notice to the owners of properties which are subject to the provisions of
this chapter shall be served by the Jackson Township MUA. All notices
shall be addressed to the owners of said property as the names of said
owners appear in the last tax duplicate of the Township of Jackson. The
notices shall describe the property by lot and block designation as the same
appears on the Tax Map of the Township of Jackson, and by the street
address, if a street address exists, and shall state that by the directive of
the Jackson Township MUA the owner is required to connect each house,
building and structure on said property with the public sewer system in
accordance with the terms of this chapter and the rules and regulations
of the Jackson Township MUA within 180 days of service of such notice as
hereinafter provided. Said notices shall also describe the penalties which
may be imposed hereunder for failure to comply with the notice and
directive in accordance with the terms of this chapter. Said notices may be
served within or without the limits of the Township of Jackson by mailing
the same by certified mail to the last known address of said owner as the
same appears on the last tax duplicate of the Township of Jackson.
§ 336-9. Violations and penalties.
Any owner of property who fails to connect any house, building or structure
as described in § 336-1 of this chapter to such public sewer system within
§ 336-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 336-9
1:1403
the prescribed time period, after service of notice by the Jackson Township
MUA pursuant to this chapter, or otherwise violates the provisions set
forth in this chapter, shall be subject to a penalty not to exceed $500
or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or both, except for
those properties exempt by the provisions of § 336-1E. The imposition of
such penalties shall be in addition to any other legal remedies which may
be provided by law or by the terms of this chapter. Each day after the
expiration of 180 days for which an owner fails to comply with the
provisions of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense thereof.
§ 336-10. Failure to make connections.
If any owner of any property in the Township of Jackson fails to make any
connection or installation required by this chapter within the time and/
or manner herein prescribed, the Jackson Township MUA may proceed to
make such connection or installation and cause same to be made and, in
addition to any penalties as provided herein, charge and assess the cost
thereof against such property.
§ 336-11. Enforcement.
The Jackson Township MUA shall be and hereby is afforded full authority
and responsibility to enforce the provisions of this chapter, including,
without limitation, the authority to file complaints, seek injunctive relief and
prosecute violators in any and all forums having competent jurisdiction. To
the extent a court of competent jurisdiction determines that such grant of
authority and responsibility exceeds permissible limits, the Township will
assume such authority and responsibility to the extent necessary.
§ 336-12. Use of septic tanks, cesspools and seepage pits.
Each septic tank, cesspool and/or seepage pit on a property connected to
the public sewer system shall be deemed abandoned. Any abandoned septic
tanks, cesspools and seepage pits used for the treatment of sewage shall
be closed in accordance with the state and local provisions then in effect.
The property owner shall apply to the Township Plumbing Inspector or his
designee prior to deactivating the septic system and shall comply with all
the requirements of that representative regarding inspection of this work
being undertaken. The employees or agents of the Jackson Township MUA
shall have the right to enter upon any premises connected to the public
sewer system to examine any septic disposal system for the purpose of
enforcing compliance with this provision.
§ 336-13. Prior enactments superseded.
This chapter and the provisions herein shall replace and supersede any and
all prior enactments with respect to the matters addressed herein.
Chapter 338
§ 336-9 JACKSON CODE § 336-13
1:1404
SECONDHAND DEALERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Charitable clothing bins — See Ch. 148.
Junk and junk dealers — See Ch. 239.
Licensing — See Ch. 251.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 310.
§ 338-1. Purpose and intent.
§ 338-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCEPTABLE IDENTIFICATION — A current valid New Jersey driver's
license or identification card, a current valid photo driver's license issued
by another U.S. state, a valid United States passport, or other verifiable
United States government-issued identification, which will be recorded on
the receipt retained by the dealer and subsequently forwarded to the local
police department on request.
DEALER — Any person, partnership, limited liability company, corporation,
or other entity who, either wholly or in part, engages in or operates any
of the following trades or businesses: the buying for purposes of resale
of precious metals, jewelry, or other secondhand goods as defined herein;
pawnbrokers as defined herein; itinerant businesses as defined herein. For
the purposes of this chapter, transient buyers, as defined herein, are subject
to the same licensing and reporting requirements as any other dealers.
ITINERANT BUSINESS — A dealer who conducts business intermittently
within the municipality or at varying locations.
MUNICIPAL CLERK — The statutory officer whose duties are defined in
N.J.S.A. 40A:9-133 and may refer to the duly appointed clerk of the city,
town, township, village, or borough.
PAWNBROKER — Any person, partnership, association or corporation:
lending money on deposit or pledge of personal property, other than choses
in action, securities, or printed evidences of indebtedness; purchasing
personal property on condition of selling it back at a stipulated price; or
A. The purpose and intent of this chapter is to assist law enforcement
officials and victims of crime in recovering stolen precious metals and
other secondhand goods by requiring minimum identification,
reporting, maintenance and distribution criteria for licensed dealers in
these goods.
B. No person shall use, exercise, or carry on the business, trade, or
occupation of the buying, selling, or pawning of precious metals or
other secondhand goods without complying with the requirements of
this chapter in the exact manner described herein.
§ 336-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-2
1:1405
doing business as furniture storage warehousemen and lending money on
goods, wares or merchandise pledged or deposited as collateral security.
PRECIOUS METALS — Gold, silver, platinum, palladium, and their alloys as
defined in N.J.S.A. 51:5-1 et seq. and N.J.S.A. 51:6-1 et seq.
PUBLIC — Individuals and retail sellers, not to include wholesale
transactions or transactions between other merchants.
REPORTABLE TRANSACTION — Every transaction conducted between a
dealer and a member of the public in which precious metals, jewelry, or any
other secondhand goods as defined herein are purchased or pawned.
SECONDHAND GOODS — Used goods such as antiques, gold, silver,
platinum, or other precious metals, jewelry, coins, gemstones, gift cards,
any tools, telephones, typewriters, word processors, GPS devices,
computers, computer hardware and software, television sets, radios, record
or stereo sets, electronic devices, musical instruments, sporting goods,
automotive equipment, collectibles, game cartridges, DVDs, CDs, and other
electronically recorded material, firearms, cameras and camera equipment,
video equipment, furniture, clothing, and other valuable articles. For the
purposes of this chapter, secondhand goods shall not include goods
transacted in the following manner:
SELLER — A member of the public who sells or pawns used goods such as
precious metal, jewelry, or other secondhand goods to a dealer.
TRANSIENT BUYER — A dealer, as defined herein, who has not been in
a registered retail business continuously for at least six months at any
address in the municipality where the dealer is required to register or who
intends to close out or discontinue all retail business within six months.
§ 338-3. License requirement for dealers.
No person, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other
entity shall engage in the business of buying, selling, or pawning of precious
metals or other secondhand goods, as defined above, within the jurisdiction
of the municipality, without having first obtained a license therefor from
the Municipal Clerk, which license shall bear a number issued by the
A. Judicial sales or sales by executors or administrators;
Occasional or auction sales of household goods sold from private
homes;
B.
C. Auctions of real estate;
The occasional sale, purchase, or exchange of coins or stamps by
a person at his permanent residence or in any municipally owned
building who is engaged in the hobby of collecting coins or stamps
and who does not solicit the sale, purchase, or exchange of such coins
or stamps to or from the general public by billboard, sign, handbill,
newspaper, magazine, radio, television, or other form of printed or
electronic advertising.
D.
§ 338-2 JACKSON CODE § 338-3
1:1406
Municipal Clerk. The application for a license to the Municipal Clerk shall
set forth the name, date of birth, and address of the dealer, whether or
not he or she is a citizen of the United States, and whether or not he or
she has ever been convicted of any crime(s), disorderly persons offense(s),
or municipal ordinance violation(s), and the date(s) thereof. Advertising
in any print or electronic media or by sign that any of those articles or
secondhand goods referred to in § 338-2 above are being bought in any
location within the municipality shall constitute engaging in business as
a dealer of secondhand goods for purposes of this chapter. No person,
partnership, limited liability company, corporation or other entity shall
place or cause to be placed any advertisement for purchase of such articles
or goods without stating in the advertising the license number issued to a
person or entity by the municipality. In any print advertisement, the license
number shall appear in type no smaller than eight point in the lower-righthand
corner of the advertisement. In any advertisement in electronic media,
the license number shall be visually or audibly stated. Failure to state or
indicate the license number shall be a violation of this chapter and shall be
subject to the penalties established in § 338-9.
§ 338-4. Application process for dealers; approval or denial.
A. Upon receipt of an application completed pursuant to this chapter, the
Municipal Clerk shall refer such application to the Chief of Police, who
shall make an investigation of the prospective licensee, pursuant to this
chapter, for the purpose of determining the suitability of the applicant
for licensing. The investigation shall include, but shall not be limited to
the following:
(1) The experience of the applicant in the business of purchase and
sale of those articles or goods referred to in § 338-2 above,
although nothing in this section shall be construed to warrant
denial of a license solely on the basis of lack of experience;
(2) The reputation of the applicant for fair dealing in the community,
which shall be made among credible sources, which sources shall
be disclosed to the applicant in the event of a denial of any license;
(3) Any criminal record of the applicant including any past convictions
for any crime(s), disorderly persons offense(s), or municipal
ordinance violation(s) within this or any other jurisdiction. The
Chief of Police may, as part of the application process, require a
fingerprint criminal background check through the Federal Bureau
of Investigation, Criminal Justice Information Services Division,
which may require an additional fee from the applicant.
(4) The type of operation contemplated to be conducted by the
applicant, particularly whether the business is to be operated from
a fixed location, whether it is to be conducted from a location
primarily devoted to the purchase and sale of precious metal or
other secondhand goods, and other factors bearing on whether the
licensed business will be of a fixed and permanent nature. This
§ 338-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-4
1:1407
section shall not be construed to require denial of any license solely
on the grounds that the business is not from a fixed location or that
the applicant is a transient buyer or itinerant business; however,
applicants who fall under the category of a transient buyer or
itinerant business must state with specificity on the license
application the business address where transaction records
required by § 338-6D of this chapter will be stored, as well as
the location where purchased goods will be retained during the
mandatory inspection period required under § 338-6A.
B. The Chief of Police shall complete any investigation pursuant to this
chapter within 30 days of the submission of the application to the
Municipal Clerk, fully completed by the applicant. If a criminal record
check has been requested within the thirty-day period and has not been
received by the Chief of Police within that period, the Chief of Police
may, if all other factors are satisfactory, recommend a conditional
issuance of the license subject to the finding regarding criminal record.
C. The Chief of Police shall, upon completion of the investigation,
recommend "grant" or "denial" of the license to the Municipal Clerk,
who shall grant or deny the license. Any recommendation of the Chief of
Police shall be in writing and, in the case of a recommendation of
denial, shall state fully and specifically the reasons for said
recommendation. If the Municipal Clerk accepts the recommendation
of the Chief of Police to deny any license, the applicant shall be notified
in writing within 10 days of such denial and the Clerk shall forward to
the applicant a statement of the reason or reasons for such denial.
D. Grounds for recommending denial of license may include reliable
information indicating that the applicant has in the past engaged in
fraudulent or deceptive business practices in a business identical to or
similar to a dealer in secondhand goods. A license may be denied if the
investigation reveals a conviction of the applicant or any of its principal
officers or employees of any crime(s), disorderly persons offense(s) in
which deceit or misrepresentation is an element; or any conviction of
any crime(s), disorderly persons offense involving theft or the receiving
of stolen goods, regardless of whether the applicant was a principal,
accessory before the fact, after the fact, or a co-conspirator; or any
prior municipal ordinance violation(s) by the applicant or any of its
principal officers or employees in this or any other jurisdiction. A
license may be denied if the applicant fails to demonstrate an ability to
satisfactorily comply with the electronic reporting requirements
specified in § 338-5, the retention and inspection requirements of
§ 338-6, or any other portion of this chapter. Upon receipt of the
recommendation of the Chief of Police, the Municipal Clerk shall issue
or deny the license accordingly, contingent upon the receipt of a bond
as required by § 338-7 of this chapter.
E. Whenever any application for a permit is denied, the applicant shall be
entitled to a hearing before a three-person panel appointed by the Chief
of Police, at which time the applicant shall be permitted to introduce
§ 338-4 JACKSON CODE § 338-4
1:1408
§ 338-5. Identification of seller; recordkeeping requirements for
dealers.
For every reportable transaction between a dealer and the public, the
dealer shall be required to do as follows:
such evidence as may be deemed relevant to such denial. Any applicant
exercising the right to appeal must file a written notice of appeal within
10 days of receiving written notice of denial of a license to act as a
dealer of secondhand goods.
F. No license shall be assignable by the dealer.
A. Require of each person selling or pawning precious metals or other
secondhand goods acceptable identification as defined above in § 338-2.
B. Require each seller to execute a declaration of ownership, which shall
contain the following certification: "My signature confirms that I am the
sole legal owner of and am legally authorized to sell the goods being
sold. By signing below I certify that I did not obtain and do not possess
the identified goods through unlawful means. I am the full age of 18
years and the identification presented is valid and correct."
C. Record and issue to each person selling or pawning such goods on a
sequentially numbered receipt:
(1) The name, address, and telephone number of the purchaser,
including the clerk or employee of the licensee making the
purchase;
(2) The name, address, date of birth, and telephone number of the
seller or sellers;
(3) A photographed recording of the seller in a format acceptable to
the Chief of Police, along with a physical description of the seller,
including height and weight (approximate), hair color, eye color,
facial hair, if any, etc.;
(4) A photographed recording of the seller's presented acceptable
identification, as set forth in § 338-2, in a format acceptable by the
Chief of Police;
(5) A photographed recording of all items sold in a format acceptable
by the Chief of Police. When photographing, all items must be
positioned in a manner that makes them readily and easily
identifiable. Items should not be grouped together when
photographing or imaging. Each item should have its own
photograph;
(6) The receipt number;
(7) A detailed, legible description of the item(s) and the manufacturer
and model of the item(s) if known; in the case of jewelry, the
§ 338-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-5
1:1409
descriptions must include style, length, color, design, and stones,
if any; any identifying marks, including numbers, dates, sizes,
shapes, initials, names, monograms, social security numbers
engraved thereon, serial numbers, series numbers, or any other
information, which sets apart the particular object from others of
like kind;
(8) The price paid for the purchase or pawn of the item(s);
(9) If precious metals, the net weight in terms of pounds Troy,
pennyweight (Troy) or kilograms/grams; fineness in terms of karats
for gold, and sterling or coin for silver, in accordance with N.J.S.A.
51:5-1, N.J.S.A. 51:6-1 et seq.;
(10) The time and date of the transaction.
D. The information outlined in Subsection C above must additionally be
electronically documented through the use of an electronic database
system authorized by the Chief of Police. Installation and training in this
software will be made mandatory as of the effective date of this chapter
and licensing will be conditional upon compliance with proper use of
the system as described herein. These records shall be subject to the
inspection of any authorized police officer or any sworn law
enforcement officer acting in the performance of their duty as set forth
in Subsection F below. Through the use of applicably required computer
equipment, and using the electronic format approved by the Chief of
Police, every dealer shall enter all reportable transactions into the
electronic database by the end of the close of business on the same date
as the purchase or receipt of property for pawn or consignment. The
information entered must contain all pertinent information outlined in
Subsection C above.
E. In the event of a database failure, or dealer's computer equipment
malfunction, all transaction information is required to be submitted on
paper forms approved by the Chief of Police within 24 hours from the
date of purchase. In the event that paper forms are used, the dealer is
responsible to enter all transaction information set forth in Subsection
C above into the database as soon as possible upon the dealer's
equipment being repaired or replaced, or the database coming back
into service. Failure by the dealer to properly maintain computer
equipment in a reasonable fashion, or failure by the dealer to replace
faulty computer equipment, may result in the dealer being cited for a
violation of this chapter and subsequently being subject to the penalties
for doing so including revocation of the dealer's license as described in
§ 338-6.
F. It shall be the requisite duty of every dealer, and of every person in the
dealer's employ, to admit to the premises during business hours any
member of the police department to examine any database, book,
ledger, or any other record on the premises relating to the reportable
transactions of precious metals or other secondhand goods, as well as
§ 338-5 JACKSON CODE § 338-5
1:1410
§ 338-6. Retention; revocation; other restrictions.
the articles purchased or received and, where necessary, relinquish
custody of those articles as provided in § 338-6. Itinerant businesses
and transient buyers will be responsible for notifying the Chief of Police
of the address where these records and articles will be stored.
A. All precious metals and other secondhand goods purchased, received
for pawn, or received for consignment as described above, are to be
made available for inspection by the Chief of Police or designee thereof
at the designated business address for a period of at least seven
calendar days from the date the transaction information is actually
reported to the Chief of Police in the approved manner described above
in § 338-5 except for jewelry, which must be maintained for at least 10
business days or for the statutory period provided in N.J.S.A
2C:21-36(d). All precious metal or other secondhand goods subject to
inspection must remain in the same condition as when purchased or
received for pawn and shall not be sold, disposed of, changed, modified,
or melted by the dealer until the seven-day retention period has
expired. Itinerant businesses and transient buyers will be responsible
for notifying the Chief of Police of the location where the purchased
item(s) are being held.
B. Upon probable cause that goods held by a dealer are stolen, and
providing that the seller signed the mandatory statement required by
§ 338-5B upon the sale of those goods, a law enforcement officer with
jurisdiction should charge the seller with theft by deception under
N.J.S.A. 2C:20-4 on behalf of the dealer, who shall be considered the
"victim" of the offense for the purposes of N.J.S.A. 2C:43-3. The officer
shall seize the goods, provide the dealer with a receipt, and issue a
criminal complaint against the seller for theft by deception and any
other criminal charges for which the officer has probable cause that the
seller has committed. If convicted of theft by deception and if so found
by an order of a court of valid jurisdiction, the seller will be responsible
for providing restitution to the dealer under N.J.S.A. 2C:44-2 for the
amount paid by the dealer to the seller for the stolen goods.
C. If market conditions would create a hardship on the dealer by holding
precious metals or other secondhand goods for such period, the dealer
may present the property to the Chief of Police in order that it may be
photographed and, if deemed necessary by the Chief of Police, an
investigation may be implemented. The Chief of Police shall have the
authority to grant the dealer a waiver of the requirement under the
section.
D. In addition to all other reporting requirements, every dealer shall
maintain for at least five years a written record of all purchases of
precious metals and other secondhand goods in the form prescribed in
§ 338-5C.
§ 338-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-6
1:1411
E. No dealer shall purchase any item covered by this chapter from any
person under the age of 18 or in the absence of providing prior
notification of such purchase to the Chief of Police or business designee
identifying the individual from whom such purchase is to be made and
the item to be purchased.
F. Suspension. The Chief of Police or a designee thereof is hereby
empowered to temporarily suspend for cause any dealer's license and
rights to operate thereunder. This penalty shall be in addition to any
fines and penalties the dealer may incur pursuant to § 338-9 of this
chapter.
(1) Grounds for suspension. The following shall constitute grounds for
suspension: violation of any provisions of this chapter, including
failure to comply with any training or fees associated with the
electronic database software system in use by the municipality;
violation of any other statute, regulation, or local ordinance; or any
other illegal, improper, or fraudulent activity.
(2) Procedure for suspension. Upon determination that appropriate
grounds exist and that a suspension is warranted, the Chief of
Police or a designee thereof shall issue a written notice of
suspension of license to the offending dealer and to the Municipal
Clerk, which shall set forth the grounds for the suspension and
notify the dealer of his or her right to appeal pursuant to
Subsection H. A temporary suspension shall issue immediately,
pending the outcome of any appeal taken. Suspended dealers must
immediately cease engaging in the business of purchasing for
resale, receiving for pawn, and/or selling of precious metals and/or
other secondhand goods in the municipality until reinstatement.
(3) Reinstatement. Suspended dealers may be reinstated only when
the grounds leading to the suspension have, in the determination of
the Chief of Police or the Chief's designee, been cured, corrected,
or appropriately rectified; or if reinstatement is deemed
appropriate by the three-person panel appointed by the Chief of
Police, upon the timely filing of an appeal as provided in Subsection
H.
G. Revocation. A license issued under this chapter may be revoked by the
Municipal Clerk upon written recommendation from the Chief of Police
or the Chief's designee that the dealer is no longer qualified, capable or
competent to comply with the requirements of this chapter. This penalty
shall be in addition to any fines and penalties the dealer may incur
under § 338-9.
(1) Grounds for revocation. The following shall constitute grounds for
revocation: a third violation under this chapter; a second violation
under this chapter less than one year after an earlier violation
under this chapter; conviction for a criminal offense within this or
§ 338-6 JACKSON CODE § 338-6
1:1412
§ 338-7. Bond.
Each dealer covered under this chapter shall deliver a bond to the
Municipal Clerk executed by the applicant as principal and executed by a
surety company authorized to do business under the laws of the State of
New Jersey as surety. The bond shall be subject to review and approval by
the Municipal Attorney, as defined in N.J.S.A. 40A:9-139, and shall be in the
penal sum of $10,000, conditioned for the due and proper observance of
and compliance with the provisions and requirements of all ordinances of
the municipality in force or which may be adopted respecting the conduct of
this business and conditioned also that the bond shall be and remain for the
benefit of any person or persons who shall have received judgment against
the dealer licensed under this chapter, which damage shall be established
by a judgment of a court of proper jurisdiction. Said bond shall contain
the following language: "The obligation of this bond shall, in addition to
the [party municipality], be and remain for the benefit of any person who
any jurisdiction; or multiple violations of any other regulations or
local ordinances within this or any jurisdiction.
(2) Procedure for revocation. Upon a determination that appropriate
grounds exist and that a revocation is warranted, the Chief of
Police or the Chief's designee shall so report to the Municipal Clerk
in writing. A temporary suspension will immediately and
automatically issue, if one is not already in effect, pending the
outcome of the charge. A three-person panel, appointed by the
Chief of Police, shall review the stated grounds for revocation and
the panel shall issue an appropriate disposition of either
suspension, revocation, or reinstatement. If the panel determines
that revocation is the appropriate disposition, it shall set forth the
grounds for the same in writing in the form of a notice of
revocation, which shall be provided to the dealer. The notice shall
advise the dealer of the right to appeal. If the panel determines that
suspension is the appropriate disposition, it shall provide the
dealer with a notice of suspension that shall advise the dealer of the
right to appeal. Following revocation, the dealer must relinquish
his or her license and must immediately and indefinitely cease
operating as a dealer of precious metals or other secondhand goods
within the municipality.
H. Appeal. Any applicant wishing to appeal an issuance of a suspension or
revocation shall be entitled to a hearing before a three-person panel,
appointed by the Chief of Police, at which time the applicant shall be
permitted to introduce such evidence as may be deemed relevant to
such suspension or revocation. Any applicant exercising the right to
appeal must file a written notice of appeal within 10 days of receiving
written notice of revocation or suspension of license.
I. A dealer shall have the right to change the location of the licensed
business, provided that he or she notifies the Municipal Clerk, in
writing, of the street address of said new location.
§ 338-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-7
1:1413
shall obtain a judgment against obligor as a result of damage sustained in
operation pursuant to any license granted under this chapter." Said bond
shall be kept for a minimum of one year from the date of issuance of license
and must be renewed annually along with the license.
§ 338-8. Fees; period of license validity.
A nonrefundable fee for initial application and license for a pawnbroker or a
dealer in precious metals or other secondhand goods, as covered under this
chapter, is $300. The annual renewal fee for a license is $250. These fees
are separate from and in addition to any fees the dealer must pay in relation
to the mandatory electronic database system designated by the Chief of
Police, as provided by § 338-5D of this chapter. Payments are to be made in
the manner directed by the Municipal Clerk. A license is valid for a one-year
period from the date of its issuance.
§ 338-9. Violations and penalties.
Violation of any provision of this chapter by any dealer shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not in excess of the limitations
of N.J.S.A. 40:49-5 or by a term of imprisonment or a period of community
service not exceeding 90 days in addition to a suspension or revocation
of operating license as provided in § 338-6F and G above. Each and every
violation shall be considered a separate violation. Each violation shall result
in an additional suspension period. Any person who is found guilty of
violating the provisions of this chapter within one year of the date of a
previous violation and who was fined for the previous violation may be
sentenced by the court to an additional fine as a repeat offender and, in
addition, may be subject to revocation proceedings as provided in § 338-6G.
The additional fine imposed as a repeat offender shall not be less than the
minimum or exceed the maximum fine provided herein, and same shall be
calculated separately from the fine imposed for the violation of this chapter.
§ 338-10. Time limit for conformance; repealer; severability.
A. Any person, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other
entity engaging in the business of a pawnbroker, or a dealer in precious
metals or other secondhand goods shall conform to the provisions of
this chapter within 90 days following the effective date of this chapter.
B. All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed.
C. Nothing contained in this chapter is intended to replace any preexisting
statutory requirements governing pawnbrokers, as in N.J.S.A. 45:22-1
et seq., the sale of precious metals as in N.J.S.A. 51:6A-1 et seq., the sale
of secondhand jewelry as in N.J.S.A. 2C:21-36 et seq., or any other
statutory provision regarding any subject matter discussed herein.
D. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this
chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a
§ 338-7 JACKSON CODE § 338-10
1:1414
Chapter 342
SEX OFFENDER RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS
§ 342-1. Residency restrictions.
Chapter 348
SHOPPING CARTS
§ 348-1. Definitions.
Certain words in this chapter, as hereinafter used, are defined as follows:
CART — A hand-drawn or hand-propelled vehicle or wheeled container
made of metal, wood or other material such as is generally provided by
merchants for carting or carrying merchandise or foodstuffs to automobiles
or other places.
court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a
separate, distinct, and independent provision, and such holding shall
not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof.
A. No person over the age of 18 who has been convicted of a violation of
any crime against a minor as listed in N.J.S.A. 2C:7-2 and who, as a
result of said conviction, is required to register with the proper
authorities pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:7-1 et seq., Registration and
Notification of Release of Certain Offenders, shall be permitted to
reside or live within 2,500 feet of any school, park, playground or daycare
center in Jackson Township.
B. A person who resides or lives within 2,500 feet of any school, park,
playground or day-care center in the Township of Jackson shall have 60
days from receipt of written notice of the prohibition set forth herein to
move. Failure to move to a location which is in compliance with this
section within that time period shall constitute a violation of this
section.
C. This section shall not apply to a person who has established a residence
prior to June 15, 2005.
D. Any violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding
$1,250; imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days; a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days.
E. The prohibitions set forth in Subsections A and B herein shall also
restrict registered sex offenders from residing or living within 2,500
feet of any amusement park, roller rink and movie theater in Jackson
Township. [Added 7-25-2005 by Ord. No. 31-05]
§ 338-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 348-1
1:1415
STREET — Street, avenue, road, alley, highway, boulevard, concourse,
driveway, culvert, parking lots, parking areas and places used by the
general public.
§ 348-2. Display of owner name and address on carts.
The owner or owners of shopping carts used in connection with any retail
business and intended for use by patrons in carrying articles of merchandise
shall clearly designate on each cart the name and the address of each owner
or owners.
§ 348-3. Abandoned or unattended carts.
It shall be unlawful for any owner or owners to permit to be left unattended
or abandoned on any public streets or public place within the Township of
Jackson, County of Ocean, any such carts.
§ 348-4. Removal from retail establishments prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove a cart, as defined herein, from
the property of any retail establishment.
§ 348-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-5-1972 by Ord. No.
34-72]
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $500 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both. Each violation shall
constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 357
SMOKING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 86.
Amusements — See Ch. 92.
Public use of buildings and facilities — See
Ch. 121.
Drug-free zones — See Ch. 179.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 474.
§ 348-1 JACKSON CODE § 348-5
1:1416
ARTICLE I
Public Buildings
[Adopted 7-14-1997 by Ord. No. 12-97 (Ch. 89, Art. I, of the 1972
Code)]
§ 357-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the smoking or carrying of lighted
tobacco products within any public building owned and operated by Jackson
Township. It is determined by the governing body that said ban is imposed
to protect the health, safety and welfare of any individual using said
facilities.
§ 357-2. Prohibition; applicability.
This article prohibits smoking or carrying of lighted tobacco in any public
building owned and operated by Jackson Township. This shall include all
offices, meeting rooms and other enclosed areas of municipal buildings and
facilities.
§ 357-3. Statutory authority; violations and penalties.
This article is adopted in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
2C:33-13b in order to prohibit the smoking or carrying of lighted tobacco
products in order to fulfill the enforcement provisions of said statute.
Individuals violating the provisions of this article shall be subject to the
penalties provided in Title 2C of the New Jersey statutes and shall further
be subject to appropriate Township disciplinary procedures as a result of
violating this Township law and policy.
§ 357-4. Placement of notices.
Notice of said prohibition shall be placed in conspicuous places within the
various municipal buildings and facilities.
§ 357-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 357-4
1:1417

ARTICLE II
School Grounds
[Adopted 11-9-1998 by Ord. No. 35-98 (Ch. 89, Art. II, of the 1972
Code)]
§ 357-5. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SMOKING — The use of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or any other matter
or substance which contains tobacco and/or other similar products.
§ 357-6. Promulgation of regulations.
Any school board having a public school building or public school property
located within the Township of Jackson shall make and enforce regulations
to prohibit the use of tobacco products anywhere in its building and on its
grounds except as part of a classroom instruction or theatrical production.
The regulations shall also provide for additional specified limitations
regarding smoking on the school grounds as designated by the Board of
Education.
§ 357-7. Complaints.
The Superintendent of the school district or his designee or any other
person having control of school property or any agent thereof or a police
officer or other public servant engaged in the execution or enforcement of
this article or any other citizen may sign a complaint against any individual
for violation of the provisions of this article.
§ 357-8. Signage.
Every public entrance to each school within the Township of Jackson shall
be posted by a person who has control of the building with a sign indicating
that the use of tobacco products is prohibited in the building and shall
further indicate that violators are subject to a fine and/or punishment,
including but not limited to community service. This sign shall be clearly
visible to the public and shall contain letters or a symbol, which contrast in
color with the sign. Similar signs shall be posted at visually accessible sites
on the boundaries of the school property.
§ 357-9. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person who violates this article shall appear before the Jackson
Township Municipal Court and shall be subject to punishment as
follows:
(1) First offense: up to 15 hours of community service at a place
designated by the Municipal Court.
§ 357-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 357-9
1:1419
§ 357-10. Minors.
Upon signing of a complaint as provided herein against a person under
the age of 18, the Municipal Court shall subpoena the parent(s) and/or
guardian(s) of the person charged to appear at the Municipal Court hearing.
(2) Second offense: up to 30 hours of community service in a place
designated by the Municipal Court and/or a fine up to $100.
(3) Third and subsequent offense: up to 50 hours of community service
in a place designated by the Municipal Court and/or a fine up to
$250.
B. Community service may include participation in a nonsmoking
educational or support program approved by the Municipal Court.
§ 357-9 JACKSON CODE § 357-10
1:1420
ARTICLE III
Amusement Parks
[Adopted 4-24-2007 by Ord. No. 11-07 (Ch. 89, Art. III, of the 1972
Code)]
§ 357-11. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have meanings as follows:
AMUSEMENT PARK — An entertainment facility opened to the public which
consists of various amusement activities, such as rides, animal attractions,
water attractions/rides, shows, and games licensed pursuant to Chapter 92
of the Code of the Township of Jackson.
SMOKING — The burning of, inhaling from, exhaling the smoke from, or
the possession of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or any other matter or
substance which contains tobacco or any other matter that can be smoked.
§ 357-12. Smoking prohibited.
Smoking is prohibited on the premises of any amusement park located in
the Township of Jackson.
§ 357-13. Exception; signage.
The owner or operator of an amusement park may designate specific
outdoor areas as smoking areas. Said owner or operator shall conspicuously
post a sign which designates each smoking area. Sufficient signage shall
also be posted throughout the park to inform the public of the smoking
prohibition.
§ 357-14. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
The owner, operator, or person in control of the amusement park, or
designated enforcement official for said persons, shall order a person
smoking in violation of this article to comply with the provisions of this
article. A person who smokes in violation of this article is subject to a fine
of not less than $100 nor more than $250 for the first offense; not less than
$100 nor more than $500 for the second offense; and not less than $100 nor
more than $1,000 for each subsequent offense.
§ 357-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 357-14
1:1421
Chapter 363
SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Excavations, mining and dredging — See Ch.
185.
Fertilizer application — See Ch. 189.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 210.
Land use and development regulations — See
Ch. 244.
§ 363-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to control soil erosion and sediment damages
and related environmental damage by requiring adequate provisions for
surface water retention and drainage, and for the protection of exposed
soil surfaces in order to promote the safety, public health, convenience and
general welfare of the community.
§ 363-2. Applicability; exemptions.
§ 363-3. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically stated:
A. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any land disturbance
activity of any type, except those specifically exempted hereafter. No
land area shall be disturbed by any person, partnership, corporation,
municipal corporation or other public agency within this municipality
unless the applicant has submitted to the district a plan to provide for
soil erosion and sediment control for such land area in accordance with
the requirements contained herein, and such plan has been approved
by the district, and a valid land disturbance permit has been issued.
[Amended 5-8-1979 by Ord. No. 14-79]
B. The following activities are specifically exempt from this chapter:
(1) Land disturbance of 5,000 square feet or less associated with
existing or proposed one- and two-family dwellings, provided, in
the case of new dwellings, that they are not part of a
comprehensive development undertaken by a subdivider or builder.
(2) Use of land for gardening primarily for home consumption.
(3) Agricultural use of lands when operated in accordance with a farm
conservation plan approved by the local soil conservation district or
when it is determined by the local soil conservation district that
such use will not cause excessive erosion and sedimentation.
§ 357-14 JACKSON CODE § 363-3
1:1422
APPLICANT — A person, partnership, corporation or public agency
requesting permission to engage in land disturbance activity.
CRITICAL AREA — A sediment-producing highly erodible or severely
eroded area.
DISTRICT — The Soil Conservation District, Ocean County. (See below.)
The district shall be the enforcement and approving authority under the
provisions of this chapter.[Added 5-8-1979 by Ord. No. 14-79]
EROSION — Detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water,
wind, ice and gravity.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — A plan and/or written
statement which fully indicates necessary land treatment measures,
including a schedule of the timing for their installation, which will
effectively minimize soil erosion and sedimentation. Such measures shall be
in accordance with standards contained herein and defined hereafter.
EXCAVATION or CUT — Any act by which soil or rock is cut into, dug,
quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced or relocated.
FARM CONSERVATION PLAN — A plan which provides for use of land,
within its capabilities, and treatment, within practical limits, according to
chosen use to prevent further deterioration of soil and water resources.
LAND DISTURBANCE — Any activity involving the clearing, grading,
transporting and filling and any other activity which causes land to be
exposed to the danger of erosion.
LAND DISTURBANCE PERMIT — A certificate issued to perform work
under this chapter.
MULCHING — The application of plant residue or other suitable materials
to the land surface to conserve moisture, hold soil in place and aid in
establishing plant cover.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in
suspension, is being transported or has been moved from its site of origin
by air, wind or gravity as a product of erosion.
SEDIMENT BASIN — A barrier or dam built at suitable locations to retain
rock, sand, gravel, silt or other material.
SITE — Any plot, parcel or parcels of land.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin.
SOIL CONSERVATION DISTRICT, OCEAN COUNTY — A governmental
subdivision of this state, which encompasses this municipality, organized in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter 24, Title 4, of the New Jersey
Revised Statutes.203
STANDARDS — The Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in
New Jersey, as promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee.
203. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 4:24-1 et seq.
§ 363-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 363-3
1:1423
STATE SOIL CONSERVATION COMMITTEE — Any agency of the state
established in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 24, Title 4, of the
New Jersey Revised Statutes.204
STRIPPING — Any activity which significantly disturbs vegetated or
otherwise stabilized soil surface, including clearing and grubbing
operations.
§ 363-4. Permit application fees. [Amended 5-8-1979 by Ord. No.
14-79]
Every application for a land disturbance permit shall be submitted to the
district and shall be accompanied by an application fee in accordance with
the Schedule of Fees established and promulgated by the district.
§ 363-5. Application requirements and procedures.
A. Filing; content.
(1) All applications for land disturbance permits shall be filed with the
district. [Amended 5-8-1979 by Ord. No. 14-79]
(2) Each application shall consist of a completed application form, the
application fee and a soil erosion and sediment control plan for the
proposed disturbed site prepared in accordance with the
requirements contained herein.
(3) Four copies of the application form and plans shall be submitted,
together with a letter from the applicant's engineer indicating any
other permits or approvals which will be required from other
governmental agencies in connection with the land disturbance
activity of the proposed use (e.g. floodplain or stream
encroachment permits). The district may, if it deems necessary,
require copies of all data submitted in connection with any other
such application. [Amended 5-8-1979 by Ord. No. 14-79]
B. Application with minor subdivision. No application for a land
disturbance permit will be required as a requisite for minor subdivision
approval. However, this shall not relieve the applicant or owner of the
responsibility to obtain a required permit in connection with a
nonexempt use of the land.
C. Application with major subdivision.
(1) Each application for preliminary subdivision approval shall be
submitted to the district and shall be accompanied by an
application for a land disturbance permit, pursuant to the terms
hereof, if the applicant chooses to do any site work prior to the
submission and approval of the final design plans. If the applicant
does not choose to do any site work prior to approval of the final
204. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 4:24-1 et seq.
§ 363-3 JACKSON CODE § 363-5
1:1424
§ 363-6. Approval of application.
design plans, then application for a land disturbance permit shall
be made concurrent with submission of final design plans.
[Amended 5-8-1979 by Ord. No. 14-79]
(2) The data required in the application for the land disturbance
permit applies to any and all lands that would be disturbed during
construction of the subdivision improvements and buildings.
(3) No final subdivision approval shall be granted until a land
disturbance permit has been approved.
D. Application with site plan. Each application for site plan approval shall
be accompanied by an application for a land disturbance permit
pursuant to the terms hereof. No site plan approval shall be granted
until the land disturbance application has been approved.
E. Application in connection with any other land disturbance. No site shall
be disturbed unless an application for a land disturbance permit has
been submitted pursuant to the terms hereof, and no permit issued by
any other municipal agency shall be deemed complete until a valid land
disturbance permit has been approved.
A. Approval procedure. [Amended 5-8-1979 by Ord. No. 14-79]
(1) Upon receipt of each land disturbance application, the district shall
immediately forward one copy each to the Jackson Township
Planning Board, the Jackson Township Environmental Commission
and the Township Engineer. The Township Engineer and the
Environmental Commission shall be requested to reply, in writing,
to the district within 30 days. If no reply is received within 30 days,
the district shall proceed as though the application were favorably
reviewed.
(2) Upon a determination that the plan is satisfactory and in
conformance with the requirements of this chapter, the district
shall, by resolution, issue a permit to the applicant within a period
of 30 days of submission of a complete application, unless by
mutual agreement, in writing, between the district or its agent and
the applicant this period is extended for an additional 30 days.
Failure of the district or its agent to make a decision within such
period or such extension thereof shall constitute certification.
(3) When, in the opinion of the district, unusual circumstances prevail,
the district shall have the right to impose special conditions and
requirements, including but not limited to the fixing of time
schedules for completion of any part of the project and posting of
performance and maintenance guaranties for any or all of the
erosion control devices; provided, however, that such special
conditions and requirements may not relate to those techniques
§ 363-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 363-6
1:1425
§ 363-7. Soil erosion and sediment control plan requirements.
and methods for controlling soil erosion and sedimentation which
are prescribed in the standards.
B. After a soil erosion and sediment control plan has been approved, it
shall be unlawful for the applicant or any person performing services
and implementing the plan knowingly to deviate from, change, amend
or modify the plan in any way, except in accordance with the provisions
of Subsection C below.
C. Minor changes, amendments or modifications to a soil erosion and
sediment control plan required as a result of conditions in the field
during construction may be approved by the district agents, who shall
in turn notify the district and Township thereof. Major changes,
amendments or modifications to such a plan shall require the approval
of the district. [Amended 5-8-1979 by Ord. No. 14-79]
D. If the title of the land is subsequently transferred, the new owner must
follow the plan already approved or submit a new plan in accordance
with this chapter.
E. Maintenance. Any applicant carrying out soil erosion and sediment
control measures under this chapter, and all subsequent owners of the
property upon which such measures have been carried out, shall
adequately maintain all permanent control measures, devices and
plantings in good order.
A. Each applicant for a land disturbance permit must submit a separate
soil erosion and sediment control plan unless the required information
can be clearly and legibly incorporated into other design plans
prepared for the project.
B. Each soil erosion and sediment control plan shall contain the following:
(1) Location and description of existing natural and man-made
features on and surrounding the site, including general topography
and soil characteristics and a copy of the Soil Conservation District
Soil Survey when requested.
(2) Location and description of proposed changes to the site.
(3) Measures for soil erosion and sediment control which meet or
exceed the standards and specifications set forth herein and in
accordance with the Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control in New Jersey, as adopted by the Ocean County Soil
Conservation District.
(4) A schedule of the sequence of the implementation of the planned
erosion and sediment control measures as related to the progress
of the project.
§ 363-6 JACKSON CODE § 363-7
1:1426
§ 363-8. Design principles and requirements.
(5) The impact of the proposed disturbance to all adjacent properties,
both during and after the development or disturbance.
(6) A map showing the contours of the land at two-foot intervals prior
to the disturbance and the proposed contours to be created,
prepared in accordance with the standard engineering practices.
(7) Complete construction detailing of all erosion control measures.
(8) When specifically required by the district, soil borings and
groundwater elevations shall be shown. [Amended 5-8-1979 by
Ord. No. 14-79]
A. General. Every plan for erosion control shall be designed in accordance
with the general design principles and all other requirements contained
herein and in the Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in
New Jersey. In the interpretation of these requirements, the term
"shall" is always mandatory, and the word "may" is permissive; also,
words used in the present tense include the future tense; and the
singular includes the plural, unless the context clearly indicates the
contrary.
B. Design criteria.
(1) Stripping of vegetation, grading or other soil disturbance shall be
done in a manner which will minimize soil erosion.
(2) Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained and
protected.
(3) The extent of the disturbed area and the duration of its exposure
shall be kept within practical limits.
(4) Either temporary seeding, mulching or other suitable stabilization
measure shall be used to protect exposed critical areas during
construction or other land disturbance.
(5) Drainage provisions shall accommodate increased runoff resulting
from modified soil and surface conditions, during and after the
development or disturbance.
(6) Water runoff shall be minimized and retained on-site wherever
possible to facilitate groundwater recharge.
(7) Sediment shall be retained on-site to the maximum extent feasible.
(8) Diversions, sediment basins and similar required structures shall
be installed prior to any on-site grading or disturbance.
(9) Satisfactory provisions shall be made for drainage to accommodate
all increased runoff resulting from modifications of soil and surface
§ 363-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 363-8
1:1427
§ 363-9. Additional regulations. [Amended 5-8-1979 by Ord. No.
14-79]
The following additional regulations shall apply:
conditions during and after development or disturbance. Where
necessary, the rate of water runoff shall be mechanically retarded.
(10) Provisions shall be made to protect existing and proposed storm
drainage systems from siltation during construction.
(11)Water concentrations at tops of slopes shall be diverted to safe
outlets by diversions or other means as specified in the standards.
(12) Detention or retention basins, where required, should be
constructed in accordance with the standards, to retain all
sediment on-site to the maximum extent feasible. When deemed
necessary by the district, fencing shall be constructed around
detention or retention areas. [Amended 5-8-1979 by Ord. No.
14-79]
(13) For permanent or temporary vegetation cover, the soil treatment
and seed mixture shall be in accordance with the standards.
(14) The timing of construction sequences shall be specified and shall
provide for the installation of all erosion control measures prior to
commencement of construction. The sequence of construction shall
also be timed to allow the maximum time for establishment of
stabilization measures.
(15) During construction all exposed soils that have the potential for
causing off-site environmental damage shall be stabilized by
temporary vegetative cover or by other means as prescribed in the
standards.
(16) When permanent vegetative cover cannot be established by
seeding, the disturbed areas shall be sodded or vegetated by other
means as prescribed in the standards.
(17) Subsurface drainage is to be provided in areas having a high water
table, to intercept seepage that would adversely affect slope
stability, building foundations or create undesirable wetness.
(18) Adjoining property shall be protected from excavation and filling
operations.
(19) Fill shall not be placed adjacent to the bank of a stream or channel,
unless provisions are made to protect the hydraulic, biological,
aesthetic and other environmental functions of the stream.
A. The agents or employees of the district or such other municipal officials
as may be designated shall inspect on a periodic, regular basis, as
required, all approved projects in order to verify that the project is in
§ 363-8 JACKSON CODE § 363-9
1:1428
§ 363-10. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon final passage and publication as required
by law and upon final approval by the State Soil Conservation Committee
pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 251, § 10.205
§ 363-11. Violations and penalties; enforcement.
full compliance with the approved soil erosion and sediment control
plan.
B. The applicant shall be required to have the approved soil erosion and
sediment control plan on site during construction of the project.
C. A stop-construction order may be issued by the district or by another
designated official if the project is not being executed in accordance
with the approved soil erosion and sediment control plan.
D. A certificate of occupancy shall be withheld in connection with the
project unless there has been full compliance with the provisions of the
approved soil erosion and sediment control plan for permanent
measures to control soil erosion and sedimentation.
A. If any person, firm or corporation violates any of the provisions of this
chapter or fails to comply with the provisions of a land disturbance
permit, the Township of Jackson or the Ocean County Soil Conservation
District may institute a civil action in the Superior Court for injunctive
relief to prohibit and prevent such violation or violations, pursuant to
P.L. 1975, c. 251, § 15.206
B. If any person, firm or corporation violates any of the provisions of this
chapter or fails to comply with the provisions of a land disturbance
permit, such person, firm or corporation shall be liable to a penalty of
not less than $25 nor more than $3,000, to be collected in a summary
proceeding pursuant to the Penalty Enforcement Law (N.J.S.A. 2A:58-1
et seq.207) and the provisions of P.L. 1975, c. 251, § 15.208
C. The Superior Court, County Court, County District Court and Municipal
Court shall have jurisdiction to enforce this chapter. If the violation
hereof is of a continuing nature, each day during which it continues
shall constitute an additional, separate and distinct offense.
205. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 4:24-48.
206. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 4:24-53.
207. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 2A:58-1 et seq. was repealed by P.L. 1999, c. 274. See now N.J.S.A.
2A:58-10 et seq.
208. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 4:24-53.
§ 363-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 363-11
1:1429
Chapter 372
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 103.
Brush, weeds, trash and debris — See Ch. 115.
Excavations, mining and dredging — See Ch.
185.
Land use and development regulations — See
Ch. 244.
§ 363-11 JACKSON CODE § 363-11
1:1430
ARTICLE I
Construction and Repair of Sidewalks and Curbs
[Adopted 10-20-1965 by Ord. No. 15-65 (Ch. 91, Art. I, of the 1972
Code)]
§ 372-1. Responsibility for maintenance and repair. [Amended
5-14-1974 by Ord. No. 13-74]
The owner of any premises in the Township of Jackson abutting a sidewalk
or curb or the owner of any parking area open to the public shall, at his own
cost and expense, keep and maintain such sidewalk or curb or parking area
or appurtenances in good condition and state of repair and shall not permit
the same to fall into a state of disrepair or to become unfit or unsafe to walk
upon or use. In the event that any such sidewalk or curb or parking area
or any part thereof becomes unsafe or hazardous to the public or unfit to
walk upon or use, the abutting property owner, at his own cost and expense,
shall, with all expeditious speed, reconstruct or repair, as the facts may
require, such sidewalk or curb or parking area or that part thereof which
requires reconstruction or repairs.
§ 372-2. Failure to repair.
§ 372-3. Construction of new sidewalks.
All new sidewalks constructed by an abutting owner shall be constructed in
accordance with the line and grade established by the Township Engineer.
All old and existing sidewalks reconstructed or repaired by an abutting
owner shall be reconstructed or repaired in accordance with the existing
line and grade unless such line or grade is changed by the Township
Engineer. It shall be the duty of the abutting owner in all instances to make
inquiry of the Township Engineer respecting such line and grade.
A. In the event that the abutting owner fails to reconstruct or repair his
sidewalk or curb or such part thereof as may require reconstruction or
repair, as provided in this article, the Township of Jackson may cause
said improvement or work to be made under the supervision of the
Superintendent of Public Works or the Township Engineer or may
award a contract therefor, and the cost thereof shall be assessed upon
the property of the abutting owner in accordance with the law in such
case made and provided.
B. In the event that the owner of any parking area open to the public fails
to reconstruct, repair or maintain said parking area and appurtenances
as may be required and, as a result, it is rendered unsafe for use by the
public, said parking area may be closed to further public use by the
Township of Jackson. [Added 5-14-1974 by Ord. No. 13-74]
§ 372-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 372-4
1:1431
§ 372-4. Compliance with specifications.
Every sidewalk constructed, reconstructed or repaired shall be in
accordance with specifications adopted by the Township Committee.
§ 372-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-5-1972 by Ord. No.
34-72]
Any person convicted by a court of competent jurisdiction of violating any
provision of this article shall be subject to the payment of a fine not to
exceed $500 or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or both.
§ 372-6. Word usage.
Whenever in this article any word imparting the singular number or
masculine gender is used in describing or referring to any person, party,
matter or thing, the same shall include and apply to several persons or
parties as well as to one person or party, to females as well as males and to
several matters or things as well as to one matter or thing.
§ 372-4 JACKSON CODE § 372-6
1:1432
ARTICLE II
Snow, Ice, Grass and Other Impediments
[Adopted 4-7-1964 by Ord. No. 5-64 (Ch. 91, Art. II, of the 1972
Code)]
§ 372-7. Duty to remove.
A. Each owner and tenant of land abutting or bordering upon the
sidewalks of any streets or public places shall keep the sidewalks in
front of his premises in a safe, passable and orderly condition, free from
snow, ice, grass, weeds or other impediments. In case there is snow or
ice on the sidewalks, such persons shall remove the same within 24
hours of daylight after the snow shall have ceased falling or after the ice
has formed.
B. In addition, lands and premises which consist of semipublic or private
roads, streets, parking areas or other premises open to or used by
tenants or employees of the owner thereof or upon which the owner or
commercial tenants of the owner invite members of the public shall be
kept passable and in orderly condition, free of snow, ice, grass, weeds
or other impediments. In the event that there is snow or ice on such
premises or places, the owner thereof shall remove the same within 24
hours of daylight after the snow shall have ceased falling or after the ice
has formed. Such premises or places to which the public, tenants or
employees are invited shall include but shall not be limited to the
following: store or shopping center parking lots; parking lots and
accessways used in connection with commercial endeavors; apartment
parking lots, driveways and accessways provided for and used by
tenants of such apartments; and all other types of premises to which the
public is invited for business or commercial purposes. [Added
3-14-1978 by Ord. No. 13-78]
C. The owner or developer of any residential property within the Township
where there has been constructed any private street, highway, lane,
alley or other roadway which is open to the public or to which the public
is invited, and which has not been taken over by the Township, shall be
responsible to remove all snow and ice from such street, highway, lane,
alley or other roadway within 24 hours of daylight after the same shall
fall or be formed thereon. The provisions of this subsection of the Code
shall be applicable only to the owner of real property on which there
has been constructed a housing development containing at least one
occupied dwelling. [Added 2-14-2012 by Ord. No. 02-12]
D. Violations of § 372-7C and enforcement of penalties. In addition to the
penalties as provided in § 372-10 of this article, if any owner or
developer fails to comply with the regulations set forth within § 372-7,
Subsection C, of this article, the Township may provide for the removal
of such snow or ice from such street, highway, lane, alley or other
roadway. The cost of removal of any such snow or ice from any privately
owned street, highway, lane, alley or other roadway by the Township
§ 372-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 372-7
1:1433
§ 372-8. Obstruction of streets restricted. [Amended 9-12-2017 by
Ord. No. 20-17]
No person shall encumber or obstruct any street or public place with any
article or thing whatsoever.
§ 372-9. Depositing or throwing matter on streets.
No person shall throw, put or place into, upon or within any street or public
place any substance, matter or thing whatsoever, whereby the safe, free or
unobstructed use of the same by the public may be in anywise impeded or
interfered with.
§ 372-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-5-1972 by Ord. No.
34-72; 4-24-1979 by Ord. No. 12-79; 2-14-2012 by Ord. No. 02-12]
Any person who shall violate any of the terms or provisions of this article
shall be subject to a penalty of not less than $100 and not to exceed $2,000
or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or both, in the discretion
of the Judge before whom such conviction may be had.
shall be certified to the governing body of the Township by the
Department of Public Works. The governing body shall examine such
certificate and, if found to be correct, shall, by resolution accepting
certification of same, cause such cost to be charged against such real
property, and the amount so charged shall thereupon become a lien and
tax upon such real property and be added to and be part of the taxes
next to be levied and assessed thereon and enforced and collected with
interest by the same officers and in the same manner as other taxes.
[Added 2-14-2012 by Ord. No. 02-12]
E. Township's removal of snow and ice on private roads or streets not
taken over by the Township. The Township, at its discretion, may elect
to repair and maintain and provide for the removal of snow, ice and
other obstructions from, and provide for the lighting of, any roads or
streets upon which the travel is sufficient, in the opinion of said
governing body, to warrant such expenditures, even though such roads
or streets shall not have been taken over by said municipal governing
body or dedicated and accepted as public highways. The municipality
may also provide for the curbside collection of solid waste along such
streets, or for the reimbursement of such solid waste collection costs as
the municipality may determine to have been reasonably incurred by
persons residing adjacent to such streets. Roads or streets so serviced,
which are not shown on the Official Map of the municipality, may, at the
option of the governing body of said municipality, be suitably improved
in accordance with any requirements established pursuant to Article 5
of the "Municipal Land Use Law," P.L. 1975, c. 291, Sections 23 through
27 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32 to 40:55D-36), and this article. [Added
2-14-2012 by Ord. No. 02-12]
§ 372-7 JACKSON CODE § 372-10
1:1434
ARTICLE III
Street Openings
[Adopted 12-5-1972 by Ord. No. 13-72 (Ch. 91, Art. III, of the 1972
Code)]
§ 372-11. Prerequisites to opening street.
No person, firm, partnership or corporation shall open or dig a trench in any
public road, street or highway of this municipality without first having done
each of the following:
§ 372-12. Written permit required.
No person, firm, partnership or corporation shall open or dig a trench, or
direct or cause any employee, agent or contractor of such person, firm,
partnership or corporation to open or dig a trench, in any public road,
street or highway until a written permit for such opening or trench has been
issued by the Township, except that openings may be made without the
necessity of written application, as hereinbefore provided, in emergencies
such as a broken or frozen water main, gas leak or other happening which
A. Made a written application therefor to the Township on forms to be
provided by the Township, which application shall state the purpose
thereof, such as an opening or excavation for sewer, water, gas,
telephone, electric or any other purpose. Attached to the application
shall be a sketch, in duplicate, showing the location and type of work to
be done pursuant to the provisions hereof. The officer charged with the
responsibility of accepting the application shall submit said sketch to
the Township Engineer and the application and sketch to the Chief of
Police or his designated representative. Upon approval by the Township
Engineer and Chief of Police that said application is in compliance with
all state and municipal laws and regulations, the permit shall be issued,
subject, however, to any conditions which may be imposed by said
Township Engineer or said Chief of Police, reasonably related to the
health, safety and welfare of the Township residents and those who
travel upon its road. Wherever in this article the Township Engineer,
Chief of Police or other Township officer is designated, the reference
therein may equally apply to any designated representative of the same.
B. Paid the proper fee to said Township for such opening or trench as
hereinafter determined.
C. Given the municipality a cash or surety company bond to guarantee that
the opening or trench made by the permittee will be properly closed
and the road, street or highway over the same and the surrounding
improvements or facilities reconstructed so that it will remain in good
condition for at least one year after the closing by the permittee.
[Amended 5-14-1984 by Ord. No. 23-84]
D. Received from the Township a written permit for the specific opening or
trench.
§ 372-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 372-12
1:1435
would endanger public life, health and safety; provided, however, that
notice thereof shall be immediately given verbally to the Township Engineer,
Superintendent of Public Works or Police Department and written
application in accordance with § 372-11 is made within 72 hours.
§ 372-13. Operation requirements.
Each permittee shall do each of the following things with relation to each
opening or trench for which the permittee is responsible:
A. Have the trench or opening dug promptly after the permit aforesaid is
granted, but in no case later than 48 hours.
B. Have the material taken from the opening or trench placed so as not to
interfere with public use of highway.
C. Have proper and ample guards, barricades, signs and lights maintained
on site to sufficiently warn users of the road, street or highway of the
dangers attendant to the project, from the time the opening or trench is
started until the road, street or highway is completely restored and
completely reopened to public travel. The type of guard, barricade, sign
and light to be utilized shall be in compliance with specifications or
standards contained in the manual entitled "Uniform Traffic Control
Devices," a copy of which shall be available at the office of the Chief of
Police, and the Chief of Police must approve the actual installation of
same in each case, both as to location of same and as to compliance
with said specifications and standards.
D. Assume full liability for any and all injuries caused by the negligence of
permittee or the employees or agents of permittee in constructing such
opening or trench as well as in its maintenance or closing.
E. Keep said opening or trench open a minimum period of time to
accomplish the purpose of the permittee, and close such opening or
trench just as soon as possible thereafter.
F. Comply with the following standards hereby adopted in this
municipality for such openings and trenches:
(1) Protection of traveling public. The permittee shall keep such
opening or trench properly guarded and at night have lights placed
thereat, and in doing the work interfere as little as possible with
the travel along the road, and open no greater part of the road at
any time than shall be allowed by the Superintendent of Public
Works.
(2) Protection from suits. The permittee shall also save harmless said
Township of Jackson, its officers and servants from and against any
loss, injury or damage resulting from any negligence or fault of the
permittee, his agents or servants in connection with the
performance of the work covered by the permit.
§ 372-12 JACKSON CODE § 372-13
1:1436
(3) Time limit. The opening or trench shall be backfilled immediately
and the pavement shall be restored within two weeks. In case the
work has not been completed before the day of expiration as shown
in the permit and the permittee has not requested an extension of
time, the Superintendent of Public Works may, if he deems it
advisable, take steps to backfill the trench and replace a permanent
pavement over the opening for which the permit has been issued,
and if any extension of time beyond said date is needed for the
completion of the work, a new application must be filed, if required
by the Superintendent of Public Works.
(4) Maintenance. The restoration of the opening or trench shall be
maintained for one year after completion.
(5) Excavation.
(a) No opening shall be commenced on a Saturday, Sunday or
holiday, except in case of emergency.
(b) On a bituminous-surface-treated road, the edges of the
opening shall be cut straight through the bituminous surface
before the trench is excavated.
(c) The work shall be so conducted as not to interfere with the
water, sewer or gas mains or any connections with buildings
until permission of the proper authorities shall have been
obtained. All rock within five feet of a water main or other pipe
which will be damaged thereby shall be removed without
blasting. No excavation which will damage trees shall be made
without the approval of the Superintendent of Public Works.
(6) Backfilling. The permittee shall completely backfill the excavation
and replace as great a portion as possible of the material
excavated, compacting it by flushing, tamping or other suitable
means, and supply additional material when there is a deficiency.
Whenever the road foreman shall deem the material unsatisfactory
for backfill, and his decision shall have been concurred in by the
Superintendent of Public Works or his duly authorized assistant,
the permittee shall backfill the trench with sand, hard-coal cinders
or other proper material acceptable, compressed as required, and
shall remove all excess material from the premises. If tamping
alone is employed, the material shall be placed in layers, not
exceeding six inches in thickness, moistened as directed, and each
layer energetically tamped until thoroughly compacted.
(7) Restoration of surface paving and surface paving foundation. After
the backfilling of the opening or trench has been completed as
above specified, the restoration of the pavement shall be governed
by the following applicable rules:
(a) In the case of an opening or trench in the earth shoulder, the
permittee shall restore the top four inches of the trench or
§ 372-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 372-13
1:1437
opening with material capable of supporting the growth of
grass, and shall fertilize and seed the surface with grass seed.
(b) In the case of a gravel pavement, the permittee shall fill in the
top eight inches of the excavated trench or opening with
compacted Grade A road gravel.
(c) In the case of penetration macadam road which consists of
broken stone of various sizes, the permittee may salvage the
broken stone and replace it in the top of the trench similar to
the original pavement and cover it with two inches of hotmixed
bituminous concrete.
(d) In the case of a gravel-based bituminous concrete road, the
permittee shall restore the surface with six inches of
compacted Grade A road gravel covered with two inches of hotmixed
bituminous concrete.
(e) In the case of a bituminous-treated gravel road, the permittee
shall restore the surface with six inches of compacted Grade A
road gravel covered with two inches of either mixed
bituminous material or hot-mixed bituminous concrete.
(f) In the case of a concrete surface, the permittee shall construct
a concrete foundation and shall restore the reinforcement and
the concrete pavement as directed by the Superintendent of
Public Works.
(g) In the case of any special condition, the permittee shall restore
the trench or opening as directed by the Superintendent of
Public Works. If the Township is required to restore the
pavement, the final charges, based on the schedule of costs,
will be billed to the permittee on the completion of the work by
the Township.
(h) No newly paved road shall be opened for a period of three
years from the date of acceptance by the Township unless such
road is overlaid along the entire length of the opening for the
full paved width of the roadway for longitudinal trenches and
25 feet on either side for the full paved width of the roadway
for perpendicular trenches or other openings. The overlay shall
consist of one inch of bituminous concrete type FABC (Mix
1-5), and the transition to existing pavement shall be
constructed as a butt joint. Feathering of the overlay is
prohibited. [Added 5-21-1990 by Ord. No. 29-90]
(8) Compliance. If the work is not being performed in accordance with
the provisions of this article, or if the work is being performed in a
manner which is hazardous to the safety and well-being of the
public, then the Township Engineer and/or the Chief of Police shall
issue a stop notice to the permittee or to the person or persons
actually in charge of the work at the location thereof. Upon the
§ 372-13 JACKSON CODE § 372-13
1:1438
issuance of the stop notice, the progress of the work shall cease
until the defects are corrected and the stop order rescinded. In the
event of such noncompliance, the permittee shall be responsible
for reimbursing the Township for any engineering or other
professional fees and other incidental costs which may be incurred
by the Township. [Amended 5-14-1984 by Ord. No. 23-84]
(9) Clearance of roadway. All work shall be performed in such a
manner that all streets, roads or highways shall be at all times
accessible for the passage of fire apparatus, mail delivery, police
vehicles, school buses, ambulances and all other emergency or
essential equipment. Access to fire hydrants, intersecting streets
and private driveways shall be maintained at all times during the
course of the work. The permittee shall conduct operations so as to
cause as little interference to traffic as possible. Trenches shall be
opened for a distance of not more than 300 feet in advance of the
laying of the subsurface structures. Transverse openings involving
the full width of any roadway shall be made so that only 1/2 of any
road or thoroughfare will be obstructed at any one time. The
complete blocking of any road or thoroughfare is prohibited except
upon the express written authorization of both the Township
Engineer and the Chief of Police. Whenever possible, services shall
be driven or bored.
(10) Traffic. Traffic on all roadways within the Township is under the
direct supervision and control of the Police Department, and any
persons employed by a permittee to regulate or supervise traffic
during the performance of work in accordance with this article
shall be such a person authorized to do so by Title 39 of the Revised
Statutes of the State of New Jersey.
(11) Emergencies. The permittee shall at all times while work is in
progress maintain with the Police Department and Superintendent
of Public Works the names and telephone numbers of responsible
representatives of the permittee who may be contacted to correct
any hazardous or emergency condition which may arise at times
other than during the normal working hours. In order to expedite
emergency repairs at times other than the normal working hours,
permittee shall have such representatives available for immediate
duty and shall have stockpiled at strategic locations sufficient
materials suitable for emergency repairs.
(12) Obstructions. During nonworking hours, roadway lanes and
shoulders shall be kept free of obstructions, including construction
vehicles whenever they may present a hazard to passing traffic.
This shall apply to sidewalks and walkways. In the event an
obstruction cannot reasonably be removed, it shall be the
responsibility of the permittee to so mark the obstruction as to
eliminate any hazard to vehicular traffic and, in the event the
obstruction is to pedestrian traffic, to provide a safe passage area
for said pedestrians.
§ 372-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 372-14
1:1439
§ 372-14. Bond required; schedule of estimated costs.
§ 372-15. Schedule of fees. [Amended 5-14-1984 by Ord. No.
23-1984; 5-13-1991 by Ord. No. 16-91]
A. Each applicant for a permit for such opening or trench shall post a cash
or surety company bond with the municipality to cover the estimated
costs of closing and fully and completely restoring the particular
opening or trench for which the application is being made, as well as to
cover the repairs to any surrounding roadway, curbing, gutters,
sidewalks, landscaping or other surrounding improvements or facilities
which may have been damaged by the project, according to the
following schedule of estimated costs: [Amended 5-14-1984 by Ord.
No. 23-84]
Schedule of Estimated Costs
Type
Fee
(per square yard)
Earth surface $5
Gravel surface $6
Bituminous surface $18
Continuous pavement and concrete
foundation
$35
B. Each such surety bond shall be executed by the permittee as principal
therein, and the surety company shall be the surety therein, which
surety company shall be one licensed to do business in the State of New
Jersey.
C. Upon completion of the project by the permittee and the restoration of
the public road, street or highway and surrounding improvements or
facilities in accordance with this article, the permittee shall receive
back his bond one year after the completion of the project, upon proper
written application therefor, subject to the approval thereof by the
Superintendent of Public Works. Said bond or cash deposit shall be for
the purpose of guaranteeing that the restoration shall remain in good
condition for at least one year after the completion of the project.
[Amended 5-14-1984 by Ord. No. 23-84]
D. A utility company may, in lieu of giving a separate bond on each project,
annually, once in January each year, give such a bond for $5,000,
provided that, when the total of all bonds required by such utility
company reaches $5,000, such utility company may either give an
additional bond or deposit cash security in an amount equal to the
performance bond required by Subsection A of this section for any
additional openings or trenches it desires to make in that calendar year.
[Added 5-14-1984 by Ord. No. 23-84]
§ 372-14 JACKSON CODE § 372-15
1:1440
§ 372-16. Disposition of fees.
The fees referred to in § 372-15A hereof shall be turned over to and become
the property of the municipality and paid by the Superintendent of Public
Works to the Township Treasurer monthly, accompanied by a written
statement of the source of each fee.
§ 372-17. Duties of Superintendent of Public Works.
The Superintendent of Public Works shall be the agent and representative
of this municipality to:
A. The following schedule of fees is hereby fixed, determined and
established as being the fees to be paid in the Township for the issuance
of permits and for other Township services in connection with the
servicing of such permits and such openings and trenches to proper
restoration: [Amended 8-26-1991 by Ord. No. 30-91]
Schedule of Fees
Openings
(length in feet) Fee
Up to 3 feet by 3 feet $100
From 3 feet to 500 feet $3 per foot, with a minimum of
$300
In excess of 500 feet $1 per additional foot
B. Such fee shall accompany the application when filed with the Township
or its representative.
A. Receive all applications, fees and bonds hereunder.
B. Inspect the sites of the proposed openings or trenches.
C. Inspect openings or trenches, warning guards, barricades, signs and
lights maintained or to be maintained at respective sites by permittee.
D. Inspect closings of openings or trenches and restoration of public
roads, streets and highways.
E. Notify permittee or municipality, or both, of any failure, refusal or
neglect on part of permittee or his employees or representatives to
comply herewith.
F. Make complaint and prosecute for and on behalf of this municipality
any offense under this article.
G. Administer the provisions of this article for and on behalf and in the
name of this municipality, under the direction of and for the Township
Committee, the governing body of this municipality.
§ 372-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 372-18
1:1441
§ 372-18. Interpretation.
The designation "public road, street or highway," as used in this article,
shall include the right-of-way, either dedicated to or owned by the Township.
§ 372-19. Placement of pipelines and conduits above ground.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this article, no
person, firm, partnership or corporation shall place pipelines, conduits or
similar objects on or above the surface of the ground in any public road,
street or highway unless in compliance with all provisions of this article
governing the opening or digging of a trench as though same applied to
the placement of said pipeline, conduit or similar object, except that those
requirements which apply exclusively to trenches or excavations shall not
apply hereto.
§ 372-20. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not exceeding
$500 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both, in the
discretion of the Municipal Judge.
§ 372-21. Responsibility for damages.
A. Nothing in this article shall be understood or construed by any
permittee or other person to absolve any permittee or his employees,
agents or contractors of any responsibility for any damage done to any
person or property in opening or digging a trench in any public road,
street or highway.
B. In the event that any permittee or his employees, agents or contractors
or any other individual who performs work under a permit authorized
by the provisions of this article causes damage or injury to any person
or property or fails to fully and completely restore the particular
opening or trench or fails to repair the surrounding roadway, curbing,
gutters, sidewalks, landscaping or other surrounding improvements or
facilities or otherwise damages such facilities, such permittee or other
individual shall be fully responsible for any such claims and damage for
damages in a civil action or proceeding. [Added 5-14-1984 by Ord.
No. 23-84]
§ 372-18 JACKSON CODE § 372-21
1:1442
ARTICLE IV
Street Acceptance Procedure
[Adopted 7-5-1972 by Ord. No. 22-72 (Ch. 91, Art. IV, of the 1972
Code)]
§ 372-22. Application; processing; cancellation of bond.
The procedure for each applicant desiring to obtain approval and
acceptance of streets and roads into the municipal road system in the
Township of Jackson, in the County of Ocean, which shall apply to all
streets, avenues and roads constructed under and in accordance with the
requirements of the Subdivision Ordinance209 of the Township of Jackson
and all amendments and supplements thereto, shall be as follows:
A. Application shall be made in writing on forms provided by the Township
of Jackson, and said application shall contain the following information:
(1) The name of the development or subdivision and the title and filing
date of the map of the subdivision or development.
(2) The names of the streets or roads and the description giving the
extent and limit of each street or road which the Township is being
requested to accept.
(3) A description of the performance bonds, if applicable, covering the
improvements to be constructed in the development.
(4) Maintenance bonds in accordance with the provisions of the
Subdivision Ordinance.210
B. The request for acceptance shall be referred by the Township
Committee to the Township Engineer and Superintendent of Public
Works for investigation and report. The aforesaid request may only be
made after all construction in conjunction with the development or
subdivision has been completed.
C. Upon receipt of a favorable report and recommendation from both the
Township Engineer and the Superintendent of Public Works, the
Township Committee may accept the designated streets into the
Township road system.
D. If the developer has posted a performance bond, either in the form of a
surety bond, cash or its equivalent, he may make written request for
cancellation of the bond and/or the return of the cash deposit after the
project has been completed and accepted by the Township of Jackson.
209. Editor's Note: See now Ch. 244, Land Use and Development Regulations.
210. Editor's Note: See now Ch. 244, Land Use and Development Regulations.
§ 372-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 372-23
1:1443
§ 372-23. Township to supply application forms.
The Township of Jackson shall supply the forms upon which the application
referred to in the preceding section shall be made, in order that all of the
applications shall be in standard form.
§ 372-23 JACKSON CODE § 372-23
1:1444
ARTICLE V
Street Vacation Procedure
[Adopted 11-26-1974 by Ord. No. 51-74 (Ch. 91, Art. V, of the 1972
Code)]
§ 372-24. Application procedure.
The procedure for each applicant desiring to obtain the vacation of streets
and roads by the Township Committee shall be as follows:
§ 372-25. Return of fee.
In the event that the Township Committee, in its discretion, fails to adopt
an ordinance vacating streets in accordance with any submitted application,
the fee paid to the Township shall be returned to the applicant, less any
actual costs, expenses or professional fees incurred by the Township of
Jackson.
A. Application shall be made in writing on forms provided by the Township
of Jackson, and said application shall include a map or sketch of the
streets and roadways requested to be vacated.
B. Said application, supporting documents and information shall be
submitted to the Township Clerk, together with a fee of $150 to defray
administrative costs and direct expenses. In addition, the application
shall contain the applicant's agreement to defray all engineering costs
and expenses caused to the Township of Jackson.
§ 372-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 372-25
1:1445

ARTICLE VI
Street Numbering System
[Adopted 9-12-1983 by Ord. No. 45-83 (Ch. 91, Art. VI, of the 1972
Code)]
§ 372-26. Establishment of system.
The Township of Jackson hereby adopts the present street address and
numbering system of the Township of Jackson as the system of numbering
all buildings and lots of land within the Township pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:67-1j.
§ 372-27. Installation and display of numerals. [Amended 7-21-1993
by Ord. No. 28-93]
Within 90 days of the date of adoption of this article, the owner of every
parcel of real property in the Township of Jackson upon which is located
a structure to which a street number has been assigned shall have the
number so assigned displayed on the parcel or on the structure in a position
which is easily observed and readable from either direction along the
public street. Display of the assigned number on a mailbox directly in front
of the structure or on the street directly opposite the structure shall be
acceptable. In the case of individual residences and two-family residences
specifically excluding strip malls and shopping centers, all numbers shall
be in Arabic figures at least three inches high, 1/2 inch wide and shall be
of light-reflective material. Numbers written in script, cursive, Old English,
Roman or other styles of writing shall not be acceptable because of the
difficulty of agencies responding in emergency situations to read such
style. Additionally, each separate commercial building, including strip malls
or shopping centers, industrial building and apartment building shall be
required to display a number and/or letter of at least eight inches in height
and one inch in width, subject to the above conditions. However, individual
retail establishments within a commercial building shall not be required to
post individual numbers, provided that the commercial building exhibits a
number as set forth in this section.
§ 372-28. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-22-2017 by Ord. No.
16-17]
Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this article shall
be subject to a fine of $50.
§ 372-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 372-28
1:1447

ARTICLE VII
Street and Highway Construction and Maintenance Operations
[Adopted 12-27-1993 by Ord. No. 45-93 (Ch. 91, Art. VII, of the
1972 Code)]
§ 372-29. Findings; adoption of standards.
§ 372-30. Preconstruction meetings.
It shall be the responsibility of the person, contractor or in the case of
a public utility (as required under Section 16:25-9.2 of the New Jersey
Administrative Code) wishing to conduct work on, under or above the
roadway to contact the Traffic Bureau of the Jackson Township Police
Department in order to arrange a preconstruction meeting in order to
submit plans for the safe movement of traffic during such period of
construction of work. Any person, contractor or utility who fails to comply
with this section prior to the start of such work or whose plans are not
approved by the Traffic Bureau of the Jackson Township Police Department
is in violation of this section.
§ 372-31. Traffic directors.
Trained and qualified traffic directors or flagging personnel shall be posted
at all construction or maintenance sites when determined by the Traffic
Bureau of the Jackson Township Police Department that the same is
necessary to provide for the safety and expeditious movement of traffic.
A. The Township of Jackson finds and declares that problems of traffic
control occur when traffic must be moved through or around road and
street construction, maintenance operations and utility work, above or
below ground, which requires blocking the roadway and obstructing
the normal flow of traffic and that such obstructions are or can become
dangerous when not properly controlled. In order to better promote the
public health, safety, peace and welfare, it is necessary to establish
controls and regulations directed to the safe and expeditious movement
of traffic through construction and maintenance zones and to provide
safety for the work forces performing these operations.
B. The Township of Jackson, in the County of Ocean, State of New Jersey,
does hereby adopt the current Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices, 1988 Edition, hereafter known as "MUTCD," except as hereby
supplemented and amended, as it controls and regulates whenever
construction, maintenance operations or utility work obstructs the
normal flow of traffic. Any person, contractor or utility who fails to
comply with the provisions of the MUTCD while performing such work
is in violation of this section.
§ 372-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 372-32
1:1449
§ 372-32. Safety requirements.
All construction sites shall have proper and ample guards, barricades, signs
and lights maintained on site to sufficiently warn users of the road, street or
highway of the dangers attendant to the project, from the time the opening,
trench or road construction is started until the same is completely restored
and completely reopened to public travel. The type of guard, barricade, sign
or light to be utilized shall be in compliance with specifications or standards
contained in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, 1988 Edition,
or its latest revisions.
§ 372-33. Road closings and detours. [Amended 8-22-2005 by Ord.
No. 34-05]
Road closings or traffic detours shall not be permitted except in emergency
situations and only for less than 12 hours in duration. Any other road
closings shall not be permitted unless approved in advance by the Traffic
Bureau of the Jackson Township Police Department and the Jackson
Township governing body.
§ 372-34. Time limits.
There shall be no construction, maintenance operations or utility work on
any roadway in the Township of Jackson before the hour of 8:00 a.m. or
after 5:00 p.m., with the exception of emergency work. This time limit
may be adjusted to permit work prior to 8:00 a.m. or after 5:00 p.m.
by the Traffic Safety Officer of the Jackson Township Police Department.
If it is determined by the Traffic Safety Officer that the construction or
maintenance operation would cause a substantial delay in traffic or cause a
safety or health hazard, the work shall then be permitted only between 8:00
a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
§ 372-35. Emergency contact phone numbers.
The person, contractor or utility responsible for the construction site shall
provide the Police Department and Traffic Bureau with at least two
emergency contact twenty-four-hour phone numbers prior to the start of
any work. If for any reason the emergency contact person cannot be
reached or does not respond to a call from the Police Department to correct
a hazardous condition, the Township may respond to correct the hazard.
The reasonable fees for such emergency service shall be charged to the
bonded contractor responsible.
§ 372-36. Stop-work orders.
The Traffic Bureau of the Jackson Township Police Department shall have
the authority to stop work, including but not limited to the backfilling of
open excavations, the removal of equipment and vehicles, the removal of
any stored materials within the roadway, safety hazards or for any violation
of this section.
§ 372-32 JACKSON CODE § 372-37
1:1450
§ 372-37. Violations and penalties.
Any person, contractor or utility who commits a violation of this article
shall, upon conviction thereof, for a first offense pay a fine of not less than
$100 nor more than $500 and/or be imprisoned in the county jail for a term
not exceeding 90 days; for a second offense, upon conviction thereof, pay
a fine of not less than $250 and/or be imprisoned in the county jail for a
term not exceeding 90 days; for a third or subsequent conviction, pay fine
of not less than $500 and/or be imprisoned in the county jail for a term not
exceeding 90 days. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each
day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 372-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 372-37
1:1451
Chapter 380
TAXICABS, LIMOUSINES AND JITNEYS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 103. Licensing — See Ch. 251.
§ 372-37 JACKSON CODE § 372-37
1:1452
ARTICLE I
Taxicabs
§ 380-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated in N.J.S.A. 48:16-1, as amended and supplemented: "autocab,"
"person" and "street."
§ 380-2. License required.
No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the taxicab business, nor
shall be/she/it operate or permit a taxicab owned or controlled by him/her/
it to be operated as a vehicle for hire upon the streets of this municipality,
without first having obtained a taxicab license from the municipality.
§ 380-3. License fee and term.
No license shall be issued or renewed unless the holder thereof has paid an
annual license fee of $25 for the right to engage in the taxicab business.
Said license shall be for the year ending on the 30th day of June and shall
be in addition to any other fee or charges established by proper authorities
and applicable to said holder for the vehicle or vehicles under his or her
operation and control.
§ 380-4. Application.
Application for a license shall be filed with the Township Clerk upon forms
provided by the municipality, and said application shall be verified under
oath and shall furnish the following:
§ 380-5. Investigation of applicant.
Each applicant (or principals thereof) for such license shall present himor
herself at the office of the Police Department and permit his or her
fingerprints to be taken by the said Police Department and have said
fingerprints, or a copy thereof, submitted to the Township with the
application for said license. The Chief of Police or, in his or her absence, the
person in charge of said Police Department, is hereby charged with the duty
A. The name and address of the applicant; where the applicant is not a
natural person, the name and address of all owners or participants in
the ownership of the legal entity and all officers, directors or others of
like position, whatever be their title.
B. The year, type and model of the vehicle for which the license is desired.
C. The number of persons the vehicle is capable of carrying.
D. The operator's license number.
E. The taxicab license number.
§ 380-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-5
1:1453
and responsibility of forwarding a copy of the fingerprints of each applicant
to the New Jersey State Police or the Federal Bureau of Investigation with
the request that the criminal records of the subject be furnished to the
local Police Department. After such information is received from either the
New Jersey State Police or the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Chief
of Police or, in his or her absence, the person in charge of said Police
Department, shall furnish the Township Council, in a timely fashion, with
any information obtained from any source concerning said applicant or
applicants. No license shall be granted to any applicant until the Township
Council is satisfied that the applicant (or any principal) does not have any
criminal record or reputation which would render the applicant unfit to
have such license.
§ 380-6. Insurance.
In order to ensure the safety of the public, it shall be unlawful for the
holder to operate or cause or permit a taxicab to be operated, nor shall
any license be issued hereunder, until and unless the applicant shall have
complied with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 48:16-1 to 48:16-12, and the acts
amendatory thereof or supplemental thereto; provided, however, that an
insurance policy of a company duly licensed to transact business under the
insurance laws of the state has been filed, conditioned for the payment of a
sum of not less than $100,000 to satisfy all claims for damages by reason of
bodily injury to, or the death of, any one person, resulting from an accident
and for a sum of not less than $300,000 to satisfy all claims for damages by
reason of bodily injuries to, or the death of, all persons, on account of any
accident, by reason of the ownership, operation, maintenance or use of such
taxicab upon any public street; and for a sum of $5,000 to satisfy any claim
for damages to property.
§ 380-7. Issuance of license.
If the Township Council finds that the applicant is fit, willing and able to
perform such public transportation in accordance with the provisions of
this article and the rules promulgated by the Township Council, then the
Township Clerk shall issue a license stating the name and address of the
applicant, the date of issuance and the year, type and model of the vehicles;
otherwise, the application shall be denied.
§ 380-8. Assignment of license.
No taxicab license shall be assigned, mortgaged, pledged or otherwise
transferred to secure a debt, loan, advance or other financing transaction.
§ 380-9. Regulation of licensed taxicabs.
The following regulations shall hereafter apply to all taxicabs licensed
hereafter in this municipality:
A. The owner of each taxicab shall forthwith file with the Township Clerk
and the Chief of Police a typewritten or printed, signed schedule
§ 380-5 JACKSON CODE § 380-9
1:1454
§ 380-10. Permit required.
§ 380-11. Regulations for permit.
Each applicant for a permit must conform to the following regulations:
showing the dates, hours, locations and telephone numbers in this
Township at which the said taxicab will be on a recognized taxicab
stand, with qualified operator, ready to serve the public, subject to
times when actually on call, i.e., making a service.
B. Hereafter, each time a taxicab license is applied for, the applicant shall
file with his or her application, and as part thereof, a new schedule as
aforesaid. When a new license is granted or a license is renewed, the
licensee shall forthwith furnish the Chief of Police with a copy of the
current schedule of said taxicab.
C. Each licensed taxicab shall at all times, as set forth in its schedule, be at
its designated stand, with qualified operator, ready to serve the public,
subject to times actually in call, i.e., making a service.
D. If during the licensed period any owner of such a licensed taxicab shall
find that it is impossible or impractical to comply with the schedule
such owner has filed, such owner shall immediately file a written notice
with the Township Clerk and the Chief of Police, stating when the
taxicab went out of public service and the reason therefor, such as
damaged by accident, necessary repairs, inability to get competent
driver, illness of driver or whatsoever may be the reason for
nonoperation of the taxicab. When a taxicab is returned to public
service, written notice thereof shall be immediately filed by the owner
with said Township Clerk and Chief of Police. The Township Council
shall review the number and extent of the periods when each taxicab
has been out of public service during the previous licensing period
when giving consideration on the question of renewal or transfer.
A. No person shall operate a taxicab for hire upon the streets of the
municipality, and no person, firm or corporation who owns or controls a
taxicab shall permit it to be driven, and no taxicab licensed by the
municipality shall be so driven at any time for hire, unless the driver of
said taxicab shall have first obtained and shall have then in force a
taxicab driver's permit under the provisions of this article.
B. Every person applying for a permit to drive a taxicab must furnish
satisfactory evidence that he or she holds a current driver's license
under the New Jersey State Motor Vehicle Law and shall continue to
hold same as long as he or she operates said taxicab.
A. Be of the age of 21 years or over.
B. Present the certificate of a reputable physician showing that he or she
has been examined within 60 days and that he or she is of sound
physique, with good eyesight and not subject to epilepsy, vertigo, heart
§ 380-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-11
1:1455
§ 380-12. Application for permit.
The applicant for said permit shall fill out, upon a form provided by the
Township, his or her full name, residence, places of residence for the
preceding five years, age, height, color of eyes and hair, place of birth, last
previous employment, whether married or single, whether he or she has
ever been convicted of a crime (and, if so, nature, date and penalty), which
statement shall be signed and filed with the Township Clerk as a permanent
record. The applicant shall also furnish four copies of a photograph taken
within the preceding 30 days, size two inches by two inches, front view.
§ 380-13. Issuance of permit.
Upon satisfactory fulfillment of the requirements hereof, there shall be
issued by the Township Clerk, at the direction of the Township Council, to
the applicant, a driver's permit card which shall contain the photograph and
permit number of the permittee.
§ 380-14. Display of permit.
The permit and photograph shall be displayed in plain view in the interior
of the taxicab at all times the taxicab is being operated by said permittee.
§ 380-15. Permit fee and term.
Each permit shall expire June 30 next succeeding. A fee shall be paid for
each permit, if granted, or for each application and refusal of a permit. The
said fees are fixed and imposed for regulations.
trouble or any other infirmity of body or mind which might render him
or her unfit for the safe operation of a taxicab.
C. Be able to read, write and understand the English language and be a
citizen of the United States.
D. Not have been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude, sex
offenses, violence, force, and/or threat of bodily injury.
E. Not be addicted to the use of narcotics or intoxicating liquors.
F. Not have received a dishonorable discharge from any branch of the
Armed Services of the United States or National Guard and not be a
member of a party advocating the overthrow of constitutional
government.
G. Be fingerprinted by the Police Department of this Township within 20
days prior to making application for a permit.
H. Have a good reputation for honesty and morality in the community in
which he or she resides.
§ 380-11 JACKSON CODE § 380-16
1:1456
§ 380-16. Compliance with provisions by licensee.
All holders of licenses engaged in the taxicab business in the Township
of Jackson, operating under the provisions of this article, shall render an
overall service to the public desiring to use taxicabs. They shall answer
all calls received by them for services inside the corporate limits of the
municipality as soon as they can do so, and if said services cannot be
rendered within a reasonable time, they shall then notify the prospective
passenger how long it will be before the said call can be answered and give
the reason therefor. Any holder who shall refuse to accept a call anywhere
in the municipality any time when such holder has available cab or cabs, or
who shall fail or refuse to give overall service, shall be deemed a violator of
this article.
§ 380-17. Drivers to keep records.
Every holder shall require the driver to keep a daily record, identified by the
cab number of the cab used that day and the permit number of the driver, of
the time and place when and where the passenger was accepted, as well as
the time and place of the discharge of the passenger, together with the fare
received for the trip, which record the holder shall keep intact for 90 days
from the date thereof, and shall be kept open at all times for inspection by
a duly authorized representative of the Police Department.
§ 380-18. Soliciting patronage.
No driver shall solicit passengers for a taxicab except when sitting in
the driver's compartment of such taxicab or while standing immediately
adjacent to the curbside thereof.
§ 380-19. Prohibited manner of solicitation.
No driver shall solicit patronage in a loud tone of voice or in any manner
annoy any person or obstruct the movement of any person or follow any
person for the purpose of soliciting patronage.
§ 380-20. Receipt and discharge of passengers on sidewalk.
Drivers of taxicabs shall not receive or discharge passengers in the roadway
but shall pull up to the right-hand sidewalk as nearly as possible or, in
the absence of a sidewalk, to the extreme right-hand side of the road and
there receive or discharge passengers, except upon one-way streets where
passengers may be discharged at either the right- or left-hand sidewalk or
side of the roadway in the absence of a sidewalk.
§ 380-21. Cruising.
No driver shall cruise in search of passengers except in such areas and at
such times as may be designated by the Chief of Police. Such areas and
times shall only be designated when the Chief of Police finds that taxicab
§ 380-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-21
1:1457
cruising would not congest traffic or be dangerous to pedestrians and other
vehicles.
§ 380-22. Additional passengers.
§ 380-23. Refusal to carry orderly passengers prohibited.
No driver shall refuse or neglect to carry any person or persons upon their
request, unless previously engaged or unable or forbidden by the provisions
of this article to do so.
§ 380-24. Soliciting business for certain establishments.
It shall be a violation of this article for any driver of a taxicab to solicit
business for any hotels, motels, rooming houses, bars, taverns, restaurants,
theaters and the like, or to attempt to divert patronage from one such place
to another.
§ 380-25. Taxicab stand.
No taxicab, while waiting for employment by passengers, shall stand on
any public street or space other than at or upon a taxicab stand designated
or established in accordance with this article, nor shall any driver of such
taxicab seek employment by repeatedly and persistently driving his or her
taxicab to and fro in a short space before, or by otherwise interfering with
the proper and orderly access to or egress from, any theater, hall, hotel,
public resort or other place of gathering.
§ 380-26. Transportation of passengers.
No driver of any taxicab shall induce any prospective passenger to employ
him or her, knowingly misinforming or misleading any such passenger
either as to time or place of arrival or departure of any train, motor vehicle
or airplane, or as to the location of any hotel, public place or private
residence, or as to the distance between any two points, nor shall such
driver deceive or make false representations to any prospective passenger
by conveying such passenger to any other place or over any other route than
that to which such passenger may have instructed the driver to go.
A. No driver shall permit any other person to occupy or ride in said taxicab
unless the person or persons first employing a taxicab shall consent to
the acceptance of an additional passenger or passengers.
B. No charge shall be made for an additional passenger except when the
additional passenger rides beyond the previous passenger's
destination, and then for only the additional distance so traveled.
§ 380-21 JACKSON CODE § 380-27
1:1458
§ 380-27. Responsibility of owner.
Every owner shall be responsible for the operation of the vehicle for which
the license has been granted regardless of the legal relationship between
such owner and the driver of such vehicle.
§ 380-28. Conduct of driver.
The driver, while engaged in the operation of a taxicab, shall conduct himor
herself in a gentlemanly or gentlewomanly manner, and he or she shall
not use any indecent, profane or insulting language while engaged in such
operation.
§ 380-29. Lost property.
Every driver of a taxicab, immediately after the termination of any hiring or
employment, must carefully search such taxicab for any property lost or left
therein, and any such property, unless sooner claimed or delivered to the
owner, shall, as soon as possible, be turned over to the Police Department.
§ 380-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-29
1:1459

ARTICLE II
Limousines
§ 380-30. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated in N.J.S.A. 48:16-13, as amended and supplemented: "autocab,"
"limousine service," "person," "principal place of business," and "street."
For purposes of clarification, it is noted that the definition of "limousine
service" generally includes the service commonly known as "car service."
§ 380-31. Compliance with statutes.
The applicable provisions of N.J.S.A. 48:16-14 to 48:16-22.7, inclusive, as
amended and supplemented, shall be complied with in the licensing,
regulation and operation of limousines in this article.
§ 380-32. Power of attorney.
The owner of any limousine to be licensed under this article shall execute
and deliver to the Division of Motor Vehicles, concurrently with the filing
of an insurance policy as required under N.J.S.A. 48:16-14, a power of
attorney, wherein and whereby the owner shall appoint the Director of
the Division of Motor Vehicles his or her true and lawful attorney for
the purpose of acknowledging service of any process out of a court of
competent jurisdiction to be served against the insured by virtue of the
indemnity granted under the insurance policy filed.
§ 380-33. Licenses. [Amended 6-10-2014 by Ord. No. 09-14]
The Clerk, upon filing of the required insurance policy and payment of an
annual license fee of $25 for each limousine service, plus $10 for each
limousine which is covered under the required insurance policy, shall issue
a license in compliance with N.J.S.A. 48:16-17. Said license shall be paid for
the year ending on the 31st day of March. The original license, or a copy
thereof, shall be retained within the limousine, along with the insurance
information required by N.J.S.A. 48:16-17, and be available for inspection by
any law enforcement officer.
§ 380-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-33
1:1461

ARTICLE III
Jitneys
§ 380-34. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated in N.J.S.A. 48:16-23, as amended and supplemented: "autobus,"
"person" and "street."
§ 380-35. Compliance with statutes.
The applicable provisions of N.J.S.A. 48:16-23 to 48:16-28, inclusive, as
amended and supplemented, shall be complied with in the licensing and
regulating of autobuses in this article.
§ 380-36. Licenses required.
§ 380-37. Investigation of applicant; denials; appeals.
A. Owners' licenses. The Township Council is hereby authorized to issue
licenses to owners of autobuses who are of good moral character or
who otherwise qualify according to the provisions of this article.
B. Operators' licenses. The Township Council is hereby authorized to issue
licenses to operators of autobuses, whether or not they are the owners,
who are capable and of good moral character and who otherwise qualify
according to the provisions of this article. Such license shall hereinafter
be referred to as an "operator's license."
A. Neither an owner's nor an operator's license shall be granted to any
person unless the application for such license has been submitted to the
Township Council. An applicant for an owner's license shall be
thoroughly investigated by the Chief of Police and shall be fingerprinted
and photographed. An applicant for an operator's license shall be
investigated for any criminal or motor vehicle violations by the Chief of
Police and shall be fingerprinted and photographed. A complete report
of said investigation shall be submitted in a timely fashion to the
Township Council for its action thereon.
(1) If, as a result of such investigation by the Chief of Police, the
applicant's character or, in the case of an applicant for an
operator's license, the applicant's driving record is found to be
unsatisfactory, the Chief of Police shall endorse on such application
his or her disapproval and his or her reasons therefor.
(2) If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant is found to be
satisfactory, the Chief of Police shall endorse his or her approval.
B. In the event of denial, the Township Council shall instruct the Township
Clerk to notify the applicant, by certified mail, setting forth the reasons
for denial. Within five days thereafter, the applicant may file with the
Township Council a written request for a hearing on said application,
§ 380-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-37
1:1463
§ 380-38. Contents of license; register.
§ 380-39. License fees.
License fees, to cover the administrative costs associated with processing
the application, in the following amounts shall be paid to the Clerk, who
shall deliver the same to the Treasurer.
§ 380-40. Insurance required.
No license shall be issued by the Township Clerk unless the applicant
has filed an insurance policy with the Clerk in accordance with the
requirements of N.J.S.A. 48:16-24.
§ 380-41. Power of attorney.
The owner of the autobus shall execute and deliver to the Township Clerk a
power of attorney, wherein and whereby the owner shall appoint the Chief
Financial Officer of the municipality as his or her true and lawful attorney
for the purpose of acknowledging service of any process, out of a court of
together with written exceptions to the findings of fact upon which the
Chief of Police based his or her investigative report. Upon the filing of
such a request, the Township Council shall fix the time and place for
a hearing and shall notify the applicant thereof, which hearing shall
be held within 10 days after the request is filed. Within 10 days after
the conclusion of the hearing, the Township Council shall make its
final decision whether to issue the license or sustain the denial of said
application.
A. Owners' and operators' licenses shall be numbered consecutively in
their own respective classifications and shall expire on December 31 of
the year of issuance. Licenses not suspended or revoked may be
renewed annually, subject to the completion of a renewal application
and the payment of the license fee. Every license shall contain the
following:
(1) The purpose of the license.
(2) The number of the license.
(3) The name and address of the licensee.
B. Every owner's license shall also include the character and description
of the vehicle.
C. The Township Clerk shall keep a register of all licenses granted, which
register shall contain the details required by this section.
A. For each autobus: $25.
B. For each operator of a licensed vehicle, whether or not the owner
thereof: $10.
§ 380-37 JACKSON CODE § 380-41
1:1464
competent jurisdiction, to be served against the insured by virtue of the
indemnity granted under this insurance policy or bond filed pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 48:16-24.
§ 380-42. Certificate of compliance.
§ 380-43. Display of badge and license.
A. The Township Clerk, upon the filing of the required insurance policy or
bond, shall issue a certificate, in duplicate, showing that the owner of
the autobus has complied with the terms and provisions of this article.
B. The certificate shall recite the name of the insurance company, the
number and date of expiration of the policy or bond, a description of the
autobus insured thereunder and the registration number of the same.
C. The duplicate certificate shall be filed with the Department of Motor
Vehicles before any such car is licensed as an autobus.
D. The original certificate shall be posted in a conspicuous place within the
autobus.
A. Every operator, whether owner or otherwise, shall be supplied a badge
containing the number of the license, which he or she shall wear in a
conspicuous place upon his or her person while operating such autobus.
B. Every owner and operator shall display the owner's license in a
conspicuous place in the autobus licensed.
§ 380-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-43
1:1465

ARTICLE IV
Enforcement Provisions
§ 380-44. Suspension or revocation of license or permit.
§ 380-45. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate a provision of this chapter
or fail to comply therewith shall severally, for each and every such violation
and noncompliance, forfeit and pay a penalty not to exceed the sum of
$500 or be imprisoned for a period of not more than 90 days, or both, in
the discretion of the Judge before whom such conviction shall be had. The
imposition of a penalty for violation of this chapter shall not excuse the
violation or permit it to continue; such violation shall be remedied within a
reasonable time, and each day that such violation is permitted to exist shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 380-46. Effect of conviction.
The conviction of a licensee or permittee for a violation hereunder shall not
prevent the Township from taking action to suspend or revoke the license
or permit of the person so convicted, as herein provided.
A. Licenses or permits issued under the provisions of this chapter may be
suspended or revoked by the Township Council if the holder has:
(1) Violated any of the provisions of this chapter.
(2) Discontinued operation for more than 30 days.
(3) Violated any ordinances of the Township of Jackson or the laws of
the United States or the State of New Jersey, the violation of which
reflects unfavorably on the fitness of the holder or permittee to
offer public transportation.
B. Prior to suspension or revocation, the holder or permittee shall be given
written notice of the proposed action to be taken and the charges
against him or her, and thereupon the holder shall be given a hearing.
§ 380-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-46
1:1467
Chapter 388
TOWERS AND WRECKERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 103.
Handicapped parking — See Ch. 227.
Permit parking — See Ch. 315.
Abandoned or inoperable vehicles — See Ch.
418.
Unlicensed vehicles — See Ch. 431.
§ 388-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BASIC TOWING SERVICE — The removal and transportation of a vehicle
from a highway, street or other public or private road or a parking area or
from a storage facility and any other services normally incident thereto, but
does not include recovery service.
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of Police of the Jackson Township Police
Department.
HEAVY-DUTY VEHICLE — Any truck, omnibus or other vehicle 26,001
pounds or greater, or any over-height or over-width vehicle.
LIGHT-DUTY VEHICLE — Any passenger automobile, station wagon, pickup
truck or panel truck up to 15,000 pounds, or any motor scooter, motorcycle,
or all-terrain vehicle.
MEDIUM-DUTY VEHICLE — Any truck, omnibus or other vehicle from
15,001 to 26,000 pounds.
NATIONALLY RECOGNIZED TOWING ORGANIZATION — Shall include the
Towing and Recovery Association of America, WreckMaster, and the Garden
State Towmen's Association.
OWNER — Any person, firm or corporation who owns and/or operates a
vehicle on the roads and highways within the Township of Jackson which
vehicle by reason of being disabled or being unlawfully upon said roads
requires towing services.
PERSONAL PROPERTY — Any item that is not directly affixed to a vehicle.
POLICE IMPOUND — Motor vehicles which are towed at the direction
of the Police Department because they have been stolen, involved in a
criminal or motor vehicle offense requiring investigation, are unregistered,
uninsured, operated by unlicensed drivers, or when required by law
(including driving while intoxicated), or which have been involved in fatal
accidents or accidents which, in the judgment of the police, may become
fatal, shall be considered police impounds. Such vehicles shall be covered
by a tarp or stored indoors when requested by police. Police impounds
§ 380-46 JACKSON CODE § 388-1
1:1468
shall be towed to either the towing operator's storage area or a location
designated by the police. Police impounds shall not be released, entered or
photographed without prior police approval.
RECOVERY SERVICE — Any operation which requires the recovery of an
automobile from a position beyond the right-of-way or berm or from being
impaled upon any other object within the right-of-way or berm by several
actions which may include but not be limited to winching and rigging. A
recovery shall be when a towing operator applies his/her knowledge in a
skillful manner to preserve the condition of the motor vehicle while moving
the damaged vehicle to a towable position.
SERVICE CALL — A call to a wrecker operator to perform minor service or
repair to a vehicle, including, but not limited to, changing of rims/tires, fuel
service, jump starts, etc.
TOWING OPERATOR — A person, firm or corporation engaged in the
business of providing wrecker services and storage services for vehicles
towed, which services are made available to the general public upon such
rates, charges and fees as determined by said person, firm or corporation.
TRANSMISSION SERVICE — The combined operation of removing and then
replacing a transmission locking pin, when such operation is necessary
before a vehicle can be moved.
VEHICLE REMOVAL CHARGE — The charge for a motor vehicle that is not
movable and has been towed into the storage facility of the primary owner
and must be towed out of the primary tower's storage facility to a public
street for towing by the secondary tower.
WAITING TIME — Any additional time a tow operator spends at the scene
other than the time required for the actual tow and/or recovery. Examples of
waiting time may include but are not limited to emergency medical services
which must be performed and/or police investigations.
WINCHING — The process of moving a motor vehicle by the use of the cable
from a position that is not accessible for direct hook up by conventional
means for loading onto a tow vehicle. Winching shall not include pulling
a vehicle onto a tilt bed or carrier nor lifting a motor vehicle with a
conventional sling.
WRECKER — A vehicle driven by mechanical power and employed for the
purpose of towing, transporting, conveying or removing any and all kinds of
vehicles, or parts of vehicles, which are unable to be operated under their
own power for which a service charge or fee is exacted.
§ 388-2. Establishment of list.
The Chief of Police of the Police Department of the Township of Jackson
shall establish lists of persons or firms who shall be utilized by the Police
Department of the Township of Jackson to provide towing and wrecking
services for abandoned or wrecked vehicles. Two lists shall be maintained.
One list shall be maintained for light-duty vehicles. This list shall be
comprised of a maximum of eight towing operators. The second list shall
§ 388-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 388-2
1:1469
be maintained for medium- and heavy-duty vehicles. This list shall be
comprised of a maximum of three towing operators. In establishing the
lists, the Chief of Police shall give first preference to those persons or firms
who are presently utilized by the Police Department for this service. All
other operators shall be given preference based upon the date of application
filed by them which application is more fully described herein. The Chief
of Police shall also establish and maintain a waiting list for operators in
the event the number of authorized operators exceeds eight and three,
respectively. The placement on the waiting list(s) shall be based on the date
of the filing of the application by the person or firm wanting to be utilized
by the Police Department for towing and wrecker services. The waiting list
shall expire concurrently with the yearly expiration of towing licenses.
§ 388-3. Application for license. [Amended 10-25-2016 by Ord. No.
24-16]
An application for a license as a proprietor of a towing or wrecking business
to be placed upon the lists to be utilized by the Police Department shall be
made by the person or firm engaged in operating a wrecker or wreckers.
Applications shall be made on forms furnished by the Police Department and
specifically report the following facts:
A. The full name and address of the applicant. If the application is made
for a corporation, it shall state the names and addresses of the officers
and directors thereof, its registered office and its resident agent.
B. The year, make and type of each wrecker used in said business, its
serial number, registration number and registered owner.
C. The address where the wrecker or wreckers shall be regularly garaged,
the telephone numbers available on a twenty-four-hour-per-day basis
and the names of all operators, their addresses and their New Jersey
driver's license numbers. All newly hired drivers shall have their
addresses and license and New Jersey driver's license numbers
reported to the Police Department within 10 days of their hire.
D. All applicants, wrecker operators, and agents of applicants, as well as
all officers and directors if a corporation, must submit to a criminal
history check upon the initial application and each inspection cycle
thereafter. Each wrecker operator, applicant, agent, officer or director
shall not have received a criminal conviction within the last seven years
for any indictable offense or any offense involving theft, fraud,
embezzlement, receiving or trafficking in stolen property, or any other
offense of a similar nature. Each wrecker operator, agent, officer or
employee of the applicant must notify the applicant/his or her employer
upon any conviction of the above-mentioned offenses or any other
offense of a similar nature. Upon notification, the applicant shall notify
the Jackson Township Police Department immediately.
§ 388-2 JACKSON CODE § 388-3
1:1470
E. Insurance required. All towing operators shall maintain and produce
proof of the following minimum insurance coverage to the Township
Clerk:
(1) Workers' compensation insurance for all employees.
(2) Liability insurance for the wrecker in the policy limits of no less
than $1,000,000 for garage keeper's liability and $1,000,000 per
accident for legal liability.
(3) Theft insurance on stored vehicles.
(4) On-hook insurance coverage.
(5) Cargo insurance coverage.
(6) The certificate of insurance shall be issued by a company certified
to do business in New Jersey, and each policy so required must
contain an endorsement providing for thirty-day notice to the
Township in the event of any material changes in the policy of
cancellation thereof.
(7) In addition thereto, the towing operator shall provide an
indemnification and hold harmless agreement in accordance with
the Township of Jackson's terms and conditions.
F. No towing operator shall be directly involved with another applicant.
Examples of direct involvement include the sharing of business
licenses, tow trucks or equipment, storage or office space, or
employees.
G. Applicants currently on the approved towing list on the effective date of
this act may continue to operate under any existing agreement for the
sharing of storage space, provided that the entity providing storage
space under such agreement meets the minimum storage requirements
specified in Subsection I of this section with respect to each towing
operator utilizing such space. However, any change in owner, principal,
or business location of a towing operator operating with such
agreement shall terminate this exception.
H. The office, workshop and storage areas of the applicant must be located
in zones where such use is permitted and lie within the boundaries of
the Township of Jackson. Sharing of such spaces among towing
operators is not permitted except as permitted in § 388-3G. Permanent
restroom facilities shall be available for the use of patrons at the
vendor's storage location. Restroom, office, and waiting areas shall be
maintained in a clean and presentable condition. Towing operators shall
comply with all applicable provisions of the Americans with Disabilities
Act. Vendors currently on the approved towing list who do not meet this
requirement on the effective date of this chapter must comply by July 1,
2014.
§ 388-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 388-3
1:1471
I. Each vendor providing light-duty towing service must show proof of
ownership, such as a tax bill, corporation paperwork, or similar
documents, or a lease agreement for a proper land area to store a
minimum of 20 vehicles. Each vendor providing heavy-duty towing
service must show proof of ownership or a lease agreement for a proper
land area to store a minimum of 20 light-duty vehicles plus four tractortrailer
vehicle combinations. Each land storage area must be fully
enclosed by a stockade or chain-link fence in good repair and a
minimum of six feet in height. Adequate lighting, shielded from
abutting premises, shall be maintained during hours of darkness. Any
change to the area or fencing at the land storage area must be
submitted and approved by the Chief of Police. Additionally, each
towing operator shall have access to secured indoor storage for storing
impounded vehicles when requested by the Police Department.
J. Each wrecker must meet all of the requirements of Title 39, Motor
Vehicles Law, including, but not limited to, proper registration and
inspection. Dealer registration (D) plates will not be permitted, and
each vehicle must have displayed thereon the name and place of the
owner in three-inch letters.
K. Each wrecker, when on duty, will be responsible for changing tires on
police vehicles at any time when required to do so. Said wrecker is to
have in his possession, when on duty, a number of police tires supplied
by the Township and is required to pick up said tires from the outgoing
duty wrecker at the time his tour of duty commences. The wrecker may
charge the Township a fee of $25 for service.
L. Each light-duty wrecker operator must have the following equipment:
(1) Two wreckers, at least one of which must be a flatbed chassis.
(2) For a conventional wrecker, minimum 14,500 pounds GVWR
commercially manufactured conventional boom lift wrecker and
chassis, with a 3,000 pounds minimum wheel lift capacity, 8,000
pounds winch capacity, and 8,000 pounds hydraulic boom capacity,
with 100 feet of three-eighths-inch cable, and the following
equipment:
(a) One large broom and shovel.
(b) Steering wheel lock or other types of commonly used devices
for towing vehicles from the rear.
(c) Tow-sling-type tow bar to prevent any part of crane metal from
touching the towed vehicle.
(d) Emergency warning lights with a permit.
(e) Portable safety lights to be installed on the rear of the towed
vehicle, if necessary.
(f) Safety flares or safety triangles.
§ 388-3 JACKSON CODE § 388-3
1:1472
(g) Minimum of 25 pounds of Speedy Dry or other suitable
absorbent for oil and gasoline spills.
(h) Fire extinguisher (ABC type).
(i) Snatch block of a size appropriate to the winch cabling of the
wrecker, four-ton minimum.
(j) Toolbox with assorted hand tools.
(k) DOT-approved traffic safety vest.
(l) Appropriate and adequate chains as circumstances dictate.
(m) Wheel lift safety straps or equivalent wheel retention device.
(n) Trailer ball hitch attachments.
(o) Motorcycle towing equipment.
(p) Flashlight
(q) Two-way radio or cellular telephone.
(r) Jumper cables or jump box device.
(s) Gasoline can.
(t) Lug wrench.
(u) Assortment of wood blocks and boards.
(3) For a flatbed chassis, all of equipment noted above, a minimum
14,500 pounds GVWR commercially manufactured flatbed and
chassis with a seventeen-foot or longer hydraulically operated
slide-back or tilt bed, minimum 3,000 pounds wheel lift capacity,
8,000 pounds winch capacity, 50 feet of three-eighths-inch cable,
and the following:
(a) Appropriate and adequate chains as circumstances dictate.
(b) One high-test bridle chain with "J," "T," and grab hooks.
M. Each heavy-duty wrecker operator must have the following equipment:
(1) Two 33,000 pounds GVWR minimum commercially manufactured
hydraulic wreckers and chassis with underreach capability.
(2) Oshkosh- or Sterling-type crane may be substituted for one
hydraulic boom wrecker.
(3) At least one truck shall have an axle lift with 25,000 pounds
minimum lift capacity and 80,000 pounds tow capacity.
(4) Each wrecker must have 50,000 pounds minimum winch capacity.
§ 388-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 388-3
1:1473
(5) Each wrecker must have 50,000 pounds minimum boom capacity.
(6) Air brakes.
(7) Air transfer system for controlling brakes of the towed vehicle.
(8) Five-eighths-inch by two-hundred-foot cable or OEM specifications.
(9) Appropriate and adequate chains as circumstances dictate.
(10) Four tie-down chains, 5/16 inch by 10 feet and four chain binders.
(11) Recovery straps, six inches by 20 feet or longer.
(12) Axle lift safety straps or equivalent retention device.
(13) Two Scotch blocks or recovery stiff legs mounted into the body of
the truck.
(14) Two twelve-ton snatch blocks per winch.
(15) Amber emergency lights with a permit.
(16) Two flood or work lights to the rear of the wrecker.
(17) Two-way radio or cellular phone.
(18) Assortment of wood blocks and boards.
(19) Assortment of tools.
(20) Flashlight.
(21) Angle iron.
(22) Tow light bar or magnetic tow lights.
(23) T-bolts/maxi release pins.
(24) Hydraulic bottle jack.
(25)DOT-approved traffic safety vest.
(26) Minimum of 25 pounds of Speedy Dry or other suitable absorbent
for oil and gasoline spills.
(27) Fire extinguisher (ABC type).
(28) Large broom and shovel.
(29) Safety flares, triangles or road cones.
(30) Additional equipment, either owned or subcontracted:
(a) One air cushion recovery system including starter cushions,
with motor driven air pump, with a lifting capacity of 100,000
pounds.
§ 388-3 JACKSON CODE § 388-3
1:1474
§ 388-4. Maintenance of records.
The Chief of Police shall see that a record is maintained containing the
names, addresses and twenty-four-hour telephone numbers of all licensed
wreckers and a record of the types of wreckers available to meet the
specific need of the emergency. The Chief of Police shall also see that a
record is maintained of the regular response of wreckers to police calls
and any and all complaints from vehicle owners as to improper service or
charges. Any complaints as to the towing and/or storage charges shall be
referred to the Traffic Safety Supervisor, who shall attempt to resolve same
and shall report same to the Division of Consumer Affairs.
§ 388-5. Maintenance of revolving list.
The Chief of Police shall maintain a weekly revolving list of licensed lightduty
wreckers, and a weekly revolving list of licensed heavy-duty wreckers
to provide service where needed and shall instruct all duty and investigating
officers to utilize said list. Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent
the Police Department from contacting towing operators out of order from
the list for safety reasons or the existence of special circumstances, upon
approval of a member of the Traffic Unit or a supervisor.
§ 388-6. Towing fees. [Amended 10-25-2016 by Ord. No. 24-16;
8-13-2019 by Ord. No. 23-19]
Every operator of a towing service shall give the owner a written estimate of
costs and a written receipt when paid. A schedule of the towing regulations
and fees provided to each applicant by the Police Department shall be
(b) One semi-tractor with a fifth wheel.
(c) One lowboy or Landoll-type equipment hauling trailer with
minimum hauling capacity of 40,000 pounds.
(d) One relief trailer or truck capable of transferring loads off
damaged trucks.
N. Notwithstanding the provisions of § 388-3B, currently licensed
applicants who fail to meet the minimum equipment requirements
outlined above may be licensed upon show of proof of a formal
agreement with another licensed operator for the provision of shortfall
equipment. This exception shall expire June 30, 2014, when all
applicants must meet all minimum equipment requirements.
O. The Township Clerk shall refer the application to the Police Department
for a check of all equipment, personnel and facilities of the applicant to
determine the ability of the applicant to perform the business herein
regulated.
P. After the application has been submitted and been reviewed by the
Traffic Services unit, it shall be forwarded to the Chief of Police for
approval or disapproval by him.
§ 388-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 388-6
1:1475
conspicuously posted at the applicant's places of business and available
during normal business hours for inspection by the public. Towing fees and
charges shall be as follows:
§ 388-7. Recovery service fees and charges. [Amended 8-13-2019 by
Ord. No. 23-19]
Recovery and winch use fees may be charged for recovery/winching of
vehicles from beyond the right-of-way or berm or from being impaled
A. For towing any disabled passenger automobile, station wagon, pickup
truck or panel truck up to 15,000 pounds, from any point within 10
miles of the limits of the Township to any point within 10 miles of the
limits of the Township between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday, a fee of $150 plus $6 per mile.
B. For towing any disabled passenger automobile, station wagon, pickup
truck or panel truck up to 15,000 pounds, from any point within 10
miles of the limits of the Township to any point within 10 miles of the
limits of the Township between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., or
at any time of the day or night Saturday, Sunday or state holidays, a fee
of $175 plus $6 per mile.
C. For towing any disabled truck or any omnibus from 15,001 pounds
through 26,000 pounds, or any motor scooter, motorcycle, or all-terrain
vehicle, from any point within 10 miles of the limits of the Township to
any point within 10 miles of the limits of the Township, between the
hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, a fee of $200
plus $6 per mile.
D. For towing any disabled motor scooter, motorcycle, or all-terrain
vehicle, or any truck or any omnibus from 15,001 pounds through
26,000 pounds, from any point within 10 miles of the limits of the
Township to any point within 10 miles of the limits of the Township,
between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., or at any time of the day
or night Saturday, Sunday or state holidays, a fee of $225 plus $6 per
mile.
E. For towing any truck or any omnibus from 26,001 pounds or greater,
from any point within 10 miles of the limits of the Township to any point
within 10 miles of the limits of the Township, between the hours of 6:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, a fee of $500 per hour.
F. For towing any truck or any omnibus from 26,001 pounds or greater,
from any point within 10 miles of the limits of the Township to any point
within 10 miles of the limits of the Township, between the hours of 6:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m., or at any time of the day or night Saturday, Sunday
or state holidays, a fee of $500 per hour.
G. For towing any vehicle from or to a location outside of 10 miles of the
limits of the Township, the basic towing fee as delineated above plus $6
per mile (one way).
§ 388-6 JACKSON CODE § 388-7
1:1476
beyond the right-of-way or berm at $175 per half hour for light- and
medium-duty vehicles and $300 per half hour for heavy-duty vehicles.
§ 388-8. Other basic fees and charges. [Amended 10-25-2016 by
Ord. No. 24-16; 8-13-2019 by Ord. No. 23-19]
Basic fees and charges shall be as follows:
A. Outside storage rates shall be $45 per day for light and medium-duty
vehicles, and $55 per day for heavy-duty vehicles, rounded to the
nearest half day.
B. Inside storage rates, when requested by the Police Department or the
owner of the vehicle, shall be $55 per day for light- and medium-duty
vehicles, and $90 per day for heavy-duty vehicles, rounded to the
nearest half day.
C. Clean-up/absorbent charge, a flat fee of $35 plus $25 per forty-pound
bag of absorbent used.
D. The vehicle removal charge, as defined herein, shall be $125.
E. Waiting time, as defined herein, shall be $60 per hour, to be charged in
fifteen-minute increments, with times less than 15 minutes rounded up
to the nearest fifteen-minute increment.
F. Fee for towing of vehicle without ignition key or for transmission
service shall be $50.
G. Fee for removal of vehicle driveshaft when required or when requested
by vehicle owner or operator shall be $75.
H. Fee for collision wrap or tarp covering of vehicle when required for
protection of the vehicle from the elements or when requested by the
Police Department, vehicle owner, or other authorized party, shall be
$90.
I. Fees for a service calls, when requested by a motorist, shall be $100 per
hour, plus the cost of parts or fuel, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
6:00 p.m. on weekdays, and $100 per hour, plus the cost of parts or fuel,
at all other times, including holidays.
J. Every operator of a towing service shall give the owner a written
estimate of costs and a written receipt when paid. A schedule of the
towing regulations and fees shall be posted during normal business
hours and shall be available for inspection by the public.
K. Fees for storage of vehicles stored at the Jackson Police Department
shall be paid to the Township in accordance with the rates listed in
Subsection A and B as it pertains to inside and outside storage rates.
L. A release fee of $35 shall be paid to the Township of Jackson for each
police-impounded vehicle.
§ 388-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 388-9
1:1477
§ 388-9. Cruising; soliciting employment.
The practice of cruising with a wrecker or tow truck is forbidden. The Police
Department may impound any wrecker or tow truck engaged in cruising for
the purpose of identifying the owner and conducting any safety inspections
as may be required. Furthermore, no person shall pay any emolument to
any third person not involved in the accident or to any police officer for
information as to the location of any accident or soliciting the employment
of the licensee's service, nor give any gratuities, fees or other compensation
or gifts to any members of the Police Department.
§ 388-10. Wrecker license. [Amended 10-25-2016 by Ord. No.
24-16]
§ 388-11. Rules and regulations.
A. Applications must be submitted along with the appropriate licensing
fees annually. The wrecker license issued by the Chief of Police is
nontransferable and shall run from July 1 of the calendar year to June
30 of the next calendar year.
B. No person or corporation shall be placed on the authorized lists as set
forth in § 388-2 of this chapter, or operate a wrecker within the
Township of Jackson pursuant to this chapter, without first obtaining a
license from the Chief of Police. The annual fees for such licenses shall
be as follows:
(1) Light-duty wrecker license: $1,000.
(2) Light- and heavy-duty wrecker license: $1,500.
C. Prior to issuance of a license, each wrecker and storage facility will be
inspected by the Police Department to ensure that all equipment and
safety standards and all rules and regulations have been complied with.
Any licensee not in full compliance at the time of the first inspection will
not be permitted to tow until a second or subsequent inspection, as
conducted by the Police Department, indicates said licensee is in full
compliance with all rules and regulations. Thereafter, inspections of
each wrecker and storage facility will be conducted every three years
by the Police Department to ensure that all equipment and safety
standards, as well as rules and regulations, have been complied with. If
an applicant acquires a new tow vehicle, makes changes to an existing
facility, or relocates, an inspection of that equipment or facility would
be required at that time, and in the case of a vehicle, prior to usage. The
applicant must notify the Police Department immediately of any of the
above-mentioned changes in equipment or facilities.
A. The Chief of Police is hereby authorized and empowered to establish
reasonable rules and regulations governing the inspection and
operation of wreckers.
§ 388-9 JACKSON CODE § 388-11
1:1478
§ 388-12. Responsibilities of licensee. [Amended 10-25-2016 by
Ord. No. 24-16]
By making application to be utilized as a tower or wrecker by the Police
Department and by accepting such position, the person or firm agrees to
the following:
B. The Chief of Police and the officers of the Traffic Services Unit shall
have the power to suspend or revoke a wrecker license for violations of
safety standards or rules and regulations of operation. The following
shall serve as a guide in imposing penalties for violations of this
chapter:
(1) First offense: suspension of license for one tour of duty (one week).
(2) Second offense: suspension of license for two tours of duty (two
weeks).
(3) Third offense: revocation of license.
C. The Chief of Police shall maintain proper records of licenses issued and
inspections made, and shall also require all licensees to keep proper
business records as to date towed, locations towed to and from,
person(s) authorizing the tow and the year, make and vehicle
identification number of vehicle being towed and to have them available
for inspection by the Police Department.
A. Answer each phone call from the Police Department and provide a
prompt and safe response to the respective scene within 30 minutes of
notification, along with adequate and proper tow-related equipment as
requested by dispatch.
B. All debris shall be placed in proper receptacles, and no debris shall be
placed inside of any of the vehicles being towed, unless specifically
approved by the investigating officer on the scene.
C. Provide the Police Department with a complete, legible and concise
abandoned car sheet for every vehicle unclaimed within 15 working
days and provide a color photograph of the vehicle and a copy of the
letter of notification to the last registered owner of that vehicle and a
receipt of mailing.
D. Pay the Township an administrative fee of $20 for each abandoned
vehicle not sold by the Township at a public auction in which ownership
will be transferred to the applicant.
E. Maintain a record, in a bound volume or appropriate digital format, of
all towing and wrecking jobs handled, the name of the owner or
operator involved, the charge made for the service, the date and an
amount of payment.
F. The vendor or his agent must be available to surrender property or to
release towed vehicles between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on
§ 388-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 388-12
1:1479
§ 388-13. Construal of provisions.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed so as to prevent any owner
or operator of a motor vehicle from calling any tower or wrecker of his
own choice. However, if the tower or wrecker designated by the owner or
operator of the motor vehicle is not immediately available or cannot respond
in a timely manner, the tower or wrecker designated on the revolving list
established herein shall be utilized.
§ 388-14. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any one or more of the provisions of this chapter
shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 for each separate offense
and/or confinement in the Ocean County Jail for a period of not more than
90 days. In the case of a continuing violation or violations, a fine of not more
than $1,000 may be assessed for each day that said violation or violations
are not corrected. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each
day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 394
weekdays and 9:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon on Saturday. Under no
circumstances will the vendor be unavailable to release vehicles or
property due to holidays or for any other reason for more than two
consecutive calendar days.
G. The licensee shall be responsible for the release of each vehicle. No
vehicle is to be released without police authorization if there is a
condition of release noted on the towed vehicle report.
H. The licensee shall accept at least two major credit cards and shall not
charge patrons for their use.
I. Effective July 1, 2013, each driver of a light-medium-duty wrecker must
possess a certification from a nationally recognized towing organization
to a level determined by the Traffic Safety Supervisor. Each newly hired
driver must obtain such certification within nine months of his or her
date of hire.
J. Effective July 1, 2014, each driver of a heavy-duty wrecker must possess
a certification from a nationally recognized towing organization to a
level determined by the Traffic Safety Supervisor. Each newly hired
driver must obtain such certification within nine months of his or her
date of hire.
K. Each wrecker operator shall wear a traffic safety vest when operating
at any scene or call for service.
L. The licensee shall answer service calls in addition to calls for towing.
M. Comply with all other terms and conditions of this chapter.
§ 388-12 JACKSON CODE § 388-14
1:1480
TOXIC AND HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fertilizer application — See Ch. 189.
Garbage, rubbish and waste material — See
Ch. 216.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 474.
§ 388-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 388-14
1:1481

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 4-14-1986 by Ord. No. 12-86 (Ch. 98, Art. I, of the 1972
Code)]
§ 394-1. Declaration of policy.
The designated best use of all groundwaters of Jackson Township is for
public and private water supply, and of most surface waters, for food
production, bathing and recreation. The aquifer below Jackson Township is
a sole source for water supply. Therefore, it is hereby declared to be the
policy of the Township of Jackson to maintain its water resources as near to
their natural condition of purity as reasonably possible for the safeguarding
of the public health and, to that end, to require the use of all available
practical methods of preventing and controlling water pollution from toxic
and hazardous materials.
§ 394-2. Statement of purpose.
It is the intent and purpose of this article to safeguard the water resources
of the Township of Jackson from toxic or hazardous materials pollution by
controlling or abating pollution from such sources in existence when this
article is enacted and also by preventing further pollution from new sources
under a program which is consistent with the above-stated declaration of
policy.
§ 394-3. Definitions.
Whenever used in this article, unless otherwise expressly stated, or unless
the context or subject matter requires a different meaning, the following
terms shall have the respective meanings set forth or indicated:
ABOVEGROUND — When referring to tanks shall mean more than 90%
exposed above the final ground elevation.
BULK STORAGE — The loose or bagged storage of dry or semidry materials.
DISCHARGE — To release by any means or to relinquish control in a
manner that could result in a release to the surface waters, groundwaters,
surface of the ground or below the ground. "Discharge" includes but is not
necessarily limited to the following, either singly or in any combination:
A. Leaks from the failure of a storage facility.
B. Spills during transport or transfer of toxic or hazardous materials.
Disposal or storage of soils, sand or debris containing toxic or
hazardous materials.
C.
Disposal to storm drains, cooling water, roof drains, sanitary systems
or any other drainage system or leaching system of toxic or hazardous
materials.
D.
§ 394-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 394-3
1:1483
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Waste and wastewater from humans or household
operations.[Added 3-14-2005 by Ord. No. 13-05]
DOUBLE-WALLED — Constructed with more than one containment layer
with space between the layers sufficient to allow monitoring of any leakage
into or out of the space.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any physical or nonphysical connection that
discharges domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water, process
wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater) to the
municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Jackson Township,
unless that discharge is authorized under a NJPDES permit other than
the Tier A municipal stormwater general permit (NJPDES Permit No.
NJ0141852). Nonphysical connections may include, but are not limited
to, leaks, flows, or overflows into the municipal separate storm sewer
system.[Added 3-14-2005 by Ord. No. 13-05]
IMPERVIOUS — A layer of natural and/or man-made material of sufficient
thickness, density and composition as to prevent the discharge into the
underlying groundwater or adjacent surface waters of any toxic or
hazardous substances for a period of at least as long as the maximum
anticipated time during which the toxic or hazardous substances will be in
contact with the material and sufficient to allow complete recovery of the
spilled product with minimum disturbance of the containment material.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Nondomestic waste, including, but not limited to,
those pollutants regulated under Section 307(a), (b), or (c) of the Federal
Clean Water Act [33 U.S.C. § 1317(a), (b), or (c)].[Added 3-14-2005 by
Ord. No. 13-05]
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by Jackson Township or other public body
Burial, land-spreading or dumping anywhere of toxic or hazardous
materials, including but not limited to landfill and scavenger facilities,
notwithstanding that the material so buried, spread or dumped was
containerized at the time of said burial, spreading or dumping.
E.
F. Passing of toxic or hazardous waste materials to any person.
Abandonment of containers, tanks, pipes, vehicles or premises
containing toxic or hazardous materials or residues. For the purpose of
this subsection, "abandonment" shall mean:
(1) Substantially empty and unattended; or
The relinquishment or termination of possession, ownership or
control without full disclosure to the new owner thereof of
containers, tanks, pipes, vehicles or premises containing toxic or
hazardous materials or residues, whether by vacating or by
disposition thereof, and shall not depend on a mere lapse of time.
(2)
G.
§ 394-3 JACKSON CODE § 394-3
1:1484
and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.[Added
3-14-2005 by Ord. No. 13-05]
NEW JERSEY STATE DISCHARGE STANDARDS — Standards of quality
and purity and special standards and groundwater quality standards and
effluent standards and/or limitations as found in the New Jersey Revised
Statutes and/or New Jersey Statutes Annotated and/or the State of New
Jersey Administrative Code and/or the Department of Environmental
Protection rules and regulations and/or Code of the United States.
NJPDES PERMIT — A permit issued by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A.[Added 3-14-2005 by
Ord. No. 13-05]
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used to reduce temperature
for the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come into direct contact
with any raw material, intermediate product (other than heat) or finished
product. Noncontact cooling water may, however, contain algaecides or
biocides to control fouling of equipment, such as heat exchangers and/or
corrosion inhibitors.[Added 3-14-2005 by Ord. No. 13-05]
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.[Added 3-14-2005 by Ord. No. 13-05]
POLLUTION — The presence in the environment of conditions and/or
contaminants in quantities or characteristics which are or may be injurious
to human, plant or animal life or to property or which unreasonably
interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property throughout
such areas of the Township of Jackson as shall be affected thereby.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Any water which, during manufacturing or
processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production
or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct,
or waste product. Process wastewater includes, but is not limited
to, leachate and cooling water other than noncontact cooling water.[Added
3-14-2005 by Ord. No. 13-05]
PRODUCT-TIGHT — Impervious to the material which is or could be
contained therein so as to prevent the detectable seepage of the product
through the container. To be product-tight, the container shall be made of
a material that is not subject to physical or chemical deterioration by the
product being contained.
PROPERLY REGISTERED INDUSTRIAL WASTE SCAVENGER — A person
in the business of collecting industrial wastes who carries a current, valid
industrial waste collector registration issued by the Department of
Environmental Protection, State of New Jersey.
SINGLE-WALLED — Constructed with walls made of but one thickness of
material. Laminated, coated or clad materials shall be considered as singlewalled.
§ 394-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 394-3
1:1485
STORAGE FACILITY — Tanks, pipes, vaults, buildings, yards, pavements
or fixed containers used or designed to be used, either singly or in any
combination thereof, for the storage and/or transmission of toxic or
hazardous materials or for the storage of portable containers containing
toxic or hazardous materials.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.[Added 3-14-2005 by Ord. No.
13-05]
SUBSTANTIAL MODIFICATIONS — The construction of any addition to an
existing storage facility, as defined under § 394-3 ("storage facility"), or
restoration, refurbishment or renovation which:
TOWNSHIP — The Code Enforcement Office or Officer of the Township of
Jackson.
TOXIC OR HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Any substance, solution or mixture
which, because of its quality, quantity, concentration, physical, chemical or
infectious characteristics, or any combination of the foregoing, presents
or may present an actual or potential hazard to human health or to the
drinking water supply if such substance, solution, mixture or combination
thereof is discharged to the land or waters of the Township of Jackson.
"Toxic or hazardous materials" shall include:
A. Increases or decreases the in-place storage capacity of the facility;
B. Alters the physical configuration; or
Impairs or affects the physical integrity of the facility or its monitoring
systems.
C.
Each and every substance, material or waste found listed in either
or both Part 116 and Part 261 of Title 40 of the Code of Federal
Regulations or in the New Jersey Statutes or New Jersey Administrative
Code or New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection rules and
regulations.
A.
B. Acids and alkalies beyond the pH range of four to 10.
C. Heavy metal sludges, mixtures and solutions in excess of standards.
D. Petroleum products, including fuels and waste oils.
Organic solvents, including petroleum solvents and halogenated and
nonhalogenated hydrocarbons.
E.
Any material listed in State of New Jersey regulations in excess of the
concentration standards thereof, unless otherwise provided elsewhere
in this article.
F.
§ 394-3 JACKSON CODE § 394-3
1:1486
TOXIC OR HAZARDOUS WASTES —
UNDERGROUND — When referring to tanks, shall mean 10% or more
below the final ground elevation.
§ 394-4. Powers of Code Enforcement Officer.
Any substance not included within Subsections A through F above
subsequently declared to be a toxic or hazardous material by the State
of New Jersey.
G.
Any solid or semisolid material which, if left to stand or if exposed to
water, will leach out or wholly or partially dissolve, forming a toxic or
hazardous material as defined in Subsections A through G above.
H.
Toxic or hazardous materials, as defined above, generated by, or as
the result of, operations in, or the existence of, any manufacturing or
other industrial or commercial establishment, which toxic or hazardous
materials are not actually used in a final product for sale, and shall
include those toxic or hazardous materials retained as by-products
of the operations within such manufacturing or other industrial or
commercial establishment for the purpose of recouping salvage value;
or
A.
Toxic or hazardous materials generated by one in possession or control
of any residential premises, for which materials disposal is intended,
and which waste is not domestic wastewater without the admixture of
nonsewage wastewater from any industrial process.
B.
C. All toxic and hazardous wastes are toxic and hazardous materials.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer may make, or cause to be made, any
investigation or study which, in his opinion, is desirable for enforcing
this article or controlling or reducing the potential for contamination of
the waters of Jackson Township from toxic or hazardous materials.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer may order the owner or any other person
in possession or control of any land, structure or equipment, or agent of
such owner or other person, to take whatever action is necessary in the
opinion of the Township to bring said land, structure or equipment into
compliance with the provisions of this article and any standards or
regulations promulgated thereunder. Such action may include but is not
necessarily limited to the following, either singly or in any combination
thereof:
(1) Ordering tank testing or the testing of the physical integrity of
pipes or any other part of a storage facility or ordering the physical
testing of the integrity of an entire storage facility.
(2) Ordering the removal of the contents of a tank, portable container,
storage facility or any part thereof.
§ 394-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 394-4
1:1487
§ 394-5. Prohibited discharges, transporting and disposal.
§ 394-6. Prohibited discharges into municipal storm sewer system.
[Added 3-14-2005 by Ord. No. 13-05]
(3) Ordering the removal or abandonment or reconstruction of any
installation, tank, storage facility or any part thereof installed in
contravention of any of the requirements of this article or any
standards or regulations promulgated thereunder.
(4) Ordering that physical improvements be performed on any tank,
storage facility or part thereof before permitting it to be returned
to service, including such improvements as tank lining removal and
replacement, and bottom and structural repairs.
(5) Ordering the drafting of, and/or implementation of, contingency
plans if there is evidence that such plans may be necessary to
protect the public from toxic or hazardous materials stored at any
particular facility.
(6) Ordering the posting of a performance bond or other undertaking
either prior to, or subsequent to, the construction or operation of a
storage facility within Jackson Township on a case-by-case basis if
evidence indicates such may be necessary to protect the public
from the effects of operating such a facility.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge toxic or hazardous
materials in the Township of Jackson unless such discharge is
specifically in accordance with State of New Jersey statutes or New
Jersey Department of Environmental rules and regulations.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to pick up, transport or dispose of
toxic or hazardous waste materials in the Township of Jackson without
having a valid and appropriate New Jersey State waste collector
registration.
C. It shall be unlawful for any industrial waste collector with a registration
issued by the State of New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection to fail to maintain a copy thereof on each vehicle operated by
said collector at all times.
A. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged through an illicit
connection to the municipal storm sewer system operated by Jackson
Township any domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water, process
wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater).
B. The spilling, dumping or disposal of materials other than stormwater in
such a manner as to cause the discharge of pollutants to the municipal
separate storm sewer system is also prohibited.
C. The following are exceptions to the prohibited discharges in this
section:
§ 394-4 JACKSON CODE § 394-6
1:1488
§ 394-7. Construction and modification permits.
§ 394-8. Permit to operate.
(1) Waterline flushing and discharges from potable water sources.
(2) Uncontaminated groundwater (e.g., infiltration, crawl space or
basement sump pumps, foundation or footing drains, rising
groundwaters).
(3) Air-conditioning condensate (excluding contact and noncontact
cooling water).
(4) Irrigation water (including landscape and lawn watering runoff).
(5) Flows from springs, riparian habitats and wetlands, water reservoir
discharges and diverted stream flows.
(6) Residential car washing water and residential swimming pool
discharges.
(7) Sidewalk, driveway and street wash water.
(8) Flows from fire-fighting activities.
(9) Flows from rinsing of the following equipment with clean water:
(a) Beach maintenance equipment immediately following its use
for its intended purpose; and
(b) Equipment used in the application of salt and de-icing
materials immediately following salt and de-icing material
applications. Prior to rinsing with clean water, all residual salt
and de-icing materials must be removed from equipment and
vehicles to the maximum extent practicable using dry cleaning
methods (e.g., shoveling and sweeping). Recovered materials
are to be returned to storage for reuse or properly discarded.
Rinsing of equipment, as noted in the above situation, is
limited to exterior, undercarriage and exposed parts, and does
not apply to engines or other enclosed machinery.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install or substantially
modify a storage facility, or part thereof, without a valid permit therefor
issued by or acceptable to the Code Enforcement Officer.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person in possession of, or acting pursuant
to, a permit issued under this section to act, allow or cause any act in
contravention of any provision of the permit.
C. Any permit issued pursuant to this section shall be effective for the
specified duration of time indicated thereon, not to exceed one year
from the effective date thereof.
§ 394-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 394-8
1:1489
§ 394-9. Exemptions.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to use, cause to be used, maintain or
fill, or cause to be filled, with toxic or hazardous materials any storage
facility or part thereof without having registered all the tanks at the
facility on forms provided by the Township of Jackson and without
having obtained a valid permit to operate such storage facility or part
thereof issued by or acceptable to the Code Enforcement Officer.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person in possession of, or acting pursuant
to, a permit issued pursuant to this section to act, permit or cause any
act in contravention of any provision of the permit.
C. No permit to operate a storage facility as required pursuant to this
section shall be issued by the Code Enforcement Officer unless and
until the prospective permittee has:
(1) Provided a listing to the Code Enforcement Office of all of the toxic
or hazardous materials to be stored at the storage facility.
(2) Demonstrated that said storage facility complies with all of the
provisions of this article and all Township, State of New Jersey or
federal regulations and standards promulgated pursuant to it
applicable to said storage facility based upon submission of such
written proof as is required by the Code Enforcement Officer.
D. Any permit issued pursuant to this section shall be effective only for the
specified duration of time indicated thereon, not to exceed four years
from the effective date thereof.
A. All storage facilities which meet all of the following criteria shall be
exempt from all provisions of this article except those contained in
§§ 394-3, Definitions; 394-4, Powers of Code Enforcement Officer;
394-5, Prohibited discharges, transporting and disposal; 394-9,
Exemptions; 394-11A, New storage facilities; 394-11E, General
provisions and requirements; 394-11G, Overfill protection; 394-12A(4),
Overfill detection; 394-12D(1) and (2), leaks and repairs; 394-14B(1)
and (4), Transfer operations; and 394-20, Waivers:
(1) The materials so stored are not toxic or hazardous wastes.
(2) The volume of the storage facility is less than 1,001 gallons.
(3) The facility is intended solely for the storage of kerosene, No. 2 fuel
oil, No. 4 fuel oil, No. 6 fuel oil or diesel or lubricating oil.
(4) The intended use of the product stored is solely for on-site heating,
or intermittent stationary power production, such as standby
electricity generation or irrigation pump power.
(5) The materials stored are not intended for resale or off-site use.
§ 394-8 JACKSON CODE § 394-9
1:1490
§ 394-10. Transfer of permits prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to transfer a permit issued pursuant
to §§ 394-7 and 394-8 of this article from one location to another, from
one storage facility to another or from one person to another. Any permit
transferred in violation of this section shall be deemed null and void and
without any effect whatsoever as of the date of said unlawful transfer.
However, upon making proper application, a new owner of a facility which
was previously operating under a valid permit may continue operation
under the terms of the old permit until such time as the new permit is issued
or denied.
(6) The storage is located at or on residential property for use at such
site.
B. All storage facilities which meet the following criteria shall be exempt
from the provisions of this article contained in §§ 394-11B and D and
394-19 and any regulations or standards promulgated thereunder:
(1) The materials so stored are not toxic or hazardous wastes.
(2) The volume of the storage facility is not greater than 1,001 gallons.
(3) The facility is intended solely for the storage of kerosene, No. 2 fuel
oil, No. 4 fuel oil, No. 6 fuel oil, diesel oil or lubricating oil.
(4) The intended use of the product stored is solely for on-site heating,
or intermittent stationary power production, such as standby
electricity generation or irrigation pump power.
(5) The materials stored are not intended for resale or off-site use.
C. All storage facilities no longer receiving the benefit of any exemption
but which were previously exempted from any or all provisions of this
article shall be required to appropriately conform to all of the
provisions of this article and all regulations and standards promulgated
pursuant thereto by January 1, 1988.
D. Tanks for the storage of No. 6 fuel oil, or other petroleum products of
equivalent viscosity, are exempt from the internal inspection and tank
lining requirements. Further, storage facilities for these products are
exempted from the requirements for impervious dikes and enclosures
around the tank if, in the opinion of the Township, the location of the
facility is so situated that a spill could not run off into storm drains or
surface waters.
E. All storage of toxic or hazardous materials in containers of five-gallon
capacity or smaller, where the total capacity stored at any time does not
exceed 250 gallons or where the dry storage in bags, bulk or small
containers does not exceed 2,000 pounds, is exempt from all portions of
this article unless specifically ruled otherwise by the Code Enforcement
Officer or State of New Jersey on a case-by-case basis.
§ 394-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 394-11
1:1491
§ 394-11. Underground storage facilities.
A. New storage facilities.
(1) All new storage facilities used or to be used for the underground
storage of toxic or hazardous materials shall be designed and
constructed in a manner which will, in the opinion of the Township,
provide the maximum reasonable protection available against
leakage or spillage from the facility due to corrosion, breakage,
structural failure or other means. Double-walled or equivalent
facilities are required for all toxic or hazardous materials except
those with a specific gravity of less than one and which are only
slightly soluble in water, such as oils and gasoline. For these
floatable materials, acceptable designs for tank construction
include cathodically protected steel; glass-fiber-reinforced plastic;
steel clad with fiber-reinforced plastic; double-walled steel or
plastic; or other equivalent designs approved by the Township.
(2) Approval of design by the Township is required before installation,
and the determination of equivalency or adequacy lies with the
Township.
(3) Design, construction, fabrication and installation of new
underground storage facilities shall be in accordance with
regulations and standards as they may be adopted by the State of
New Jersey or under this article.
(4) A new storage facility for all facilities not previously covered by this
section is one for which construction actually begins on or after
April 14, 1986, subject, however, to the exemptions contained in
§ 394-9A.
(5) It shall be unlawful for any person to sell for use in the Township of
Jackson, install, use, put into service or maintain the existence of
any new underground storage facility or part thereof after April 14,
1986, if said new storage facility or part thereof fails to conform to
all of the provisions of Subsection A(1), (2) and (3) above and all
regulations and standards promulgated thereunder, subject,
however, to the exemptions contained in § 394-9A.
B. Existing storage facilities.
(1) An existing underground storage facility is one for which
construction actually begins prior to April 14, 1986.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to substantially modify or cause
the substantial modification of any existing underground storage
facility or part thereof without complying with the provisions of
Subsection A above and all regulations and standards promulgated
thereunder.
§ 394-11 JACKSON CODE § 394-11
1:1492
(3) It shall be unlawful to use, or maintain the existence of, any existing
underground storage facility beyond January 1, 1988, which is
intended for use with toxic or hazardous materials with a specific
gravity of less than one and which are only slightly soluble in water,
such as oils and gasoline, without modifying said storage facility so
as to comply with all of the provisions of Subsection A above and all
regulations and standards promulgated thereunder.
(4) It shall be unlawful to use or maintain the existing underground
storage facility beyond January 1, 1988, which is intended for use
with any toxic or hazardous materials other than those with a
specific gravity of less than one and which are only slightly soluble
in water, such as oils and gasoline, without modifying said storage
facility so as to comply with all of the provisions of Subsection A
above and all regulations and standards promulgated thereunder.
C. Abandonment.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to use or maintain the existence
of an abandoned underground storage facility or part thereof.
(2) It shall be unlawful for anyone to sell or transfer to another an
improperly abandoned underground storage facility or land
containing an improperly abandoned underground storage facility
if there exists any reasonable evidence of the existence of such a
facility, unless the purchasing party has been made fully aware of
the presence of such facility.
(3) It shall be unlawful for any person to repair, alter or prepare for use
any abandoned storage facility without first obtaining a permit to
construct from the Code Enforcement Officer.
(4) It shall be unlawful for the owner or other person in possession or
control of any real property, building or place or vehicle to fail to
immediately empty of all toxic or hazardous materials, and to
completely and permanently remove, an abandoned storage facility
or part thereof within 90 days of the discovery thereof on or in said
real property, building or place pursuant to the provisions of
Subsection H below unless approval is granted to do otherwise.
(5) For the purposes of this section, an "abandoned storage facility or
part thereof" means one which has remained out of service for six
months or more or which has been declared by the owner to be
abandoned.
(6) For the purposes of this section, "out of service" means
substantially empty, meaning 5% or less filled; or not in use,
meaning no regular filling or drawing; or not being maintained,
meaning lacking adherence to the requirements of this article; or
uncontrolled, meaning not attended or secured; or any combination
thereof.
§ 394-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 394-11
1:1493
(7) For the purposes of this section, "discovery" means either actual
discovery or knowledge of the existence of the abandoned storage
facility or part thereof or possession of sufficient knowledge of the
facts and circumstances involved so that the existence of the
abandoned storage facility or part thereof should have been
discovered or known of.
D. Testing and inspection.
(1) All existing underground storage facilities or parts thereof which
do not meet the construction standards in Subsection A above must
be tested and inspected in accordance with the schedule set forth
below. It shall be unlawful for any existing underground storage
facility owner, operator or lessee to fail to test his tanks and file an
acceptable certificate of test completion with the Code
Enforcement Officer in accordance with the following schedule:
Testing Schedule for Existing Underground Tanks
Age of System by 1986
(years)
Date 1 to 4 5 to 9 10 to 14
15 to
19
20 or
More
December 31,
1986
X
July 1, 1987 X
December 31,
1987
X
July 1, 1988 X
July 1, 1989 X
Full compliance for all facilities except those described in
§ 394-11B(3)
December 31,
1987
X X
December 31,
1988
X
Full compliance for all facilities
(2) If, for any reason, testing satisfactory to the Township cannot be
performed, the tank must be removed from service or brought up to
the standards of Subsection A by the first scheduled test date.
(3) The Final Test of the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA),
Recommended Practice No. 329 (1983), or other test of equivalent
or superior accuracy, as approved by the Township, must be used to
comply with the testing and inspection requirement of
§ 394-11D(1).
§ 394-11 JACKSON CODE § 394-11
1:1494
(4) Any test and inspection as required by this subsection shall be
performed by a person whose qualifications are acceptable to the
Township for performing such tests. Certificates of test completion
containing the results of such tests as performed shall be prepared
by the tester and shall be filed with the Township within 30 days
after completion of the testing of the storage facility. No certificate
of test completion shall be acceptable to the Township to indicate
satisfactory compliance with the testing requirements of this
subsection if qualifications of the tester have not been accepted by
the Township prior to the test. No certificate of test completion
shall be acceptable to the Township if the test and inspection were
not performed in accordance with any regulation and standards
which may be promulgated pursuant thereto.
(5) The certificate of test completion shall be filed on a form provided
by the Township, and a copy of such form completed shall be kept
by the storage facility owner, operator or lessee and by the tester
for a period of not less than five years from the date of its issuance.
It shall be unlawful for the storage facility owner, operator or
lessee, and for the tester thereof, to fail to keep a copy of the
certificate of test completion for the required five-year period.
(6) Certificates of test completion shall contain a legally authorized
form notice to the effect that false statements made knowingly
therein are punishable pursuant to the Code of Criminal Justice of
New Jersey.
(7) A certificate of test completion not properly completed and/or not
subscribed by the tester shall not be acceptable to the Township.
E. General provisions and requirements.
(1) When an underground storage facility or part thereof is found to be
leaking, the portion containing the leak must be immediately
emptied of all contents therein and removed from service. It shall
be unlawful to cause or permit a leaking underground storage
facility or part thereof to remain in service or to continue to retain
its toxic or hazardous contents after the owner, operator or lessee
of said storage facility or part thereof knows or should have known
of the existence of the leak therein.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to repair, or to permit the repair,
in place, of any underground storage facility or part thereof which
has leaked or otherwise failed, for the purpose of reusing said
storage facility, unless:
(a) Such repair will result in the storage facility or part thereof
complying with the requirements of Subsection A above and all
regulations and standards promulgated thereunder.
(b) Such repairs occur pursuant to plans therefor previously
submitted to and approved by the Township.
§ 394-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 394-11
1:1495
(3) It shall be unlawful for any person to replace or cause the
replacement of any underground storage facility or part thereof for
any reason if the replacement facility does not meet the
requirements of Subsection A above and all regulations and
standards promulgated thereunder.
(4) It shall be unlawful for any person to use, maintain or put into
service any underground storage facility or part thereof without
first complying with the testing and inspection requirements of
Subsection D above and regulations and standards promulgated
thereunder.
F. Monitoring and leak detection.
(1) All underground storage facilities or parts thereof must be
equipped with means of calculating product delivery and
consumption. Accurate records must be kept of all deliveries and
consumption and the figures reconciled daily in an approved
manner unless a less frequent schedule is allowed by the Code
Enforcement Officer.
(2) All underground storage facilities or parts thereof must be
provided with a means of monitoring frequently and accurately for
any leakage and spillage that might occur. All leak detection
systems and tanks shall be monitored by the facility operator at
least on a weekly basis and the results recorded and kept with the
product records. Leak detection and monitoring can be provided by
an electrical continuous leak detection system; visually operated or
float-operated alarms for tanks in pits; pressure, vacuum or fluid
level detectors for double-walled facilities; observation wells and
collection barriers or membranes for use in high groundwater
areas; for gasoline and oil facilities, a perforated, properly
designed U-tube installation is acceptable; or other equivalent
design approved by the Code Enforcement Officer. Permanent
records of all monitoring shall be kept for a period of five years.
(3) It shall be unlawful for the owner or other person in possession or
control of a storage facility or part thereof to fail to comply with any
of the requirements of this subsection and of any regulations and
standards promulgated pursuant thereto.
G. Overfill protection.
(1) A means of overfill protection shall be provided for all new
underground storage facilities or parts thereof and for all
replacement underground storage facilities or parts thereof.
Overfill protection shall consist of either an overfill protection
device or a product-tight containment capable of intercepting and
preventing the release to the ground or groundwater of an overfill
spill.
§ 394-11 JACKSON CODE § 394-11
1:1496
(2) It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator or lessee to fail to
provide satisfactory overfill protection for any new underground
storage facility or part thereof in accordance with the provisions of
this subsection and any regulations and standards promulgated
pursuant thereto.
H. Removal of underground storage facilities from service.
(1) It shall be unlawful for the owner or any other person in possession
or control of an underground storage facility or part thereof to
remove it from service unless:
(a) Said storage facility or part thereof is declared abandoned,
emptied immediately and removed within 60 days of so
declaring and is disposed of as junk by first rendering it vaporfree
and by sufficiently perforating it so as to render it unfit for
further use;
(b) Said storage facility or part thereof is declared abandoned,
emptied immediately and removed within 60 days for the
storage of other than toxic or hazardous materials after having
met all of the requirements of Subsection A and all regulations
and standards promulgated pursuant thereto;
(c) Said storage facility or part thereof is declared abandoned,
emptied immediately and removed within 60 days for the
storage of other than toxic and hazardous materials, in which
case the facility shall be emptied, cleaned of all residue and
made safe and vapor-free;
(d) Said storage facility is declared temporarily out of service and
maintained in accordance with Subsection A(3) of this section;
or
(e) Said storage facility is declared to be suspected of leaking and
maintained in accordance with § 394-11E.
(2) Any declaration of facility abandonment or of taking a facility
temporarily out of service or returning a facility to service must be
made to the Code Enforcement Officer in writing.
(3) It shall be unlawful for the owner or any other person in possession
or control of any underground storage facility or part thereof to
render it temporarily out of service unless said storage facility or
part thereof is planned to be returned to active service within six
months of the placement of it temporarily out of service, and it is
returned to active service within said six months, it is emptied of its
contents immediately and the fill line, gauge opening and pump
suction are capped and secured against tampering, and the vent
line is left open. No facility in a temporarily out-of-service condition
shall be returned to use prior to notification to the Code
§ 394-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 394-11
1:1497
§ 394-12. Outdoor aboveground storage facilities.
Enforcement Officer and prior to the successful completion of any
tightness testing due under § 394-11D.
(4) It shall be unlawful for anyone to place toxic or hazardous materials
in a facility which is temporarily out of service.
A. New storage facilities.
(1) For the purpose of this subsection, a new aboveground storage
facility shall be one for which construction actually begins on or
after April 14, 1986.
(2) It shall be unlawful to fabricate, construct, install, use or maintain
any new aboveground storage facility or part thereof in a manner
which will allow the discharge of a toxic or hazardous material to
the ground, groundwaters or surface waters of Jackson Township.
(3) It shall be unlawful to fabricate, construct, install, use or maintain
any new aboveground storage facility or part thereof without
having constructed around and under it an impervious containment
and dike enclosing the storage facility or part thereof, conforming
to the following requirements:
(a) The volume of the diked area shall be at least 110% of the
volume of the largest tank contained therein, excluding the
volume below the dike level occupied by other tanks.
Additional volume of up to 10% of the total volume of all other
tanks or vessels contained in the dike area may be required if
the configuration, arrangement and spacing of the tanks and
dikes do not meet National Fire Protection Association
standards.
(b) The dikes and the entire area enclosed by the dikes, including
the area under the tanks, shall be made permanently
impervious to the types of products expected to be stored in
the tanks. A tank cannot be switched from one product to
another unless the barrier is impervious to the new material
stored.
(c) Drainage of precipitation from within the diked area shall be
controlled in a manner that will prevent any toxic or hazardous
material from entering the ground, groundwaters or surface
waters of Jackson Township.
(4) It shall be unlawful to construct, fabricate, install, use or maintain
any new aboveground storage facility without providing a positive
means of detecting an overfilling condition therein before any
spillage can occur, which detection system shall include but shall
not necessarily be limited to both visual and audible alarms at a
point on the storage facility most frequently manned. The overflow
§ 394-11 JACKSON CODE § 394-12
1:1498
point must be clearly visible to the operator filling the facility
or the operator at the receiving facility where possible. If not
possible, adequate means must be provided to immediately detect
an overflow.
(5) It shall be unlawful to fabricate, construct, install, use or maintain
any new aboveground storage facility or part thereof without
conforming to all regulations and standards promulgated pursuant
to this section relating to such new storage facilities.
(6) It shall be unlawful to fabricate, construct, install, use or maintain
any new aboveground storage facility sitting on the ground and
making contact therewith, or partially buried in the ground and
making contact therewith, or part thereof, unless and until the
exterior surface of the areas in contact with the ground are
cathodically protected in conformance with a design approved by
the Code Enforcement Officer.
B. Existing storage facilities.
(1) An existing aboveground storage facility is one for which
construction actually begins prior to April 14, 1986.
(2) Commencing January 1, 1988, it shall be unlawful for any person to
use, maintain or fill with toxic or hazardous materials any existing
aboveground storage facility or part thereof without conforming to
all of the requirements of Subsection A above and all regulations
and standards promulgated pursuant thereto, with one exception.
It will not be required to place an impervious barrier directly
beneath an existing tank that is sitting on or partially in the ground
and is too large to be moved. In this case, the interior bottom of the
tank shall be coated with a glass-fiber-reinforced epoxy coating or
approved equivalent. In achieving the above compliance, the
following schedule shall be adhered to:
(a) By January 1, 1988, all interior coating of facilities shall be
completed.
(b) By January 1, 1988, all facilities shall be protected against
overfill.
(c) By January 1, 1988, installation of cathodic protection shall be
completed on all facilities in contact with the ground which
were built prior to 1967.
(d) By January 1, 1989, installation of cathodic protection shall be
completed on all facilities in contact with the ground which
were built between 1967 and 1972.
(e) By January 1, 1990, installation of cathodic protection shall be
completed on all facilities in contact with the ground which
were built between 1972 and 1977.
§ 394-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 394-12
1:1499
(3) It shall be unlawful for any person to use, maintain or fill with toxic
or hazardous materials an existing aboveground storage facility or
part thereof without complying with the following inspection
schedule and all regulations and standards promulgated pursuant
thereto and without submitting to the Code Enforcement Officer a
statement of proof of inspection:
(a) Any owner or other person in possession or control of an
aboveground storage facility or part thereof shall have said
tanks and vessels inspected and shall file a proof of inspection
with the Code Enforcement Officer by June 1, 1987. Where
interior coating has not yet been applied, such inspection will
be performed before coating.
(b) For the purpose of this section, "inspection" means the
inspection of all aboveground tanks and other vessels for the
storage of toxic or hazardous materials constituting an
aboveground storage facility or part thereof.
(c) Any inspection of an existing aboveground storage facility of
greater than 10,000 gallons' capacity or part thereof, as
required by this subsection, shall be performed in accordance
with a written protocol submitted to and approved by the Code
Enforcement Officer by an authorized tank inspection firm or
person or by a professional engineer licensed to practice
professional engineering in the State of New Jersey, and it shall
be performed in compliance with any regulations and
standards promulgated pursuant to this section relating to
such inspections.
(d) Aboveground storage facilities or parts thereof sitting on the
ground and in contact therewith or partially buried in the
ground and in contact therewith shall be emptied and cleaned
to facilitate inspection of portions thereof not accessible from
the outside.
(e) Proofs of inspection must be filed with the Code Enforcement
Officer on a form provided by the Township or one acceptably
equivalent thereto within 30 days of each inspection and
before the tank is refilled, and a copy of such form shall be kept
and maintained by both the owner, or other person in
possession or control of the aboveground storage facility or
part thereof, and the inspector for a period of not less than five
years from the date of the inspection. The proof of inspection
form shall be subscribed by both the owner, or other person in
possession or control of the aboveground storage facility
inspected, and the inspector. This proof of inspection form
shall contain a legally authorized form notice to the effect that
false statements made knowingly therein are punishable
pursuant to the New Jersey Code of Criminal Justice.
§ 394-12 JACKSON CODE § 394-12
1:1500
(4) It shall be unlawful for any person to substantially modify or cause
the substantial modification of any aboveground storage facility or
part thereof without complying with the provisions of Subsection A
above and all regulations and standards promulgated pursuant
thereto.
C. General provisions.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon an aboveground
storage facility or part thereof without first cleaning out all residue,
venting it until dry and safe and leaving all of the hatches open or
with all connections severed and valves blank-flanged. For the
purpose of this subsection, an abandoned aboveground storage
facility or part thereof means one that has remained substantially
empty and unattended for six months or more without being
declared temporarily out of service or has been temporarily out of
service for six months or more.
(2) It shall be unlawful for the owner or other person in possession or
control of an aboveground storage facility or part thereof to remove
it from service unless:
(a) Said storage facility or part thereof is disposed of as junk by
first rendering it vapor-free and by sufficiently perforating it so
as to render it unfit for further use and demolishing it and
removing it from the site;
(b) Said storage facility or part thereof is removed for sale or use
elsewhere, in which case it must be first cleaned and made
vapor-free to be safe in transit, and such reuse shall be in
accordance with all pertinent portions of this article if
relocation is to be within Jackson Township;
(c) Said storage facility is declared abandoned; or
(d) Said storage facility is declared temporarily out of service; and
(e) The Code Enforcement Officer has been notified of the
intended status of removal from service.
(3) It shall be unlawful for the owner or other person in possession or
control of an aboveground storage facility or part thereof to render
it temporarily out of service unless said storage facility or part
thereof is planned to be returned to active service within six
months of its placement temporarily out of service, and it is
returned to active service within said six months, pursuant to the
provisions of Subsection C(6) and (7) following, and it is drained of
all liquid, and the fill line, gauge opening and discharge line are
capped and blank-flanged and secured against tampering, and the
vent line is left open.
§ 394-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 394-12
1:1501
(4) It shall be unlawful for anyone to place toxic or hazardous materials
in an abandoned or temporarily out-of-service aboveground storage
facility.
(5) It shall be unlawful for any person to bring an abandoned
aboveground storage facility back into service without meeting all
of the requirements of Subsection A above. No abandoned facility
shall be brought back into service without a complete inspection
acceptable to the Township.
(6) It shall be unlawful for any person to bring a temporarily out-ofservice
facility back into use after January 1, 1988, without first
meeting all the requirements of Subsection A above.
(7) An aboveground storage facility properly declared to be
temporarily out of service may be returned to service prior to 1987
by written notification to the Code Enforcement Officer if the
requirements of § 394-12B(2) have been met.
(8) It shall be unlawful for the owner or other person in possession or
control of an aboveground storage facility or part thereof to fail to
empty, clean and inspect pursuant to Subsection B(3)(c) above, to
file proof of inspection pursuant to Subsection B(3)(e) above, to
leak-test and/or to recoat if necessary, every five years, each tank
or vessel for the storage of toxic or hazardous materials within said
storage facility or part thereof.
(9) It shall be unlawful for any person to replace or cause the
replacement of any aboveground storage facility or part thereof for
any reason without complying with the new storage requirements
of Subsection A above and without complying with the inspection
and proof of inspection requirements of Subsection B(3)(c) and (e),
respectively.
(10) It shall be unlawful for any person to use, maintain, construct,
fabricate, modify or install any aboveground storage facility or part
thereof without conforming to all plans and specifications
submitted to and approved by the Township prior to such use,
maintenance, construction, fabrication, modification or
installation.
D. Leaks; repairs.
(1) When an aboveground storage facility or part thereof is found to be
leaking, it must immediately be emptied of all contents therein
contained and removed from service unless approval is specifically
granted by the Township to do otherwise.
(2) It shall be unlawful for the owner or other person in possession or
control of a leaking aboveground storage facility or part thereof to
cause or permit it to remain in service or to continue to retain its
§ 394-12 JACKSON CODE § 394-12
1:1502
§ 394-13. Piping; fittings; connections.
toxic or hazardous contents after said owner or other person knows
or should have known of the existence of the leak.
(3) It shall be unlawful for any person to reuse and repair or cause the
reuse and repair of an aboveground storage facility or part thereof
which is leaking or which has leaked without:
(a) Performing or having said repairs performed in accordance
with a written protocol submitted to and approved by the
Township prior to said repairs.
(b) Inspecting or having said leaking storage facility or part
thereof inspected by a person whose qualifications are
acceptable to the Code Enforcement Officer, with such
inspection in accordance with Subsection B(3)(c) above, and
filing a proof of inspection in accordance with Subsection
B(3)(e) above, with such inspection performed and proof of
inspection filed prior to reuse of the storage facility or part
thereof or to filling it with a toxic or hazardous material but
after repairs have been effected.
A. New installations.
(1) For the purpose of this section, "new installations" means piping,
pipelines, fittings or connections for use with toxic or hazardous
materials for which installations or construction actually begins on
or after April 14, 1986.
(2) All new installations shall be:
(a) Fabricated, constructed and installed in a manner that will
prevent the escape of the toxic or hazardous materials
contained therein to the ground, groundwater or surface
waters of the Township of Jackson.
(b) Protected against corrosion by the use of noncorrosive
materials, cathodic protection with coatings approved by the
Township or the functional equivalent of the foregoing options
approved by the Township.
(c) Designed, constructed and installed with access points as
required by the Township to permit periodic pressure testing of
all underground piping without the need of extensive
excavation.
(d) Designed, constructed and installed with a simple, effective,
reliable means of monitoring the new installation for leakage,
including a warning device to indicate the presence of a leak,
spill or other failure or breach of integrity for piping installed
underground or in areas where piping is not clearly visible.
§ 394-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 394-13
1:1503
(e) Constructed of double-walled pipe or be constructed in
product-tight trenches or galleries where piping is buried or
below grade, except that single-walled piping will be allowed
for facilities containing products with a specific gravity of less
than one and only slightly soluble in water, such as gasoline
and fuel oil.
(3) It shall be unlawful for any person to fabricate, construct, install,
use or maintain or to cause the fabrication, construction,
installation, use or maintenance of any new substantial installation
or part thereof for use with toxic or hazardous materials:
(a) Without previously having submitted plans therefor to the
Township and without having received approval of said plans.
(b) Without complying with the plans submitted to, and approved
by, the Township as required in Subsection A(3)(a) above.
(c) Without complying with the provisions of Subsection A(1) and
(2) above and any regulations and standards promulgated
thereunder.
B. Existing installations.
(1) For the purpose of this section, "existing installations" shall mean
piping, fittings and connections for use with toxic or hazardous
materials for which installation or construction actually begins
prior to April 14, 1986.
(2) Commencing January 1, 1988, it shall be unlawful to use or
maintain any existing installation or part thereof in association with
any underground storage facility or part thereof unless said
existing installation complies with all of the provisions of
Subsection A above and all regulations and standards promulgated
pursuant thereto.
(3) It shall be unlawful for the owner or other person in possession or
control of any existing piping installation or part thereof associated
with any underground storage facility or part thereof to fail to
pressure-test said existing piping or part thereof whenever the
associated underground storage facility or part thereof is tested.
(4) It shall be unlawful for the owner or other person in possession or
control of an existing installation or part thereof, when testing or
contracting to test said installation or part pursuant to Subsection
B(3) above, to fail to:
(a) Test or have said installation or part thereof tested by a person
whose qualifications are acceptable to the Township.
(b) Test or have tested said installation in a manner acceptable to
the Township.
§ 394-13 JACKSON CODE § 394-13
1:1504
(c) Test or have said installation tested in accordance with a
written protocol submitted to, and approved by, the Township
prior to said test.
(d) Test or have tested said installation in accordance with any
regulations or standards which may be promulgated under this
subsection relating to said testing.
(e) Submit to the Township, within 30 days of said test, a
completed certificate of test completion form, pursuant to
§ 394-11D(3) through (6) and any regulations and standards
promulgated thereunder.
C. General provisions.
(1) Notwithstanding the requirements of Subsection B(3) above, it
shall be unlawful for the owner or other person in possession or
control of a new or existing installation or part thereof not to test
said installation or part in accordance with the procedures set forth
in Subsection B(3) above and in all regulations and standards
promulgated thereunder whenever the Township has determined
that such a test is necessary or whenever the Township has ordered
that such a test be performed.
(2) Whenever an existing or new installation or part thereof is found to
be leaking, it must immediately be emptied of all contents therein
contained and removed from service.
(a) It shall be unlawful for the owner or other person in possession
or control of said leaking installation or part thereof to cause or
permit it to remain in service or to continue to retain its toxic
or hazardous contents after said owner or other person knows
or should have known of the existence of the leak.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to repair or cause the repair
of any new or existing installation or part thereof which has
leaked or otherwise failed without performing said repairs or
having said repairs performed in a manner approved by the
Township.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person to reuse or cause the reuse
of any new or existing installation or part thereof which had
leaked or otherwise failed without repairing said installation
pursuant to the provisions of Subsection C(2)(b) above and all
regulations and standards promulgated thereunder.
(d) It shall be unlawful for any person to reuse or to cause the
reuse of any new or existing installation or part thereof which
had leaked or otherwise failed without repairing said
installation or part so as to conform to the requirements of
Subsection A above and all regulations and standards
promulgated thereunder.
§ 394-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 394-13
1:1505
§ 394-14. Transfer of toxic or hazardous materials.
(e) It shall be unlawful for any person to reuse or cause the reuse
of any new or existing installation or part thereof which had
leaked or otherwise failed without inspecting or having said
installation or part inspected subsequent to the completion of
any repairs but prior to said reuse by a person whose
qualifications are acceptable to the Township in accordance
with § 394-12B(3)(d) and any regulations and standards
promulgated thereunder and without filing with the Township
a proof of inspection prior to said reuse in accordance with
§ 394-12B(3)(d) and any regulations and standards
promulgated thereunder.
A. Transfer facilities.
(1) "Transfer facilities" means truck fill stands and/or any other facility
for the loading or unloading of toxic or hazardous materials.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to fabricate, construct or install
a transfer facility or part thereof without:
(a) First submitting plans therefor to the Township and without
first obtaining the Township's approval thereof.
(b) Fabricating, constructing and installing said transfer facility or
part thereof in accordance with the plans submitted and
approved pursuant to Subsection A(2)(a) above.
(c) Providing a simple, effective, reliable means of monitoring the
transfer facility or part thereof for leakage or spillage,
including a warning device.
(d) Providing a level of spill protection equivalent to that provided
by a fill stand area completely paved and curbed with an
impervious material and drained to a holding tank of adequate
size to contain any spill that could reasonably be expected to
occur from the normal operation of the facility and roofed so as
to exclude precipitation which would otherwise tend to fill the
holding tank.
(3) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, maintain or use a
transfer facility or part thereof so as to permit the escape
therefrom of toxic or hazardous materials to the ground,
groundwaters or surface waters of Jackson Township. All holding
tanks associated with spill control shall be maintained in an empty
condition at all times to provide maximum storage capacity at the
time of a spill.
(4) It shall be unlawful for any person to fabricate, construct, install,
use, operate or maintain any transfer facility or part thereof
§ 394-13 JACKSON CODE § 394-14
1:1506
§ 394-15. Portable containers and tanks.
without doing so in accordance with regulations and standards
pertaining thereto which may be promulgated by the Township.
B. Transfer operations.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to transfer, cause the transfer or
permit the transfer of toxic or hazardous materials to or from a
storage facility, part thereof or vehicle, where conditions at the
transfer facility are inadequate at the time of said transfer to
ensure a safe transfer operation without the occurrence of spills,
leaks or accident.
(2) Failure of a transfer facility to conform to and comply with the
provisions of Subsection A and all regulations and standards
promulgated thereunder shall constitute a rebuttable presumption
that conditions at said transfer facility are inadequate for the
purposes of Subsection B(1) above.
(3) The transfer of toxic or hazardous materials to any storage facility
or part thereof which does not comply with all provisions of this
article applicable thereto and any regulations and standards
promulgated under this article applicable thereto shall constitute a
rebuttable presumption that conditions at said transfer facility are
inadequate for the purposes of Subsection B(1) above.
(4) Conditions at the transfer facility shall be deemed to be inadequate
at the time of a transfer if:
(a) The transfer facility is constructed so that all possible points of
overflow are not visible from the loading and unloading
locations; or
(b) The truck, storage facility or part thereof being delivered to
does not have adequate capacity to contain the amount of toxic
or hazardous material being transferred or to be transferred,
or if a person performing or causing said transfer does not
ensure by some reliable means that the truck, storage facility
or part thereof has adequate capacity to contain the amount of
toxic or hazardous material being transferred or to be
transferred.
A. Storage facilities.
(1) It shall be unlawful to fabricate, construct, install or otherwise
create a storage facility or part thereof for portable containers and
tanks in excess of 100 gallons' total capacity containing toxic or
hazardous materials if the facility has to be used for more than 30
days without:
§ 394-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 394-15
1:1507
(a) First having submitted satisfactory plans and specifications
therefor to the Township.
(b) Constructing, installing, fabricating or otherwise creating said
storage facility in accordance with the reports and plans
submitted pursuant to Subsection A(1)(a) above.
(c) Constructing, installing, fabricating or otherwise creating said
storage facility so as to prevent the discharge of any of the
toxic or hazardous contents of the portable containers therein
to the ground, groundwaters or surface waters of Jackson
Township.
(d) Providing a chemically resistant pad on which to place the
portable containers or tanks, impervious to the toxic or
hazardous materials being stored in said containers and tanks.
(e) Providing a complete impervious containment of the storage
facility or part thereof sufficient to contain at least 30% of the
volume to be stored.
(f) Constructing, fabricating, installing or otherwise creating a
storage facility or part thereof in accordance with all
regulations and standards promulgated under this subsection.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to use, maintain or operate a
storage facility containing portable containers or tanks for the
storage of toxic or hazardous materials without:
(a) Preventing the discharge of any of the toxic or hazardous
contents of the portable containers or tanks to the ground,
groundwaters or surface waters of Jackson Township.
(b) Properly securing the portable containers or tanks containing
toxic or hazardous materials so as to protect them from
vandalism, unauthorized access and damage by traffic,
machinery or falling objects.
(c) Storing the portable containers and tanks containing toxic or
hazardous materials indoors except where such storage is
prevented by fire regulations or where sufficient evidence is
presented that physical or financial constraints of the facility
make indoor storage impractical. Waiver of the indoor storage
requirement shall be only by permission of the Township.
(d) Protecting any outdoor storage of portable containers or tanks
containing toxic or hazardous materials from damage from
heat, cold, rust and other weather-related conditions.
(e) Complying with all regulations and standards promulgated
relating to the maintenance, use or operation of a storage
facility containing portable containers containing toxic or
hazardous materials.
§ 394-15 JACKSON CODE § 394-15
1:1508
(f) Complying with all of the provisions of Subsection B below and
any regulations and standards promulgated thereunder.
B. Handling of portable containers or tanks. It shall be unlawful for the
owner or other person in possession or control of a storage facility
containing portable containers or tanks which contain toxic or
hazardous materials to:
(1) Stack said portable containers or tanks more than two high without
a properly designed storage rack for that purpose or to attempt any
stacking without adequate equipment.
(2) Store said portable containers or tanks in a manner so as to prevent
all sides thereof from being available for inspection.
(3) Fail to maintain current inventory records indicating deliveries,
consumption, sale and final disposal of all toxic or hazardous
materials stored in portable containers or tanks and to maintain
said records for five years from the occurrence recorded.
(4) Fail to handle said portable containers or tanks in accordance with
any regulations and standards promulgated pursuant to this
subsection.
(5) Store said portable containers in numbers in excess of the
maximum allowed by the approved design of the storage facility.
C. Inspections.
(1) It shall be unlawful for the owner or other person in possession or
control of a storage facility containing portable containers or tanks
for the storage of toxic or hazardous materials to fail to have said
facility or part thereof containing said portable containers or tanks
inspected:
(a) Prior to application for the renewal of a permit to operate a
storage facility issued pursuant to § 394-8.
(b) Subsequent to any substantial modification of the storage
facility or part thereof containing said portable containers or
tanks and prior to the using or putting into service of a storage
facility or part thereof.
(c) Prior to the using or putting into service of said storage facility
or part thereof after repairs had been performed on it.
(2) It shall be unlawful to fail to have the inspections required by
Subsection C(1) above performed in accordance with the provisions
of § 394-12B(3)(c) and all regulations and standards promulgated
pursuant thereto and those promulgated under this subsection.
(3) It shall be unlawful to fail to file a proof of inspection with the
Township within 30 days of the performance of an inspection
§ 394-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 394-15
1:1509
§ 394-16. Bulk storage of toxic or hazardous material.
required by Subsection C(1) above complying with the provisions
of § 394-12B(3)(e) and any regulations and standards promulgated
pursuant thereto.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to repair or modify or to cause or
permit said repairs or modifications of a storage facility or part thereof
containing portable containers or tanks for the storage of toxic or
hazardous materials without performing said repairs or modifications
or having them performed pursuant to a written protocol previously
submitted to and approved by the Township.
E. At the discretion of the Township, § 394-15A(1)(a), (d), (e) and (f) and
§ 394-15C may be waived for temporary facilities, such as spill cleanup
operations.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to fabricate, construct, install, repair
or modify any bulk storage facility or part thereof without doing so in
accordance with a written protocol previously submitted to and
approved by the Township.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to fabricate, construct, install,
modify, repair, use, maintain or operate any bulk storage facility or part
thereof without:
(1) Doing so in a manner that will prevent toxic or hazardous materials
contained therein from coming into contact with precipitation or
other sources of moisture unless there is a provision made for
collecting and treating the leachate and runoff generated so as to
prevent a discharge of toxic or hazardous materials to the ground,
groundwaters or surface waters of Jackson Township and so as to
prevent the development of an explosive, incendiary or other
hazardous or dangerous condition.
(2) Providing for the segregation of and without segregating
potentially reactive chemicals which are toxic or hazardous
materials or which may react so as to form toxic or hazardous
materials, which reaction may present or cause a hazardous or
dangerous condition.
(3) Providing for and storing bagged toxic or hazardous materials on
pallets and within a roofed structure which prevents precipitation
from reaching the bags.
(4) In the case of an indoor bulk storage facility, without providing for
and providing an impervious floor without floor drains with a
surrounding impervious dike so as to provide containment for
hazardous or toxic materials generated from firefighting within the
building.
§ 394-15 JACKSON CODE § 394-16
1:1510
§ 394-17. Reporting; records; cleanup.
(5) Providing for and providing adequate security so as to protect the
storage facility and toxic or hazardous content therein from
vandalism and accident.
(6) Complying with any regulations and standards which may be
promulgated pursuant to this section.
C. Road deicing and other deicing materials are toxic or hazardous
materials. In addition to the foregoing provisions of this section, road
deicing salt may be stored near the shore or other areas where no
adverse environmental impact may occur without brine control so long
as the Township's approval for such a storage facility has been applied
for and received in advance.
A. It shall be unlawful for the owner or other person in possession or
control of any storage facility or part thereof to fail to report any
unauthorized discharge, spill, leak, or any recognizable loss of toxic or
hazardous materials therefrom or the failure of said storage facility to
the Township within one hour of the time such owner or other person
had sufficient evidence that he knew or should have known of said
unauthorized discharge, spill, leak, loss or failure. A report to the
Township shall not be deemed in compliance with any reporting
requirement of any other federal, state or local law.
B. It shall be unlawful for the owner or other person in possession or
control of any storage facility or part thereof to fail to keep records in
writing reflecting the types and amounts of toxic or hazardous
materials stored in the said storage facility or part thereof at any given
time.
(1) It shall be unlawful for the owner or other person in possession or
control of any storage facility or part thereof to fail to keep records
of the disposal or other transfer in or out of said storage facility or
part thereof, such records reflecting the types and amounts of toxic
or hazardous materials involved in the transfer. The name and
vehicle license and registration numbers of the transporter and the
intended destination must also be included if the material is waste.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person required to keep records by any
provision of this article to fail to maintain said records available for
inspection by the Township for at least five years from the date of
the event, occurrence or transaction recorded. Copies shall be
provided by the owner or operator for the Township if requested.
(3) It shall be unlawful for any person required to keep records by any
provision of this article to fail to keep, record and maintain said
records in accordance with any regulations and standards
promulgated pursuant to this section.
§ 394-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 394-17
1:1511
C. It shall be the responsibility and obligation of any person who
discharges, or causes or permits the discharge of, any toxic or
hazardous material to the ground, groundwaters or surface waters of
Jackson Township to cease said discharge; to reclaim, recover and/or
properly dispose of the discharged toxic or hazardous material and any
other substance contaminated therefrom; to restore the environment to
a condition and quality acceptable to the Township; and to repair any
damages caused thereby, all to the satisfaction of the Township.
(1) It shall be unlawful for the owner or any other person in possession
or control of any source discharging toxic or hazardous materials to
the ground, groundwaters or surface waters of Jackson Township to
fail to cease said discharge immediately upon obtaining knowledge
or notice of its existence.
(2) It shall be unlawful for the owner or any other person in possession
or control of any source discharging or which has discharged toxic
or hazardous materials to the ground, groundwaters or surface
waters of Jackson Township to fail to reclaim, recover and/or
dispose of the discharged toxic or hazardous materials. Where time
permits, cleanup shall be in accordance with a written protocol
previously submitted to and approved by the Township and the
State of New Jersey.
(3) It shall be unlawful for the owner or other person in possession or
control of any premises or place to fail to reclaim, recover and/or
otherwise dispose of any toxic or hazardous materials discharged
thereto, in accordance with a written protocol previously submitted
to and approved by the Code Enforcement Officer, in the event that
the persons described in Subsection C above are not ascertainable
or otherwise fail to comply with the provisions of Subsection C(2).
This provision shall not abridge any existing right of action in any
person, nor shall it create any new right of action in any person.
(4) It shall be unlawful for the owner or any person in possession or
control of any source which has discharged toxic or hazardous
materials to the ground, groundwaters or surface waters of Jackson
Township to fail to restore this environment contaminated or
damaged by said discharge to its condition prior to the discharge,
repairing any damages caused thereby in accordance with a
written protocol previously submitted to, and approved by, the
Township and the State of New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection.
(5) It shall be unlawful for any person required by this article or by any
order of the Code Enforcement Officer to reclaim, recover or
otherwise dispose of discharged toxic or hazardous materials and
other substances contaminated therefrom and/or to restore the
environment to the condition that existed prior to the discharge of
toxic or hazardous materials thereto to fail to perform said required
§ 394-17 JACKSON CODE § 394-17
1:1512
§ 394-18. Confidentiality of records.
§ 394-19. Posting and labeling.
acts pursuant to any regulations and standards promulgated
pursuant to this subsection.
A. Any information relating to secret processes, or methods of
manufacture or production, obtained in the course of an inspection or
investigation, or submitted to the Township, shall be kept confidential
except for the use and purposes of the Township in the enforcement of
this article and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder.
B. Inability to file completed forms.
(1) In the event that a person claims to be unable to file completed
reports and/or plans and specifications on the grounds that it
related to, and is part of, a secret process or method of
manufacture or production, an affidavit signed by an authorized
person must be filed with the Township stipulating:
(a) The location of the process or equipment, specifying the
building and the section or part of the building in which it is
located.
(b) In general terms, the name of the process or equipment.
(c) The means to be employed for the control of water
contaminants.
(d) The nature and estimated rate of discharge of contaminants to
the ground or surface waters.
(e) The authority of the person signing the affidavit.
(f) A statement that the installation is related to a secret process
or method of manufacture or production.
(2) In the event that such affidavit is filed, the Township shall
determine the extent to which an exemption should be granted.
Any information relating to secret processes, or methods of
manufacture or production, which may be required, ascertained or
discovered by the Township shall not be disclosed and shall be kept
confidential.
A. It shall be unlawful for the owner or other person in possession or
control of any place, building, land, vehicle or thing to store toxic or
hazardous materials therein without conspicuously posting a notice
thereat or thereon, warning of the presence of such materials and
providing any safety information necessary to protect the public and
assist emergency response personnel in carrying out their
responsibilities.
§ 394-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 394-19
1:1513
§ 394-20. Waivers.
Any requirement, mandate, prohibition or time limitation imposed by this
article, or any regulation, standard or order generated hereunder, may be
waived or modified by order of the Township.
§ 394-21. Permit fee schedule.
The following shall be the permit fee schedule for permits issued pursuant
to this article:
§ 394-22. Enforcement; remedies.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to use, maintain or operate any
storage facility or part thereof without:
(1) Clearly labeling the specific contents of each portable container
conspicuously on said container.
(2) Clearly labeling the specific contents of each indoor and
aboveground tank or vessel conspicuously thereon.
(3) Clearly labeling the specific actual, intended and possible contents
of piping associated with any storage facility or part thereof at or
near the points of filling or drawing.
(4) Conspicuously posting any permit issued pursuant to this article.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely post or label any container
or storage facility or to post an invalid permit.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to use, maintain or operate any
storage facility or part thereof without complying with all regulations
and standards promulgated pursuant to this article.
A. Permit to operate: $10 per tank.
B. Construction and modification permit: $5.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this
article, any lawful rules and regulations promulgated under this article,
any lawful order of the Township of Jackson, Code Enforcement Officer
or his designee or any conditions, limitations or restriction which is part
of an operating permit. It shall be the duty of all municipal officials and
employees to enforce the provisions of this article. No building permit
shall be issued for the installation of any improvement of facilities
governed by the provisions of this article without the prior approval of
the Code Enforcement Officer or his designee. In addition to any other
remedies provided by this article, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
have the following judicial remedies available to him for violation of this
article, any lawful rule or regulation promulgated under this article, any
lawful order of the Code Enforcement Officer or his designee or any
condition, limitation or restriction which is part of an operating permit.
§ 394-19 JACKSON CODE § 394-22
1:1514
§ 394-23. Civil liability; joint and several liability.
Whenever a violation of the article occurs or exists, any person, individually
or otherwise, who has a legal, beneficial or equitable interest in the facility
or instrumentality causing or contributing to the violation or who has
a legal, beneficial or equitable interest in the real property upon which
such facility or instrumentality is located shall be jointly and severally
liable for said violation regardless of fault and regardless of knowledge
of the violation. This provision shall be construed to impose joint and
several liability, regardless of fault and regardless of knowledge of the
violation, upon all persons, individually or otherwise, who, although no
longer having any such legal, beneficial or equitable interest in said facility
or instrumentality or real property, did have such an interest at any time
during which such violation existed or occurred or continued to exist or
to occur. This provision shall be liberally construed to protect the public
health, safety and welfare and to accomplish the purposes of this article.
§ 394-24. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-14-2005 by Ord. No.
13-05]
If any person or corporation shall fail or refuse to obey or comply with or
violates any of the provisions of this article or any lawful rule or regulation
promulgated hereunder or any lawful order of the Code Enforcement
Officer or his designee or any condition, limitation or restriction which is
part of an operating permit issued or rendered under and pursuant to the
provisions of this article, such person or corporation, upon conviction of
such offense, shall be punished by a fine of $5,000 or by imprisonment not
to exceed 90 days in the county jail, or both, in the discretion of the court.
Each day of continued violation shall be considered as a separate offense.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer of the Township of Jackson may institute
a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction to seek injunctive
relief to enforce compliance with or prohibit the violation of this article,
any lawful rule or regulation promulgated under this article, any lawful
order of the Code Enforcement Officer or his designee or any condition,
limitation or restriction which is part of an operating permit and to seek
injunctive relief to prevent injury to the air, waters and property,
including animal, plant and aquatic life, of the Township of Jackson and
to protect human health, safety and welfare caused or threatened by
any violation.
§ 394-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 394-24
1:1515

ARTICLE II
Required Reimbursement for Cleanup
[Adopted 4-24-1995 by Ord. No. 14-95 (Ch. 98, Art. II, of the 1972
Code)]
§ 394-25. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ETIOLOGICAL AGENTS — A viable microorganism or its toxin which causes
or may cause human disease. These include, but are not restricted to,
anthrax, rabies, tetanus, botulism, polio and AIDS specimens as per the
Department of Transportation Guide Book.
EXPENDABLE ITEMS — Any items used to administer first aid to victims
or emergency personnel or to extinguish any fire or stop or contain any
leak or spill or disposal involving any hazardous material or etiological
agent which cannot be reused or cannot be replenished without cost after
that particular fire, leak, spill or disposal of any hazardous material or
etiological agent. These include but are not restricted to fire-fighting foam,
chemical extinguishing agents, absorbent material, sand, recovery drums
and specialized protective equipment, to include but not be restricted to
acid suits, acid gloves, goggles and protective clothing, cots, blankets and
stretchers.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — Any substance which, by reason of being
explosive, flammable, poisonous, corrosive, oxidizing, irritating, or
otherwise harmful, is likely to cause death or injury (National Fire
Protection Association).
NONEXPENDABLE ITEMS — Any devices or vehicles used in the
emergency operations to administer first aid, extinguish any fire or stop or
contain any leak or spill or disposal involving any hazardous material or
etiological agent which could normally be reused or replenished without
cost but cannot due to said fire, leak, spill or disposal of any hazardous
material or etiological agent. These include but are not restricted to fire
apparatus, ambulances, trucks, loaders or electronical equipment.
PROPERTY OWNER — Any business, company, corporation or private
individual, registered or unregistered, who manufactures, stores or sells
any hazardous material or etiological agent.
VEHICLE — Any motorized equipment, registered or unregistered,
including but not limited to passenger cars, motorcycles, trucks, tractortrailers,
tanker trucks, construction equipment and farm machinery.
VESSEL — Any container, drum, box, cylinder or tank used to hold or
contain or carry or store any hazardous material or etiological agent.
§ 394-26. Purpose.
§ 394-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 394-26
1:1517
§ 394-27. Responsibility for reimbursement.
The following shall be responsible for said reimbursement:
§ 394-28. Reimbursement for services.
Any person or company responsible for any fire, leak, spill or disposal
involving a hazardous material or etiological agent must provide
reimbursement for services rendered by any recovery company, towing
company or other technical assistance called for by the Township of
Jackson, first aid squad or fire districts to handle such incident.
§ 394-29. Time limit for payment.
Any person, owner or company responsible for any fire, leak, spill or
disposal of hazardous material or etiological agent shall reimburse the
Township of Jackson, who shall in turn reimburse the first aid squad or fire
districts, for the full price of any expendable or nonexpendable items used
to extinguish such a fire, stop or contain such a leak, control such a spill or
for removal of such disposed items within a period of 45 days after receipt of
a bill for such items from the appropriate Township agency, first aid squad
or fire district.
A. This article provides for the replacement or reimbursement for the
specialized and sometimes nonreusable equipment required by state
and federal regulations to be made available in the Township in case of
fire, leakage or spillage or disposal involving any hazardous material or
etiological agent.
B. This article entitles the Township of Jackson to reimbursement for any
expendable and nonexpendable items used by the Township, including
emergency management, or first aid squad or any of its fire districts in
extinguishing any fire, stopping or containing any leak or controlling
any spill or disposal of hazardous material or etiological agent.
A. The owner or operator of any vehicle responsible for any fire, leak, spill
or disposal of hazardous material or etiological agent.
B. The owner or person responsible for any vessel containing hazardous
material or etiological agent involved in any fire, leak, spill or disposal
on public or private property, whether stationary or in transit, whether
accidental or through negligence.
C. The owner or person responsible for any property from which any leak,
spill or disposal of hazardous material or etiological agent emanates,
whether accidental or through negligence.
D. Any person responsible for any fire, leak, spill or disposal of hazardous
material or etiological agent on public or private property, whether
accidental or through negligence.
§ 394-26 JACKSON CODE § 394-30
1:1518
§ 394-30. Violations and penalties.
Any person, owner or company responsible for any fire, leak or spill of
hazardous material or etiological agent who fails to reimburse the
Township, first aid squad or the appropriate fire district within the time set
forth in this article shall be subject to a fine of not less than $1,000 or to
imprisonment for a period of not more than 90 days.
§ 394-31. Disposition of funds.
All reimbursements collected for hazardous material or etiological agents
incidents shall be paid to the Township, who shall reimburse the
appropriate Township agency. A record of all such funds shall be maintained
by the appropriate Township agency, first aid squad or fire district.
§ 394-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 394-31
1:1519
Chapter 400
TRAILERS AND CAMPSITES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Campgrounds — See Ch. 145.
Land use and development regulations — See
Ch. 244.
Mobile home dealerships — See Ch. 275.
Mobile home parks — See Ch. 280.
Mobile homes and trailers — See Ch. 285.
Rent control for mobile home parks — See Ch.
334.
Private campgrounds — See Ch. 456.
§ 394-31 JACKSON CODE § 394-31
1:1520
ARTICLE I
Automobile Trailers
[Adopted 9-16-1959 (Ch. 99, Art. I, of the 1972 Code)]
§ 400-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the terms used herein are defined as
follows:
AUTOMOBILE TRAILER — Any vehicle or structure designed and
constructed in such manner as will permit occupancy thereof as sleeping
quarters for one or more persons or the conduct of any business or
profession, occupation or trade (or use as a selling or advertising device),
and so designed that it is or may be mounted on wheels and used as a
conveyance on highways, roads, streets or other thoroughfare, propelled or
drawn by its own or other motive power.
PERSON — Includes an individual or individuals, partnership, firm,
company, corporation, tenant, owner, lessee or licensee, their agents or
servants, heirs and assigns.
§ 400-2. Parking restrictions; location; use restrictions.
A. It shall be unlawful within the limits of the Township of Jackson for any
person to park any trailer on any street, alley or highway, or other
public place, or on any tract of land owned by any person, occupied or
unoccupied, within the Township of Jackson in the County of Ocean,
except as provided in this article.
B. Emergency or temporary stopping or parking is permitted on any
street, highway or other thoroughfare for not longer than one hour,
subject to any other and further prohibitions, regulations or limitations
imposed by the traffic and parking regulations or ordinances for that
street, highway or other thoroughfare.
C. No person shall park or occupy any trailer on the premises of any
occupied dwelling or on any lot which is not a part of the premises of
any occupied dwelling, either of which is outside an approved trailer
camp, whether or not the lot or premises are owned by the person
seeking to park or occupy any such trailer; except that the parking of
only one unoccupied trailer in an accessory private garage building or
in a rear yard is permitted, provided that no living quarters shall be
maintained or any business practiced or conducted in said trailer while
such trailer is so parked or stored.
D. From and after the effective date of this subsection, mobile homes or
trailers shall be permitted to be located and to be used as dressing
rooms and changing facilities for entertainers and as office facilities in
recognized amusement parks within the Township of Jackson, provided
that the owner thereof complies with the following conditions: [Added
6-25-1974 by Ord. No. 22-74; amended 5-27-1975 by Ord. No.
24-75; 5-24-1977 by Ord. No. 18-77]
§ 400-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-2
1:1521
§ 400-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-5-1972 by Ord. No.
34-72]
Any person convicted of any violation of this article shall be subject to a fine
not exceeding $500 or imprisonment for any term not exceeding 90 days, or
both.
(1) Such trailers or mobile homes are not to be used for dwelling or
living purposes or for storage.
(2) Such trailers or mobile homes are not to be open to the general
public or accessible for use by the general public.
(3) No more than 10 such trailers or mobile homes shall be permitted
in any single recognized amusement park for use as dressing rooms
or changing facilities for entertainers.
(4) Such trailers or mobile homes used as dressing rooms or changing
facilities for entertainers shall not be used for any purpose during
any season or period when such recognized amusement park is not
in operation.
(5) No more than three such mobile homes or trailers shall be
permitted in any single recognized amusement park for use as
office facilities.
(6) Three additional mobile homes or trailers, in addition to those
permitted in Subsection D(5), shall be permitted in any single
recognized amusement park for use as office facilities for a period
commencing with the adoption of this subsection and terminating
as of April 1, 1979. The provisions of this subsection are to remain
in force and effect until April 1, 1979, and after that date, said three
additional mobile homes or trailers shall not be used for purposes
aforesaid. [Added 3-28-1978 by Ord. No. 21-78]
E. The provisions of Subsection D211 are to remain in force and effect until
November 30, 1975. After November 30, 1975, Subsection D shall
cease to be effective, and no mobile homes or trailers shall be used as
changing or office facilities or for any other purpose within any
amusement park or any other location within the Township of Jackson,
except as may be otherwise permitted by other provisions of this Code.
[Added 5-27-1975 by Ord. No. 24-75]
211. Editor's Note: Refers to those provisions of said subsection as amended 5-27-1975 by Ord.
No. 24-75, which provisions have been superseded by the provisions of Subsection D as
amended 5-24-1977 by Ord. No. 18-77.
§ 400-2 JACKSON CODE § 400-3
1:1522
ARTICLE II
Trailer Camps and Campsites
[Adopted 11-20-1951 (Ch. 99, Art. II, of the 1972 Code)]
§ 400-4. License required. [Amended 7-24-1973 by Ord. No. 40-73]
Within the limits of the Township of Jackson, in the County of Ocean, no
person, firm or corporation shall conduct or carry on the business of the
operation of a trailer park or campsite or work in, occupy or directly or
indirectly in any manner whatsoever utilize any place or premises in which
is conducted or carried on a trailer park or campsite, unless and until there
is granted by the governing body of said Township, in accordance with the
terms of this article, and shall be in force and effect, a license to conduct
said trailer park and campsite for the place and premises in or at which
the same shall be conducted and carried on. However, trailers to be used
in connection with construction projects and in connection with mining
operations are allowed within the Township of Jackson, provided that the
owner thereof notifies the Building Inspector in writing of the fact that such
trailer is to be installed within the Township of Jackson and indicates the
location of the trailer and the proposed date of its removal, and provided
further that said trailer is not to be used for dwelling or living purposes.
§ 400-5. Fees. [Amended 2-16-1966 by Ord. No. 2-66]
§ 400-6. Records. [Amended 9-5-1972 by Ord. No. 30-72]
Each licensee shall keep records of the number of trailers in the park or site,
and also the names and addresses of all persons living in or occupying or
owning trailers in the park or site, and exhibit such records to any member
of the Township of Jackson Police Department and to the representatives of
A. The fee for each trailer park or site shall be dependent upon the
number of trailers located in said trailer park or site, payable in
advance at the time that the licensee shall obtain a license to operate
said trailer park or site, and said fees shall be as follows:
(1) One to 20 trailers: $75 per year.
(2) Twenty-one to 40 trailers: $125 per year.
(3) Forty-one to 60 trailers: $200.
B. Said license fee must be paid to the Township by the first day of
February of the year for which the license is being issued. [Amended
9-5-1972 by Ord. No. 30-72; 12-28-1981 by Ord. No. 62-81212]
212. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided as follows: "This ordinance shall become
effective only in the event that mobile homes located in mobile home parks licensed under
the provisions of Chapter 400 of the Jackson Code become taxable as real property. In the
event such mobile homes are not taxable as real property, the provisions of this ordinance
shall not become operative."
§ 400-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-6
1:1523
the Township upon demand in order that proper charges shall be made by
the Township in accordance herewith.
§ 400-7. Requirements and standards. [Amended 12-18-1956]
A. Every trailer park shall have at least one male and one female toilet,
which shall be properly connected with adequate cesspools or septic
tanks, shall have a supply at all times of good water and shall be
maintained in a clean condition.
B. The sewerage hookups for all trailers must be made by the licensee of
the parks or sites. All hookups must be watertight. The licensee of the
trailer camp or site must have hookups for all outlets.
C. All additions to trailer parks or sites now in operation and all new trailer
parks or sites must be approved by the Township Engineer of the
Township of Jackson.
D. The licensee must furnish at least one garbage container with cover for
each trailer on the licensed premises.
E. Each trailer in the licensed premises must have at least 2,500 square
feet of space on which it is situate.
F. The Board of Health shall make two inspections each month of each
licensed trailer park or site.
G. No trailer or mobile home located in a trailer park licensed pursuant to
the provisions of §§ 400-1 through 400-9, whether such trailer or mobile
home is sold or rented, shall be occupied by the vendee, tenant or
lessee, as the case may be, until a certificate of occupancy has been
secured from the Construction Code Official of the Township of Jackson
certifying that said trailer or mobile home complies with all applicable
state laws and regulations as well as with all applicable provisions of
the Jackson Code. Application shall be made to the Construction Code
Official on a form to be provided. A fee of $5 shall accompany such
application. A certificate of occupancy shall be issued if the trailer or
mobile home complies with all applicable laws, regulations and
ordinances as aforesaid. No trailer or mobile home shall be installed or
occupied in such a trailer park unless it is properly supported by such
supports as may be necessary. [Added 10-26-1976 by Ord. No.
51-76; amended 3-22-1977 by Ord. No. 8-77]
H. Roads, where provided, shall be designed so as to permit convenient
and safe movement of traffic and unobstructed access to a public street
or highway. All roads shall be paved and shall have a smooth, hard,
dense and dust-free surface which shall be durable and well drained
under normal use and weather conditions. Road surfaces shall be
maintained free of holes and free of snow and ice, and any such
accumulation of snow and ice shall be removed within a minimum of 24
hours after termination of the precipitation which caused the snow or
ice to accumulate. No road, street or driveway located in a trailer park
§ 400-6 JACKSON CODE § 400-7
1:1524
§ 400-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person convicted of a violation of this article shall be subject to
imprisonment in the County Jail of the County of Ocean for a term not
exceeding 90 days or to a fine not exceeding $500, or both.
§ 400-9. Number of licenses; number of trailers. [Amended
4-6-1960; 12-5-1972 by Ord. No. 34-72; 6-11-1974 by Ord. No.
21-74]
There shall not be more than four trailer park licenses issued by the
governing body, and no trailer park shall contain more than 60 trailers
within the boundaries of the site for which the license shall be issued.
or family mobile home park shall have a name which will duplicate the
names of any other existing public or private roads or streets located
within the Township of Jackson. All such street names shall be subject
to approval by the Township Committee. [Added 3-14-1978 by Ord.
No. 12-78; amended 4-24-1979 by Ord. No. 18-79; 11-7-1983 by
Ord. No. 59-83213]
213. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall take effect 12 months after final
passage and publication as required by law. Where the requirements for paved roadways
would result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to, or exceptional and undue
hardship upon, the owner of a park, the time for compliance therewith may be extended
by the Township Committee.
§ 400-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-9
1:1525

ARTICLE III
Conversion of Trailer Parks to Mobile Home Parks
[Adopted 4-22-1975 by Ord. No. 18-75 (Ch. 99, Art. III, of the 1972
Code)]
§ 400-10. Conversion of license.
The holder of a trailer park license issued pursuant to §§ 400-1 through
400-9 hereinabove may convert said trailer park license to a family mobile
home park license, provided that all the provisions of Chapter 400, and, in
particular, the provisions of §§ 400-11 through 400-28, are complied with.
§ 400-11. Number of licenses; license fees.
§ 400-12. Application for conversion of license.
A. Number of licenses. The number of licenses permitted to be issued for
the conversion of trailer parks to mobile home parks shall not exceed
four in number.
B. License fees. The annual license fee for each mobile home park shall be
$200. The annual license fee shall be paid to the Township Clerk on
February 1 of each and every year. [Amended 12-28-1981 by Ord.
No. 62-81214]
A. Application for a conversion from a trailer park license to a mobile
home park license shall be filed with the Township Clerk, and such
license shall be issued by the Township Clerk after having received
approval from the Township Committee. The application shall be in
writing, signed by the applicant, and shall include the following:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The location and legal description of the mobile home park.
(3) A complete plan of the park in conformity with the requirements of
this article.
(4) Plans and specifications of all buildings, improvements and
facilities constructed or to be constructed within the park.
(5) Such further information as may be requested by the Township
Clerk or the Township Board of Health.
B. The applicant shall submit appropriate plans and specifications for
sewerage or septic facilities to the local Board of Health for approval
and the applicant must secure the approval of Jackson Township
214. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided as follows: "This ordinance shall become
effective only in the event that mobile homes located in mobile home parks licensed under
the provisions of Chapter 400 of the Jackson Code become taxable as real property. In the
event such mobile homes are not taxable as real property, the provisions of this ordinance
shall not become operative."
§ 400-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-12
1:1527
§ 400-13. Mobile home park requirements.
The mobile home park shall conform to the following requirements:
Municipal Utilities Authority, if necessary, and of the State Board of
Health and other applicable state agencies.
C. The Township Committee shall investigate the applicant and inspect the
application and proposed plans and specifications. The Township
Committee shall be the sole issuing authority under this article. If the
applicant is of good moral character and the proposed mobile home
park will, when constructed or altered in accordance with such plans
and specifications, be in accordance with all the provisions of this
article, the Zoning Ordinance215 and all other applicable ordinances,
the Township Committee shall authorize the Township Clerk to approve
the application. Upon completion, or posting of a performance bond to
guarantee the completion, of the following items of the park, the
Township Committee shall authorize the Township Clerk to issue the
license to operate: all curbing on new streets, streets, lighting, water
supply and sewage and refuse disposal systems to accommodate the
additional mobile homes, as well as recreational, laundry and sanitation
facilities.
A. The park shall be located on a well-drained site, properly graded to
ensure rapid drainage and freedom from stagnant pools of water.
B. Mobile home spaces shall be provided consisting of a maximum of
seven spaces for each acre of ground within the mobile home park.
C. Mobile homes shall be so harbored on each space that there shall be at
least a twenty-five-foot clearance between mobile homes; provided,
however, that with respect to mobile homes parked end to end, the endto-
end clearance may be less than 25 feet but shall not be less than 20
feet. No mobile home shall be located closer than 25 feet away from any
building within the park or from any property line boundary of the park,
or within 75 feet of an existing street or roadway.
D. All mobile home spaces shall abut upon a driveway of not less than 30
feet in width, which shall have unobstructed access to a public street,
alley or highway.
E. Walkways not less than three feet wide shall be provided for access to
service buildings, if any.
F. All driveways and walkways within the park shall be hard-surfaced and
lighted at nights with lights spaced at intervals so as to illuminate
adequately all such driveways and walkways.
215. Editor's Note: See now Ch. 244, Land Use and Development Regulations.
§ 400-12 JACKSON CODE § 400-13
1:1528
§ 400-14. Water supply.
G. Each park shall provide service buildings to house such toilet, bathing
and other sanitation facilities and such laundry facilities as are
hereinafter more particularly prescribed.
H. An electrical receptacle, properly grounded, shall be provided for each
mobile home space, and each mobile home shall be waterproofed and
accessible to the parked mobile home. The receptacle shall supply 115/
230 volts with a minimum rated capacity of 50 amperes. A properly
sized overcurrent device shall be installed as an integral part of each
outlet.
A. An adequate supply of potable water, complying with the Potable Water
Standards established by the State Department of Health of the State of
New Jersey, shall be provided in each mobile home park. The water
shall be obtained from an approved public potable water supply, if
available. If an approved public potable water supply is not available, a
water supply shall be developed in accordance with the Standards for
the Construction of Water Supply Systems for Realty Improvements,
promulgated by the Sate Commissioner of Health pursuant to the
provisions of c. 199, P.L. 1954,216 and approved by the Jackson
Township Board of Health prior to its use.
B. The water supply system shall be piped so as to provide service to all
buildings and to each mobile home space. An individual connection
shall be provided for each mobile home space and so installed that it
will not be damaged by the parking of mobile homes. The connection
shall consist of a riser terminating at least four inches above the ground
surface, with a three-fourths-inch valved outlet threaded so that a
flexible tubing with a screw connection may be attached between the
riser and the home. If the mobile home is disconnected, the outlet shall
be disinfected and capped. The water system piping shall deliver water
to each mobile home space connection at six gallons per minute at 20
pounds per square inch.
C. Potable water shall be stored only in impervious tanks protected
against surface drainage. All tanks shall be provided with watertight
covers, and any overflow or ventilation openings shall be covered with a
metallic screen of not less than No. 16 mesh to prevent the entrance of
insects and vermin. No storage tank shall have a drainage connection
direct to a sewer.
D. No physical (cross-) connection shall be made between an approved
public potable water supply and an unapproved water supply unless it
satisfies the provisions of c. 308, P.L. 1942 (N.J.S.A. 58:11-9.1 et seq.). A
semipublic water supply is considered as an unapproved water supply
for the purpose of this article even though it may meet the Potable
216. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 58:11-23 et seq.
§ 400-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-14
1:1529
§ 400-15. Compliance with minimum requirements; emergency
telephone.
§ 400-16. Certificate of occupancy. [Added 10-26-1976 by Ord. No.
51-76]
Water Standards established by the State Department of Health of the
State of New Jersey.
E. Drinking fountains, if provided, shall be constructed of impervious
material and have an angle jet with the nozzle above the overflow rim of
the bowl. The nozzle shall be protected by a nonoxidizing guard. The
bowl shall be of easily cleanable design, without corners, and the bowl
opening shall be equipped with a strainer.
A. Every park shall comply with the minimum requirements of each and
every state, county and municipal statute, law, code, ordinance and
regulation in connection with the ownership and operation of mobile
home parks, trailer camps and campsites.
B. All mobile home parks licensed under this article shall post in a
conspicuous, public place an emergency phone number which will
provide twenty-four-hour access to the landlord or his agent or
representative. Said number shall also be placed on file with the
Jackson Township Police Department and in the Township Clerk's office.
[Added 12-27-1989 by Ord. No. 49-89]
A. No mobile home or trailer located in a mobile home park licensed to
operate pursuant to §§ 400-10 through 400-28 of the Jackson Code,
whether such mobile home or trailer is sold or rented, shall be occupied
by the vendee, tenant or lessee, as the case may be, until a certificate of
occupancy has been secured from the Building Inspector of the
Township of Jackson certifying that said mobile home or trailer
complies with all applicable state laws and regulations as well as with
all applicable provisions of the Jackson Code.
B. Application shall be made to the Construction Code Official, on a form
to be provided, for a certificate of occupancy. A fee of $5 shall
accompany such application. Inspections shall be made by the
Construction Code Official or his designee. A certificate of occupancy
shall be issued if the mobile home or trailer complies with all applicable
laws, regulations and ordinances; otherwise, the owner shall be notified
in writing of any violations found. The inspection shall be made and
either a certificate of occupancy or a notice of violation shall be issued
within seven days from the date of application. [Amended 3-22-1977
by Ord. No. 8-77]
C. No mobile home or trailer shall be installed or occupied in any mobile
home park unless it is located upon and supported by a concrete pier or
platform of sufficient size and width to accommodate the mobile home
or trailer to be installed.
§ 400-14 JACKSON CODE § 400-16
1:1530
§ 400-17. Sanitation facilities.
Each park accommodating dependent mobile homes shall be provided with
toilets, baths or showers, slop sinks and other sanitation facilities which
shall conform to the following requirements:
§ 400-18. Laundry facilities.
Laundry facilities shall be provided as follows:
§ 400-19. Service and recreational buildings.
D. No mobile home or trailer shall be occupied in any mobile home park
until an inspection is made by the Building Inspector of the Township
certifying that said mobile home or trailer is properly located upon and
supported by a concrete pier or platform of sufficient size and width as
indicated above and that said mobile home or trailer is otherwise
occupiable in accordance with any applicable laws, ordinances or
regulations.
A. Toilet facilities for males shall consist of not less than one flush toilet
and one urinal for the first 15 dependent mobile homes or any less
number thereof, and for dependent mobile homes in excess of 15, not
less than one additional flush toilet for every 10 additional dependent
mobile homes or fractional number thereof.
B. Each toilet and each shower or bathtub with individual dressing
accommodations shall be in a private compartment or stall.
C. The toilet and other sanitation facilities for males and females shall be
either in separate buildings or shall be separated, if in the same
building, by a soundproof wall.
A. Not less than one single-tray laundry and one automatic or
semiautomatic-type washing machine for the first 25 dependent mobile
home spaces or any less number thereof, and for dependent mobile
home spaces in excess of 25, not less than one additional single-tray
laundry and one additional automatic or semiautomatic-type washing
machine for every 25 additional dependent mobile home spaces.
B. An ample number of electrical outlets shall be provided supplying
current sufficient to operate each washing machine. Drying spaces
shall be provided sufficient to accommodate the laundry of the mobile
home occupants if automatic drying equipment is not supplied.
C. The laundry facilities shall be either in a separate building or, if in the
same building where sanitation facilities are housed, shall be separated
from the rooms housing the sanitation facilities by a soundproof wall.
A. All service buildings and the grounds of the park shall be maintained in
a clean, sightly condition and kept free of any condition that will
§ 400-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-19
1:1531
§ 400-20. Sewage and refuse disposal.
menace the health of any occupant or the public or constitute a
nuisance.
B. Every mobile home park shall provide at least 200 square feet of
recreation area for each mobile home space within the park. Said
recreation area shall be located entirely within one section of the park,
unless authority issuing the license permit shall permit the recreational
area to be divided into two or more locations. Such recreation area shall
be located so as to be convenient to the residents of the mobile home
park.
A. Mobile home parks accommodating 80 mobile homes or fewer shall be
permitted to maintain individual sewage disposal systems, consisting of
suitable septic tanks and laterals. No septic tank shall be connected by
laterals to more than seven mobile homes. Notwithstanding the
provisions of this section, individual sewage disposal systems or other
means of private sewage disposal shall not be permitted where a public
sanitary sewer is available within 100 feet of the site of the mobile home
park.
B. Where sewer lines are not to be connected to a public sewer system, an
individual sewage disposal system shall be constructed and installed in
accordance with Standards for the Construction of Sewerage Facilities
for Realty Improvements, promulgated by the New Jersey State
Commissioner of Health, and shall be approved by the State
Department of Health and the Jackson Township Board of Health prior
to use.
C. Each mobile home space shall be provided with a building sewer
installed in accordance with the requirements of Regulation 4.1 of the
New Jersey State Sanitary Code, Chapter IX, Mobile Home Parks. The
building sewer shall be at least four inches in diameter, constructed of
cast iron, extra strength.
D. The sewer inlet shall consist of a four-inch riser extending, as a
minimum, four inches above the surface of the ground in order that a
pipe connection from the mobile home can be made. The riser shall be
embedded firmly in the ground and be protected against heaving and
shifting.
E. The sewer riser shall be equipped, with a forty-five-degree ell or
quarter bend, fitted with a standard ferrule and close nipple and
provided with a screw cap. The screw cap shall be fastened by a durable
chain to prevent its removal while the sewer riser is in use. When the
sewer riser is not in use, it shall be capped.
F. The sewer connection pipe shall be provided with suitable fittings to
permit a watertight junction. The connections between the mobile
home drain and the sewer shall be watertight, self-draining and shall be
§ 400-19 JACKSON CODE § 400-20
1:1532
§ 400-21. Garbage receptacles.
Metal garbage cans with tight-fitting covers shall be provided in quantities
adequate to permit disposal of all garbage and rubbish. Garbage cans shall
be located not further than 200 feet from any mobile home space. The cans
shall be kept in sanitary condition at all times. Garbage and rubbish shall be
collected and disposed of as frequently as may be necessary to ensure that
the garbage cans shall not overflow.
§ 400-22. Register of occupants.
effected by a noncollapsible, corrosion- and weather-resistant flexible
hose of suitable diameter to fit the drain and the building sewer.
G. The mobile home park owner shall maintain in good repair several
spare connecting pipes to be used when privately owned pipes do not
meet the requirements of this article.
H. Sewer lines and appurtenances shall be laid in accordance with the
following requirements:
(1) Minimum size: six inches, except building sewer.
(2) Grade.
Pipe Size
(inches) Minimum Grade
6 0.65%
8 0.40%
10 0.29%
12 0.22%
(3) Construction. All sewer line joints, sewer connections and
manholes shall be watertight.
(4) Manholes. At the upper end of each sewer line, at intersections, at
changes in grade or alignment, at intervals of not more than 500
feet when the pipe is eight inches in diameter or greater, when the
pipe is less than eight inches in diameter, manholes or cleanouts
shall be at intervals of not more than 200 feet.
(5) Installation: preferably laid in trenches separated horizontally from
any potable waterline by at least five feet of undisturbed or wellcompacted
earth. If laid in a common trench with the potable
waterline, the potable waterline shall be placed on firm foundation
at the side of the trench at least 12 inches above the sewer.
A. It shall be the duty of each licensee to keep a register containing a
record of all mobile home owners and occupants located within the
park. The register shall contain the following information:
§ 400-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-22
1:1533
§ 400-23. Fire protection.
Every park shall be equipped at all times with fire-extinguishing equipment
in good working order, of such type, size and number and so located
within the park as to satisfy applicable reasonable regulations of the Fire
Department. No open fires shall be permitted at any place which may
endanger life or property. No fires shall be left unattended at any time.
§ 400-24. Supervision.
The licensee or a duly authorized attendant or caretaker shall be in charge
at all times to keep the park, its facilities and equipment in a clean, orderly
and sanitary condition. The attendant or caretaker shall be answerable,
with the licensee, for the violation of any provision of this article to which
the license is subject.
§ 400-25. Compliance with other laws.
In addition to the specifications and requirements set forth in this article,
every licensee shall comply with all applicable provisions and standards
of the New Jersey State Sanitary Code and all state, county and Jackson
Township statutes, codes, ordinances, rules and regulations.
§ 400-26. Posting of license.
The license certificate shall be conspicuously posted in the office or on the
premises of the park at all times.
§ 400-27. Increase in number of sites.
In the event an applicant is permitted to convert a trailer park license to
a family mobile home park license, he may increase the capacity of such
(1) The name and address of each mobile home occupant.
(2) The name and address of the owner of each mobile home.
(3) The make, model, year and license number of each mobile home
and motor vehicle.
(4) The state, territory or country issuing said licenses.
(5) The date of arrival and departure of each mobile home.
(6) Whether or not each mobile home is a dependent or independent
mobile home.
(7) The ages of each occupant of every mobile home.
B. The park shall keep the register available for inspection at all times by
law enforcement officers, public health officials, the Township Clerk
and other officials whose duties necessitate acquisition of the
information contained in the register.
§ 400-22 JACKSON CODE § 400-27
1:1534
park to 80 mobile home sites, provided that all required Zoning Board of
Adjustment, Planning Board and other requirements have been met.
§ 400-28. Revocation of license.
The Township Clerk may revoke any license to maintain and operate a park
when the licensee has been found guilty by a court of competent jurisdiction
of violating any provision of this article. After such conviction, the license
may be reissued if the circumstances leading to conviction have been
remedied and the park is being maintained and operated in full compliance
with law.
§ 400-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-28
1:1535
Chapter 405
TREE REMOVAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use and development regulations — See
Ch. 244.
§ 405-1. Intent and purpose.
A. Indiscriminate, uncontrolled and excess destruction, removal and
cutting of trees upon lots and tracts of land within Jackson Township
will cause increased drainage control costs, increased soil erosion and
sedimentation, decreased fertility of the soil, degradation of water
resources, decreased groundwater recharge, increased buildup of
atmospheric carbon dioxide, the establishment of a heat island effect
and increased dust and pollution. The singular or cumulative affect of
any of the foregoing could adversely impact the character of Jackson
Township, decrease property values, render the land unfit and
unsuitable for its most appropriate use, and negatively affect the
health, safety and general welfare of Jackson's residents. Thus, the
Township governing body desires to regulate and control indiscriminate
and excessive cutting of trees within the Township and to require
appropriate tree replacement.
B. It is recognized that there is a strong interrelationship between the
integrity of the Township's water resources, development on steep
slopes, tree removal, soil disturbance, stormwater management and the
general use of the land resources. Fewer trees throughout the Township
also correlates with increased air pollution. Therefore, the governing
body finds that the appropriate management of these resources is an
important health, safety and general welfare concern. Managing the
Township's tree resources is consistent with the state-approved
community forestry management plan, as in P.L. 1996, c. 135.217 The
appropriate management guidelines for tree preservation to be utilized
are:
(1) The American National Standard, ANSI A300 (Part 5) —
Management;
(2) Trees and Development: A Technical Guide to Preservation of Trees
During Land Development, Nelda Matheny and James R. Clark; and
(3) Protection and Care of the Urban Forest, NJDEP Division of Parks
and Forestry.
217. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:1L-17.1 et seq.
§ 400-28 JACKSON CODE § 405-1
1:1536
§ 405-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CALIPER: ANSI Z60 FOR NURSERY STOCK — "Caliper" is a type of
diameter measurement used in the nursery industry. The height
measurement shall be taken from ground level for field-grown stock and
from the soil line for container-grown stock, which should be at or near
the top of the root flare. Caliper measurement of the trunk shall be taken
six inches above the top of root flare up to and including four-inch caliper
size. If the caliper at six inches above the ground exceeds four inches, the
caliper should be measured at 12 inches above the top of root flare. Seldom
are tree trunks perfectly round. The most accurate measurement will result
from the use of a diameter tape. Caliper measurements taken with manual
or electronic slot or pincer type caliper tools should be the average of the
smallest and largest measurements.
COMMUNITY FORESTRY MANAGEMENT PLAN — A plan developed by a
municipality that outlines the goals and objectives for managing trees on
municipal property with the intent of minimizing liability to the municipality
and maximizing the useful life of the tree resource. The plan is to be
approved by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection,
Division of Parks and Forestry, New Jersey Forest Service. A Shade Tree
Commission shall be formed to oversee the implementation of the
community forestry management plan.
DIAMETER BREAST HEIGHT (DBH) — The diameter of a tree measured
4 1/2 feet above the uphill/highest side.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, ice, wind and gravity.
C. Trees are declared to be an important cultural, ecological, scenic and
economic resource. Proper management of this resource will ensure its
maintenance and result in economic returns. A forestry management
program is intended to meet the objectives of preserving, protecting,
enhancing and maintaining trees and providing opportunities for the
continued use of forest resources which are compatible with the
maintenance of the environment. This will be accomplished by ensuring
management of forest and trees through the application of sound
management practices. To that end, it shall be unlawful to cut down,
damage, poison or in any other manner destroy or cause to be
destroyed any trees covered by this chapter, except in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter.
D. The enforcement of this chapter shall be the duty of the Shade Tree
Commission of Jackson Township and its agents, such as the Tree
Specialist, through the regulation, planting, care and control of shade,
ornamental and evergreen trees and shrubs in the streets, highways,
public places of the Township and tree removal on all lands within the
Township.
§ 405-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 405-2
1:1537
EXEMPT AREA — The lot area as provided in this chapter for which tree
replacement shall not be required.
FOREST MANAGEMENT PLAN — A plan for the management of timbered
or forested lands approved by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, New Jersey Forest Service, or similar state or federal agency.
HISTORIC TREE — A tree that has been found to be of notable historic
interest to Jackson Township because of its age, type, size or historic
association and which has been so designated and that designation has
been officially made and promulgated as part of the official records of the
Township.
OPEN SPACE — Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved
and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public or private use
and enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of
land adjoining or neighboring such open spaces, provided that such areas
may be improved with only those buildings, structures, streets and off-street
parking and other improvements that are designated to be incidental to the
natural openness of the land.
SHADE TREE COMMISSION — Shade tree commissions can be formed by
municipal ordinance, N.J.S.A. 40:64-1 et seq.
SPECIMEN TREE — Any tree in fair or better condition which is so
designated by the Shade Tree Commission based on considerations of
whether the tree is a rare species or specimen thereof; is abnormal in
height, trunk diameter or dripline circumference for a tree of its species;
has foliage of an unusual quality for a tree of its species; occupies a location
which confers special shade tree, fragrance, erosion control, aesthetic,
scenic enhancement, historic, preservation or cultural values to the
community. For purposes of this definition, "in fair or better condition" shall
mean that a tree has a relatively sound and solid trunk with no evidence of
extensive decay or visual evidence of being hollow and with no major insect
or pathological problem.
TREE — Any deciduous or coniferous species which has a DBH of six inches
or greater.
TREE ESCROW FUND — A fund established by the governing body for the
administration and promotion of tree and shrubbery resource sustainability
projects and practices which may be consistent with the Community
Stewardship Incentive Program as outlined within the New Jersey Shade
Tree and Community Forestry Assistance Act, P.L. 1996, c. 135.218
TREE PLANTING PLAN — A specific plan adopted by Jackson Township for
the location and placement of trees on public property.
TREE PRESERVATION AND REMOVAL PLAN (TREE SAVE PLAN) — A
specific plan that contains tree locations and other information in
accordance with § 405-5 herein.
218. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:1L-17.1 et seq.
§ 405-2 JACKSON CODE § 405-2
1:1538
TREE REMOVAL PERMIT — The permit issued by the Shade Tree
Commission or its designee to remove or destroy a tree or trees.
TREE REPLACEMENT PLAN — A specific plan for replacement of removed
trees in accordance with the provision of this chapter.
TREE SPECIALIST —
§ 405-3. Applicability.
The terms and provisions of this chapter shall apply as follows:
The Mayor shall appoint a Tree Specialist. This individual shall be
responsible for the inspection of sites for which application(s) are
filed under this chapter. This individual will be responsible for the
administration and protection requirements of this chapter and
enforcement of the chapter as directed by the Shade Tree Commission.
A.
A Tree Specialist is either of the following:
A forester who shall have a bachelor's degree in forestry or
arboriculture from a college or university, shall be certified as a
certified tree expert by the State of New Jersey and shall have
a minimum of three years' experience in planting, care and
maintenance of trees. The forester shall have the responsibility of
reviewing an approved forest management plan and inspecting the
forested site for plan compliance if requested by the Tax Assessor.
(1)
A conservation officer who shall be certified as a certified tree
expert by the State of New Jersey and shall have a minimum of
three years' experience in planting, care and maintenance of trees.
(2)
B.
The Tree Specialist shall be paid from the Tree Escrow Fund, which is
established herein, and shall be paid in accordance with a fee schedule
established by contract with the municipality.
C.
A. Unless specifically excepted in Subsection C below, it shall be unlawful
for any person to remove or cause to remove trees with a DBH of six
inches or more without first having obtained a tree removal permit as
provided herein.
B. Specimen and historic trees.
(1) Trees which have been designated as specimen or historic under
the provisions of this chapter shall be maintained in a living
condition, and it shall be unlawful for any person to remove such
tree without an approved tree removal permit. No specimen or
historic tree shall be removed unless the applicant has obtained the
approval of the Shade Tree Commission.
(2) The condition of trees proposed to be saved shall be evaluated by
use of guides as follows:
§ 405-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 405-3
1:1539
§ 405-4. Tree removal permits.
(a) Evaluation of Hazard Trees in Urban Areas, ISA Books, Nelda
Matheny and James R. Clark.
(b) Urban Tree Risk Management, USDA Forest Service,
Northeastern Area.
(c) The Guide for Plant Appraisal, the Council of Tree and
Landscape Appraisers.
C. Exceptions. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the
following:
(1) Any property upon which no trees are located, as confirmed by a
statement of no tree verification.
(2) Any tree of less than six inches DBH.
(3) Any tree or trees removed or cut in accordance with a forest
management plan, provided that such plan is filed with the Tree
Specialist, Shade Tree Commission and Tax Assessor.
(4) Any tree or trees removed or cut in accordance with an approved
conservation plan prepared by the Soil Conservation District,
provided that such plan has been filed with the Shade Tree
Commission and Tax Assessor.
(5) Any tree or trees planted and grown for commercial purposes on
property used as a commercial nursery, tree farm, garden center,
Christmas tree plantation or tree orchard.
(6) Any tree growing in a utility right-of-way or fire trail subject to the
approval of the Shade Tree Commission.
A. Any person wishing to obtain a tree removal permit shall make
application to the Shade Tree Commission by filing a written
application with the Tree Specialist and paying such fees as are set
forth in § 405-8. No permit shall be issued until a tree preservation and
removal plan for the lot or parcel has been reviewed and approved as
compliant with § 405-5 by the Tree Specialist.
B. Where an application, as required by this chapter, has been submitted,
no permit shall be issued until a tree save plan for the lot or parcel, if
necessary, has been reviewed and approved as compliant with § 405-5
by the Tree Specialist, and until the filing of a written report of an onsite
inspection by the Tree Specialist. Where an application is made in
connection with the construction of a building or other improvement,
no building permit shall be issued until the tree removal permit has
been issued.
§ 405-3 JACKSON CODE § 405-4
1:1540
§ 405-5. Tree preservation and removal plan.
A tree preservation and removal plan shall be submitted to the Tree
Specialist's office. Applications that require Planning Board or Zoning
Board approval shall have tree preservation and removal plans as part
of the submittal to the Planning Board or Zoning Board and said plans
provided to the Tree Specialist for review and approval in accordance
with this chapter. Tree preservation and removal plans shall contain the
following:
C. All required escrow and bond fees for any application, including
required tree replacements or fees, shall be verified as paid prior to the
issuance of the tree removal permit.
D. Tree removal permit applications shall be filed at the Tree Specialist's
office and shall be completed in full. The application must be deemed
complete and all required fees, as set forth in § 405-8, be paid prior to
review.
E. Inspections. After the application is complete and reviewed, the Tree
Specialist shall inspect the trees and property which are the subject of
the permit application within 30 days.
F. Permit approval or denial. The Tree Specialist shall approve or deny the
tree removal permit within 10 business days after completion of the
inspection. The Tree Specialist shall notify the applicant in writing of
the factual basis and criteria for any denial. The final decision of the
Tree Specialist may be appealed to the governing body by filing written
notice within 10 days of the final decision. The governing body shall
hold a public hearing and issue its decision within 60 days after notice
of appeal is filed, unless the applicant requests and the governing body
consents to an extension of time. The governing body may delegate its
appeal responsibilities to the Shade Tree Commission.
A. The name and address of the applicant.
B. The name and address of the owner of the property from which the
trees are to be removed.
C. The lot and block of the property.
D. The shape and dimensions of the lot or parcel, including the location of
all existing and proposed easements. If the tree removal permit is for a
single-family residence, the plan shall consist of a tree location sketch
containing the minimum amount of pertinent information to enable the
determination of compliance with the regulations in this chapter,
including the information set forth in Subsection D(1), (2), (6) and (8)
below. The plan for any other property shall include a survey prepared
by a licensed land surveyor that contains tree locations. The survey
shall contain, at a scale of no less than one inch equals 50 feet, the
following information:
§ 405-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 405-5
1:1541
§ 405-6. Term of permit.
Any and all permits approved by the Shade Tree Commission shall be
declared null and void if the tree removal is not completed within a
reasonable time, not to exceed 12 months after permit issuance. In no case
will the permit be valid for more than 12 months. Permits not used within
this period will require a new application and the payment of new fees. For
purposes of this section, a permit shall no longer be valid when the work
authorized by the permit is completed.
§ 405-7. Criteria for issuance of permits.
(1) The existing and proposed tree preservation limits.
(2) The proposed limit of the clearing and all individual trees to be
retained outside the tree clearing identified by some approved
method as determined by the Tree Specialist, such as flagging,
prior to the field inspection. For any clearing greater than or equal
to three acres, a representative 5% of the wooded areas proposed
to be cleared shall be inventoried. The representative 5% shall be
determined by agreement between the Tree Specialist and the
applicant. Where less than three acres is proposed to be cleared, all
trees to be removed shall be inventoried.
(3) The installation and limits of a temporary existing tree protection
fence along the limits of the proposed tree removal shall be in
compliance with § 405-10.
(4) Locations of all forest types shall be identified by common and
botanical names of dominant tree species.
(5) All specimen and historic trees to be removed shall be indicated on
the plan. All reasonable efforts shall be made to preserve such
trees, including, but not limited to, if feasible, relocation of
infrastructure, roadways and buildings. Removal of such trees shall
require specific written approval of the governing body with
consideration of the Shade Tree Commission's recommendations.
(6) A proposed tree replacement plan in accordance with this chapter.
A tree replacement plan shall be considered the proposed
landscaping plan required for all subdivision and site plan
approvals.
(7) A North arrow.
(8) The location of existing and proposed structures and
improvements, if any.
A. Upon completion of the Tree Specialist's field inspection report and
review of any requested recommendations, the Tree Specialist shall
approve a permit if:
§ 405-5 JACKSON CODE § 405-7
1:1542
§ 405-8. Fees.
(1) The tree preservation and removal plan is compliant with § 405-5;
(2) The tree replacement plan is approved by the Tree Specialist;
(3) None of the conditions set forth below in Subsection B exists;
(4) At least one of the criteria as follows has been satisfied:
(a) The tree is located in an area where a structure or
improvements will be placed in accordance with the approval
of Planning/Zoning Boards and the tree cannot be relocated on
the site because of age, type or size of the tree.
(b) The tree is dead, diseased, injured, in danger of falling, is too
close to existing or proposed structures, interferes with
existing utility service, creates unsafe vision or clearance or
conflicts with other ordinances or regulations.
(c) The tree is to be removed for harvesting as a commercial
product or for the purpose of making land available for farming
or other agricultural activity, or is to be removed in furtherance
of a forest management plan or soil conservation plan, or to
serve some other purpose which is consistent with the
purposes of this chapter.
B. The Tree Specialist may deny a permit if the removal will contribute to
extra runoff of surface water onto adjacent properties, erosion or
silting, and such conditions are not otherwise satisfactorily abated, or if
the tree removal causes:
(1) Impairment to the growth or development of remaining trees on
the applicant's property or upon adjacent properties;
(2) Soil instability;
(3) Dust;
(4) Drainage or sewerage problems;
(5) Dangerous or hazardous conditions; or
(6) Depression of the value of adjacent properties.
A. Application.
(1) The applicant, at time of filing the application with the Tree
Specialist, shall pay the application fee of $10 for each new or
existing lot. No application shall be considered without the
payment of the required fees. An inspection fee of $25 will be
applied to all applications requiring an on-site verification.
(2) The replacement fee will be in accordance with § 405-9.
§ 405-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 405-8
1:1543
§ 405-9. Replacement trees.
B. Tree Escrow Fund.
(1) A Tree Escrow Fund shall be established and maintained by the
Chief Financial Officer of Jackson Township to receive and disburse
replacement tree contributions. Appropriations from the Tree Fund
shall be authorized by the governing body with consideration of the
Shade Tree Commission recommendation in accordance with the
municipal tree planting plan.
(2) The primary purpose of said fund is to provide for the planting and
maintenance of trees and shrubs on public property. The fund will
also cover administrative costs to implement the provisions of this
chapter, including but not limited to site inspections, processing of
permits and supervision of tree replacements. Administrative costs
imposed in accordance with this chapter shall not exceed 30% of
the fund, as determined on an annual basis.
A. Tree replacement schedule.
(1) Any tree removed pursuant to this chapter, unless exempt under
§ 405-3C, shall be replaced based on the following:
Number
of Trees
to be
Removed
Size/
Diameter
(inches)
Number of
Replacement
Trees
Size of
Replacement
Trees
Or Dollar
Amount
1 Greater than
6 up to 10
1 2 to 2 1/2 $240
2 Greater than
6 up to 10
1 3 1/2 to 4 $420
1 Greater than
10 up to 16
2 2 to 2 1/2 $480
1 Greater than
16 up to 23
2 3 $840
1 Greater than
23 up to 30
4 3 1/2 to 4 $1,680
1 Greater than
30
5 3 1/2 to 4 $2,100
(2) In cases where the tree cost requirement criteria is combined with
other criteria of this subsection, the value of proposed shade,
ornamental, evergreen and shrub material shall be deducted from
the calculated amount for replacement trees. The value of the
proposed landscape material shall be calculated based upon
average local material costs for planting.
§ 405-8 JACKSON CODE § 405-9
1:1544
§ 405-10. Protection of existing trees during construction.
B. The applicant will receive a one-for-one replacement tree credit should
stands of 10 or more trees greater than four inches in diameter be
preserved within the limit of the disturbance line.
C. All replacement trees shall be planted on site in accordance with the
foregoing. However, if one or more of the following conditions exist,
some or all of the replacement trees may be planted off site:
(1) The site in question cannot physically accommodate the total
replacement amount of trees, and the applicant contributes an
amount equal to the calculated monetary value of nonreplaced
trees to the Tree Escrow Fund; or
(2) The Tree Specialist and applicant agree in writing that the
applicant shall make payment to the Tree Escrow Fund based upon
the chart provided; or
(3) The Tree Specialist and applicant agree in writing that the
applicant shall plant replacement trees off site on municipally
owned property pursuant to the municipal tree planting plan.
D. Notwithstanding the tree replacement fee schedule in Subsection A
above, in all commercial and industrial applications, the tree
replacement fee shall be $25 per tree, with a maximum amount of
$2,500 per acre. Specimen and historic trees shall not be included in
this fee calculation, but shall be assessed a separate fee in accordance
with the fee schedule provided in Subsection A above.
A. Protective barriers.
(1) Prior to construction and any tree removals, suitable tree
protective barriers shall be erected, and this protection, where
required, shall remain until such time as the protection is
authorized to be removed by the Tree Specialist or after issuance of
a final certificate of occupancy. In addition, during construction, no
attachments or wires shall be attached to any of said trees so
protected. Where some grading must take place within the dripline
of trees in the protection zone, appropriate measures shall be taken
to minimize impact to the trees. Any trees seriously damaged
during construction must be professionally treated by a New Jersey
certified tree expert or replaced if the damage is beyond treatment.
(2) A detail of the existing tree self-supported protective barrier shall
be provided on all applications. The protective barrier shall be a
minimum of four feet high.
(3) The self-supported protective barrier shall be placed, as
determined by the Tree Specialist, at the dripline of any tree along
the limit of clearing and around the entire dripline for trees to
§ 405-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 405-10
1:1545
§ 405-11. Tree replacement.
Any tree removed pursuant to a tree removal permit shall be replaced
as provided below, unless said tree is located in an exempt area, is dead
or fatally diseased as determined by a certified tree expert, or tree
replacement payment is made pursuant to § 405-9. Tree replacement shall
be required in accordance with the standards set forth in ANSI Z60.1,
American Standard for Nursery Stock. Tree replacement shall be in
accordance with either Subsection A, B, C or D below or a combination of
Subsections A, B, C and D.
remain undisturbed within the limit of clearing. Refer to: Trees and
Development, Table 6.2, page 74.
(4) It shall be unlawful for any person in the construction of any
structure or other improvement to place solvents, material,
construction machinery or temporary soil deposits within the
dripline.
B. Street right-of-way and utility easements may be delineated by placing
stakes a minimum of 50 feet apart and tying ribbon, plastic tape, rope,
etc., from stake to stake along the outside perimeters of such areas to
be cleared.
C. Large property areas separate from construction and land clearing
areas into which no equipment will venture may also be delineated as
set forth above in § 405-10B, as determined by the Tree Specialist
following a field evaluation.
A. One-to-one tree replacement. For each tree six inches in DBH or
greater that is removed, the applicant shall prepare a replanting plan
for other areas of the property. The replacement plan or landscape plan
shall reflect a one-to-one tree replacement for each tree six inches or
greater to be removed. All proposed replacement trees shall be in
accordance with selections from Trees For New Jersey Streets,
published by the New Jersey Shade Tree Federation, and Street Tree
Factsheets, a publication of the Municipal Tree Restoration Program,
and submitted for review and approval prior to the issuance of a tree
removal permit.
B. Tree area replacement/reforestation. For each square foot of tree area
to be removed, the applicant shall prepare a reforestation scheme on
other treeless open space areas of the property to compensate for the
tree removals. The reforestation plan shall be based on a twenty-footby-
twenty-foot grid. Of this number of trees, 10% shall be balled and
burlaped, two-inch to two-and-one-half-inch caliper; 20% shall be balled
and burlaped, one-and-three-fourths-inch to two-inch caliper; 30% shall
be bare root one-and-one-fourth-inch to one-and-one-half-inch caliper;
and 40% shall be bare root six-foot- to eight-foot-tall whips. A mixture of
trees, indigenous to the area and site, shall be utilized. Proposed trees
shall be planted in natural groves and may be spaced five feet to 20 feet
§ 405-10 JACKSON CODE § 405-11
1:1546
on center. The ground shall be seeded with a grass mixture approved
by the Shade Tree Commission. The reforestation formula shall follow
the guidelines as set forth in the New Jersey No Net Loss Reforestation
Act, P.L. 1993, c. 106 (N.J.S.A. 13:1L-14.2).
C. Credits. The permit applicant will receive a one-to-one replacement
tree credit:
(1) For stands of 10 or more trees with a DBH of six inches or greater
preserved within the limit of the disturbance line; or
(2) Forested areas of one acre or greater, which are left natural and
conveyed to the Township with a deed restriction that they will
remain forested and undeveloped. This conveyance excludes all
previous dedicated easements.
D. All replacement trees shall be planted on site, unless all of the
replacement trees cannot be physically accommodated. In such
instance, the applicant shall pay the tree replacement fee in accordance
with the schedule in § 405-9.
E. Exempt areas.
(1) For all existing residential properties and new residential
development with a proposed lot area of less than 40,000 square
feet, up to 50% of the lot area may be exempt area. For residential
development with a proposed area of 40,000 square feet or greater,
up to 20,000 square feet in area may be exempt area. The exempt
area shall be calculated as a contiguous, circular area from a fixed
point within the footprint of the existing or proposed primary
residential structure on the property. The exempt area should be
calculated to minimize any adverse environmental impacts.
(2) Agricultural operations are exempt from replacement
requirements because such operations are governed by the Right
to Farm Act, N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 to 4:1C-10, which preempts local
regulation. Property owners claiming exemption under this
subsection must continue to farm the property in question as
described on the tree removal permit for a minimum of five
consecutive years after the date of clearing or date of
commencement of the prescribed farming activity that is deemed
compliant by the Tree Specialist. An approved permit must be
submitted prior to clearing. If the property is not farmed as
prescribed on the tree removal permit within three years of the
tree removal or is developed for any other use before the five years
expires, the reforestation replacement obligation in accordance
with § 405-11B will be enforced according to the new use of the
property.
(3) In all commercial, industrial and nonresidential developments, with
a proposed buildable lot area less than 40,000 square feet, up to
50% of the lot area may be exempt area. For development with a
§ 405-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 405-11
1:1547
§ 405-12. Emergencies.
In case of emergencies, such as hurricanes, fire, windstorm, ice storm,
flood, freezing temperatures or other disaster, or in the case of dead or
diseased trees which are a hazard to persons or property, the requirements
of the regulations set forth in this chapter may be waived by the Tree
Specialist upon a finding that such waiver is necessary so that the public or
private work to restore order on the property in the Township will not be
impeded.
§ 405-13. Stop-work orders.
§ 405-14. Enforcement.
The Shade Tree Commission in conjunction with the Tree Specialist shall
oversee all tree removals pursuant to an issued tree removal permit. The
Tree Specialist shall conduct adequate inspections of all sites for which a
tree removal permit has been issued. Upon the ascertainment of a violation
of this chapter, the Tree Specialist or Shade Tree Commission shall refer
enforcement actions to the Code Enforcement Officer.
proposed buildable area of 40,000 square feet or greater, up to
20,000 square feet in area may be exempt area. The exempt area
shall be calculated as a contiguous, circular area from a fixed point
within the footprint of the existing or proposed primary structure
on the property. The exempt area should be calculated to minimize
any adverse environmental impacts.
(4) Utility line clearance operations, provided that such plan is filed
with the Tree Specialist and work performed in accordance with
ANSI A300 Part 7: BMP Utility Pruning of Trees, and Board of Tree
Experts Pruning Standards for Shade Trees, Section 5.5.
A. The Shade Tree Commission is hereby authorized to issue stop-work
orders to the holder of the tree removal permit, and the Tree Specialist
is authorized to recommend the issuance of stop-work orders in the
event that there is:
(1) A failure to comply with the approved plan, such as a site plan,
forest management plan or soil conservation plan;
(2) Noncompliance with the tree removal permit granted pursuant to
this chapter; or
(3) Noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. The stop-work order shall remain in effect until the Shade Tree
Commission, upon recommendation of the Tree Specialist, has
determined that the resumption of work will not violate the plans,
permit or the provisions of this chapter.
§ 405-11 JACKSON CODE § 405-15
1:1548
§ 405-15. Applicability to tree removal construction companies;
permit required.
All provisions of this chapter shall apply to any person removing trees
on behalf of any other person, including all tree removal construction
companies or persons in the business of removing trees or construction.
It shall be unlawful for any person or company to remove or cause to be
removed any tree or undertake any work for which a permit is required
pursuant to this chapter unless a valid permit therefor is in effect and
is displayed in accordance with the provisions set forth in § 405-16; such
removal or work shall constitute a violation of this section and shall subject
the person or company violating this section to all penalties provided
herein.
§ 405-16. Display of permit; carrying of plan or authorization; right
of entry.
§ 405-17. Duties of Tree Specialist.
The Tree Specialist shall perform the duties set forth in this chapter and
shall be responsible for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter as
A. The applicant shall prominently display on the site the tree removal
permit issued. Such permit shall be displayed continuously while trees
are being removed or replaced or work done as authorized on the
permit and for 10 days thereafter. In addition, the person or persons
cutting or removing trees, if other than the applicant, shall carry with
him/her authorization from the owner or applicant authorizing such
person to cut or remove trees. In the event that the trees are being cut
or removed in accordance with a forest management plan or a soil
conservation plan, a copy of the plan shall be in the possession of the
person cutting or removing such trees.
B. As a condition for the issuance of the permit, the applicant shall agree
in writing to the entry onto his/her premises by the Tree Specialist and
all law enforcement officers as necessary to effectuate the provisions of
this chapter, and such entries shall be deemed lawful. Failure to allow
such entry shall be unlawful and shall constitute a violation of this
chapter and shall constitute failure to display the permit as required
herein. It shall be unlawful and considered a violation of this chapter for
any person to engage in the business of plant cutting, trimming,
removal, spraying or otherwise treating trees, shrubs or vines within
the Township and without the applicable certification or license for the
designated work. All contractors offering tree care services for hire
within Jackson Township shall register annually with the Tree
Specialist, provide a current certificate of insurance showing evidence
of employer liability and workers' compensation coverage for the work
to be performed, and shall comply with applicable OSHA regulations,
ANSI Z133.1 Safety Standards, New Jersey Board of Tree Experts
Pruning Standards for Shade Trees and ANSI A300 Practice Standards.
§ 405-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 405-17
1:1549
directed by the Shade Tree Commission. In this regard, the Tree Specialist
is authorized and shall perform any necessary inspections and is further
authorized and shall issue violation notices and shall sign complaints and
provide testimony in the Municipal Court for violations of this chapter.
§ 405-18. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 412
TRESPASSING ON PUBLIC PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public use of buildings and facilities — See
Ch. 121.
Curfew — See Ch. 172.
§ 412-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings
indicated:
MUNICIPAL PUBLIC PROPERTY — Any lands, buildings, premises, public
grounds, areas and parks which are owned, possessed or controlled by
a municipal public agency, including but not limited to the Township of
Jackson, the Board of Education of the Township of Jackson, the Jackson
Township Municipal Utilities Authority, the Board of Recreation
Commissioners of the Township of Jackson, the Industrial Commission of the
Township of Jackson and the Board of Fire Commissioners of the Township
of Jackson.
PARENT or GUARDIAN — Any adult person having care or custody of a
minor, whether by reason of blood relationship, the order of any court or
otherwise.
A. Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, association or other legal
entity violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction of such violation, be punished by a fine of up to $2,000 for
each offense, in the discretion of the Judge before whom conviction may
be had. Each illegally removed tree shall be considered a separate
violation. Each violation of any of the provisions of this chapter and
each day the same is violated shall be defined and taken to be a
separate and distinct offense. In addition, the court may order
restitution (fine and/or appraised value, whichever is greater) and/or
replacement of the tree illegally removed.
B. In addition to other remedies, the Shade Tree Commission, Tree
Specialist or other authorized official may institute any appropriate
legal action to prevent a continuing violation of the terms of this
chapter.
§ 405-17 JACKSON CODE § 412-2
1:1550
§ 412-2. Certain acts prohibited.
§ 412-3. Order to leave; noncompliance; nonapplicability.
§ 412-4. Presumption of violation.
The continued presence of any person or persons on municipal public
property after having been ordered to leave such property or the continued
repeated presence of any person or persons on municipal public property
after having been ordered to leave such property shall be deemed to be a
refusal to leave by such person or persons after being ordered to do so and
shall be presumed to be a violation of this chapter.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to enter onto or be
present upon or within municipal public property without the
permission of the public agency having title to, possession of or control
of such municipal public property.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to drive or park a motor
vehicle or motorized vehicle on or upon or within municipal public
property or facilities, except that the driving or parking of duly licensed
or registered motor vehicles on public streets or in designated parking
areas while such parking areas are open to the public shall be
permitted. [Added 6-28-1977 by Ord. No. 29-77]
C. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to drive a motor vehicle
on, upon or through municipal public property or facilities, or to use
such municipal public property as a way or place for passage or as a
thoroughfare, where such municipal public property has posted
thereon, or at entrances thereto, signs bearing the notation "No
Thoroughfare, Code Ch. 412." [Added 4-24-1979 by Ord. No. 16-79]
D. The parking of motor vehicles by visitors to a public facility in parking
areas designated for use by such visitors shall be permitted. [Added
6-2-1980 by Ord. No. 18-80]
A. Whenever any police officer or any official or employee of the municipal
public agency having title, possession or control of municipal public
property finds any person or persons on, present upon or within such
municipal public property without permission, said police officer,
official or employee shall order that person or those persons to leave
such municipal public property. Any person who shall fail or refuse to
leave such municipal public property after being ordered to do so by a
police officer or by an official or employee as aforesaid shall be guilty of
a violation of this chapter.
B. The provisions of this chapter shall not be applicable to any public
street, highway, road, alley or sidewalk, nor to any public park or
recreation facility during hours when they are open to the public, nor to
any public building during normal business hours or at such times when
the public is permitted to attend meetings or sessions of public bodies.
§ 412-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 412-5
1:1551
§ 412-5. Violations by minors.
§ 412-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine not exceeding $500 or by imprisonment
not exceeding 90 days, or both, in the discretion of the court.
Chapter 418
VEHICLES AND OTHER MACHINERY, ABANDONED OR
INOPERABLE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 103.
Garbage, rubbish and waste material — See
Ch. 216.
Junk and junk dealers — See Ch. 239.
Unlicensed vehicles — See Ch. 431.
§ 418-1. Findings.
It is hereby determined and declared that the placing, abandonment,
leaving, keeping or storage out of doors of any motor vehicle not currently
in use for transportation and not licensed for the current license year, or
any other unused machinery or equipment, on public or private lands in
the Township of Jackson is contrary and inimical to the public welfare in
that such articles so placed, abandoned, left, kept or stored out of doors,
exposed to the elements, deteriorate and in themselves are detrimental to
and depreciate the value of properties in the neighborhood where they are
located and in Jackson Township as a whole.
A. No parent or guardian of a minor under the age of 18 years shall
knowingly permit that minor to violate the provisions of this chapter.
B. Notice of violation. Whenever any minor under the age of 18 years is
charged with a violation of this chapter, the parent or guardian of such
minor shall be notified of this fact by the Chief of Police or any other
person designated by him to give such notice.
C. Presumption of parental knowledge. If, at any time within 30 days
following the giving of notice as provided in § 412-5B of this chapter,
the minor to whom such notice relates again violates this chapter, it
shall be presumed in the absence of evidence to the contrary that the
minor did so with the knowledge and permission of the minor's parent
or guardian.
§ 412-5 JACKSON CODE § 418-2
1:1552
§ 418-2. Keeping or storing out of doors prohibited. [Amended
4-12-1993 by Ord. No. 11-93]
No person shall place, abandon or leave, keep or store or suffer or permit
the placing, abandoning, leaving, keeping or storage of any article
described in § 418-1 of this chapter out of doors on any public land in
Jackson Township or between the right-of-way sidelines of any public
thoroughfare therein. Upon private lands, not more than one currently
unregistered and/or uninspected motor vehicle shall be parked, kept or
stored on any private property, and no vehicle shall at any time be in a
state of major disassembly, disrepair or in the process of being stripped
or dismantled. Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to prohibit the
placing, keeping or storage of any such article in an enclosed garage, barn
or other building.
§ 418-3. Presumption where left on private lands.
If any article described in § 418-1 of this chapter shall be left, placed, kept
or stored on private lands for 15 days or more, it shall be presumed that
the owner or tenant in possession of said land left, placed, kept or stored it
there or permitted or suffered it to be left, placed, kept or stored there.
§ 418-4. Procedure for violations on private lands. [Amended
5-13-1975 by Ord. No. 21-75]
Whenever it shall appear to any member of the Police Department or to the
Code Enforcer, or Building Inspector, or any other official of the Township
of Jackson, that § 418-2 of this chapter is being violated and that the land
on which the violation exists is privately owned, he shall, in writing, notify
the owner or tenant in possession of the land on which the violation exists
to abate the violation by removing the article or articles constituting the
violation from Jackson Township or into an enclosed garage, barn or other
building within 10 days of the service of the notice. Said notice shall be
served upon such owner or tenant, if he resides in Jackson Township,
personally or by leaving it at his usual place of abode with some member
of his household over the age of 14 years; but if any such owner or tenant
shall reside outside Jackson Township, the notice shall be served upon him
by registered or certified mail addressed to him at his usual residence, if
ascertainable, otherwise by notice published in the newspaper in which the
legal notices of Jackson Township may be published. The owner or tenant
shall so abate the violation within the time fixed by the notice. For the
purpose of this chapter, the Police Department, Code Enforcer, Building
Inspector and any other municipal official are enforcement officers.
§ 418-5. Procedure for violations on public lands or between rightof-
way sidelines.
Whenever it shall appear to any member of the Police Department of
Jackson Township that § 418-2 of the chapter is being violated and that the
§ 418-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 418-5
1:1553
violation exists on public lands or between the right-of-way sidelines of any
public thoroughfare, he shall:
§ 418-6. Forfeiture; disposal.
If any article impounded by the Police Department of Jackson Township
under this chapter shall remain in its possession for 30 days after notice of
the impounding in the case of motor vehicles and for six months for all other
articles, the impounded article shall be deemed to have been abandoned
and forfeited by the owner, and the article shall be sold and disposed of as
provided by N.J.S.A. 39:10A-1 et seq. in the case of motor vehicles and as
provided by N.J.S.A. 40:47-20219 in the case of all other articles.
A. Determine whether any article constituting the violation constitutes or
may constitute a traffic hazard, and if so, he shall move it or cause it to
be moved to a nonhazardous location or into an enclosed storage place.
B. Ascertain, if he can, who is the owner of the article or articles and shall,
in writing, notify such owner to abate the violation forthwith and in all
events within 10 days after the service of the notice upon him, which
notice shall be given as required in § 418-4 for the service of notice
thereunder.
C. If any article constituting the violation constitutes or may constitute a
traffic hazard and it cannot be moved to a nonhazardous location, or if
the name and address of the owner of the article cannot be ascertained,
or if the violation is not abated in the time required by the notice given
under the foregoing Subsection B:
(1) Determine whether the article or articles have a value in excess of
the cost of removing it or them to enclosed storage and the cost of
storing it or them for 30 days in the case of motor vehicles and for
six months for all other articles.
(2) Unless the article or articles appear to have a value clearly in
excess of such cost, he shall arrange, if he can, for the removal of it
or them by someone who will undertake that removal without cost
to Jackson Township, but otherwise he shall arrange for that
removal at the expense of Jackson Township to an authorized
dump.
(3) If the article or articles appear to have a value clearly in excess of
said cost, he shall remove it or them or cause it or them to be
removed at the expense of Jackson Township to enclosed storage.
(4) If the articles are removed under the foregoing Subsection A or
Subsection C(2) or (3), he shall, in the manner required by § 418-4
for service of notice thereunder, give notice to the owner of that
removal and of the place to which the article or articles have been
removed and of the owner's right to reclaim it or them by paying
the cost of removal and interim storage charges.
§ 418-5 JACKSON CODE § 418-7
1:1554
§ 418-7. Violations and penalties.
Anyone who shall violate this chapter shall be fined not more than $500 or
be imprisoned in the county jail for not more than 90 days, or both, in the
discretion of the Judge before whom he may be convicted.
Chapter 431
VEHICLES, UNLICENSED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 103.
Taxicabs, limousines and jitneys — See Ch.
380.
Abandoned or inoperable vehicles — See Ch.
418.
§ 431-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to control and regulate unlicensed motor
vehicles within the Township of Jackson in order to preserve the public
peace and order and protect the health and welfare of the general public of
the Township of Jackson.
§ 431-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MOTOR-DRIVEN VEHICLE — Includes but is not limited to minibikes,
motor scooters, go-carts, swamp buggies, mopeds and snowmobiles and
any other motor-driven vehicle, not capable of being registered under Title
39, Motor Vehicles and Traffic Regulation, of the New Jersey Revised
Statutes,220 as amended, except such vehicles as are in such title expressly
exempted from registration. Section 431-3A and B shall also apply to
vehicles licensed under Title 39, Motor Vehicles and Traffic Regulation, of
the New Jersey Revised Statutes, as amended.[Amended 6-24-1985 by
Ord. No. 18-85]
§ 431-3. Operation and use restrictions. [Amended 3-28-2005 by
Ord. No. 18-05]
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, permit to operate, and suffer
to be operated, park or let stand a motor-driven vehicle, as defined herein,
within the Township of Jackson under the following circumstances:
219. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:47-20 was repealed by P.L. 1971, c. 197. See now N.J.S.A.
40A:14-157.
220. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 39:1-1 et seq.
§ 418-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 431-3
1:1555
§ 431-4. Impoundment; violations and penalties. [Amended
6-12-1995 by Ord. No. 22-95]
Chapter 437
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 162.
Housing standards — See Ch. 233.
Land use and development regulations — See
Ch. 244.
Individual and semipublic water
supplies — See Ch. 505.
A. On private property of another without the express, prior, written
consent of the owner and the occupant of said property.
B. On any public grounds or property.
C. In such manner as to create loud, unnecessary or unusual noise so as to
disturb or interfere with the peace and quiet of other persons.
D. In a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger or be
likely to endanger the safety or property of any person.
A. The police officer charging the individual with a violation of this chapter
may impound said individual's motor-driven vehicle until such time as
the Police Department can verify identification and issue summonses in
connection with said violation. Impoundment fees will be charged to the
violator on a daily basis until the same is redeemed after satisfaction of
the above-referred-to requirements.
B. Any person who violates any one or more of the provisions of this
chapter shall, for a first offense, be subject to a fine of not less than
$250 nor more than $500 and/or confinement in the Ocean County Jail
for a period of not more than 90 days. In the case of a second or
subsequent violation, said person shall be subject to a fine of $500 and/
or confinement in the Ocean County Jail for a period of not more than
90 days. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues. [Amended
4-24-2000 by Ord. No. 6-00]
§ 431-3 JACKSON CODE § 431-4
1:1556
ARTICLE I
Connections
[Adopted 8-27-2001 by Ord. No. 37-01 (Ch. 106 of the 1972 Code)]
§ 437-1. Connection requirements; exemptions.
A. Water connection. The owner of every house, building or structure now
existing or hereafter constructed, assembled or moved onto any lot or
lots in the Township of Jackson intended for residential or commercial
use or professional occupancy and located on any street along the line
of any public water system now or hereafter constructed, where the
property line of such premises having the house, building or structure is
located not more than 100 feet from the line of such public water
system, shall connect such house, building or structure with the public
water system within 180 days after notice that such water system is
available to said premises, except as provided in Subsection E of this
section. Connection to the Jackson Township MUA Water System shall
be made pursuant to the rules and regulations of the Jackson Township
MUA and shall be at the property owner's expense.
B. Water meters. The owner shall also install two water meters in each
such house, building or structure. The first water meter shall be for
internal water use. The second water meter shall be for all external
water use, including, but not limited to, an irrigation system.
C. On lots where there are multiple structures, each such structure
requiring water service shall be separately connected to the public
water system with its own service line.
D. Every building permit issued for the construction of any new building
adjoining any public street in the Township of Jackson in which a public
waterline is available at the time of application for said building permit
shall be conditioned upon connection to the public water system
regardless of the distance between the proposed building and the
public waterline. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until said
connection has been completed in compliance with the rules and
regulations of the Jackson Township Municipal Utilities Authority.
E. Exemptions.
(1) Single-family residential properties (including home-based
businesses) served by properly functioning wells shall be exempt
from the mandatory connection requirements set forth in this
section upon execution of an acknowledgment and release form by
those individuals and/or entities as set forth in Resolution 2001-128
of the Jackson Township MUA.
(2) Any and all exemptions granted hereunder shall terminate
immediately upon the failure of the property owner's private well.
§ 437-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 437-1
1:1557
§ 437-2. Operation and maintenance of private wells for domestic
use.
After 180 days from service of notice that such public water supply is
available, the operation and maintenance of any private well supplying
water for domestic use is declared to be a health hazard and a nuisance,
except for those exempt properties as set forth in § 437-1E.
§ 437-3. Connection specifications.
Any and all connections with the public water supply system shall be made
by a qualified, licensed plumber in full compliance with the rules and
regulations of the Jackson Township MUA and all relevant local, county,
state and federal requirements. The appropriate connection fees shall be
paid for each connection pursuant to the Jackson Township MUA rules and
regulations.
§ 437-4. Tampering with system.
It shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by the Jackson Township
MUA to tamper with, alter or injure any part of the public water system.
Anyone violating this provision shall be subject to the penalties set forth in
§ 437-9 and any other penalties permitted by law.
§ 437-5. Lien.
Charges for water service, or any connection to the public water service,
shall be a lien upon the premises as provided for by N.J.S.A. 40:14B-42 and
40:14B-45.
(3) Nothing herein stated shall be construed to allow or permit owners
of properties currently or hereafter connected to the public water
system to disconnect therefrom, nor will anything herein be
construed to allow new homes to be constructed with private wells
for domestic use when public water facilities are available.
(4) Nothing herein stated shall be construed to exempt premises
located within a subdivision wherein new homes are constructed
adjacent to dry lines from the obligation to connect to public water
facilities as and when said dry lines are connected to public water
facilities and become available for use as determined by the
Jackson Township MUA. Developers installing dry lines at the
direction of the Jackson Township MUA shall provide notice to
home purchasers of their requirement to connect to the public
water system upon availability of service by express language set
forth in all contracts of sale as well as by deed recitals.
§ 437-1 JACKSON CODE § 437-6
1:1558
§ 437-6. Installment payments. [Amended 7-24-2007 by Ord. No.
23-07]
Owners of properties containing preexisting residential dwellings,
residential apartments and/or tax-exempt buildings or structures with
properly functioning private wells shall be entitled to pay water connection
fees imposed by the Township Municipal Utilities Authority in 12 quarterly
installments. In the event that any of said parties can clearly establish
financial hardship, then the Authority, may, by resolution, agree to extend
the payment period to 20 quarterly installments. Payments made during the
last eight quarters of the extended period shall be equal and shall include
interest at a rate of 4% per annum. Nevertheless, in the event that title
to any subject premises is transferred or conveyed prior to payment of the
total amount of connection fees, the outstanding balance thereof shall be
accelerated and made immediately due and payable at the time of such
transfer or conveyance of title.
§ 437-7. Notice to connect.
Upon a determination that public water supply is available to serve any
house, buildings and structures on any property in the Township, each
owner of property shall be directed by the Jackson Township MUA to
connect each house, building, and structure on said property with the
public water in accordance with the terms of this article and the rules and
regulations of the Jackson Township MUA, except as set forth in § 437-1E.
§ 437-8. Service of notice.
Notice to the owners of properties which are subject to the provisions
of this article shall be served by the Jackson Township MUA. All notices
shall be addressed to the owners of said property as the names of said
owners appear in the last tax duplicate of the Township of Jackson. The
notices shall describe the property by lot and block designation as the same
appears on the Tax Map of the Township of Jackson, and by the street
address, if a street address exists, and shall state that by the directive of
the Jackson Township MUA the owner is required to connect each house,
building and structure on said property with the public water system in
accordance with the terms of this article and the rules and regulations of
the Jackson Township MUA within 180 days of service of such notice as
hereinafter provided. Said notices shall also describe the penalties which
may be imposed hereunder for failure to comply with the notice and
directive in accordance with the terms of this article. Said notices may be
served within or without the limits of the Township of Jackson by mailing
the same by certified mail to the last known address of said owner as the
same appears on the last tax duplicate of the Township of Jackson.
§ 437-9. Violations and penalties.
Any owner of property who falls to connect any house, building or structure
as described in § 437-1 of this article to such public water system within
§ 437-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 437-9
1:1559
the prescribed time period, after service of notice by the Jackson Township
MUA pursuant to this article, or otherwise violates the provisions set forth
in this article, shall be subject to a penalty not to exceed $500, or
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or both, except for those
properties exempt by the provisions of § 437-1E. The imposition of such
penalties shall be in addition to any other legal remedies which may be
provided by law or by the terms of this article. Each day after the expiration
of 180 days for which an owner fails to comply with the provisions of this
article shall constitute a separate offense thereof.
§ 437-10. Failure to make connections.
If any owner of any property in the Township of Jackson fails to make
any connection or installation required by this article within the time and/
or manner herein prescribed, the Jackson Township MUA may proceed to
make such connection or installation and cause same to be made and, in
addition to any penalties as provided herein, charge and assess the cost
thereof against such property.
§ 437-11. Enforcement.
The Jackson Township MUA shall be and hereby is afforded full authority
and responsibility to enforce the provisions of this article, including, without
limitation, the authority to file complaints, seek injunctive relief and
prosecute violators in any and all forums having competent jurisdiction. To
the extent a court of competent jurisdiction determines that such grant of
authority and responsibility exceeds permissible limits, the Township will
assume such authority and responsibility to the extent necessary.
§ 437-12. Prior enactments superseded.
This article and the provisions herein shall replace and supersede any and
all prior enactments with respect to the matters addressed herein.
§ 437-9 JACKSON CODE § 437-12
1:1560
ARTICLE II
Distribution System
[Adopted 6-16-1980 by Ord. No. 31-80221 (Ch. 106A of the 1972
Code)]
§ 437-13. Connection with public system required.
The owner of every house, building or structure now or hereafter
constructed, assembled or moved onto any lot or lots in the Township
of Jackson intended for residential or commercial use or professional
occupancy and located on any street along the line of any Township-owned
water system now or hereafter constructed, where the property line of
such premises having the house, building or structure is located not more
than 200 feet from the line of such Township-owned water supply system,
shall, within 30 days after notice that such water supply is available to said
premises, its house, building or structure, connect such house, building or
structure to the water supply system. No water from the Township water
supply shall be turned on for service into any premises by any person other
than the Superintendent of Public Works or some other person designated
by the Township Committee to perform this service.
§ 437-14. Application for connection; fees. [Amended 7-27-1981 by
Ord. No. 36-81; 5-23-1983 by Ord. No. 35-83; 9-23-1985 by Ord. No.
32-85; 11-13-1989 by Ord. No. 39-89]
A. The application to have water turned on shall be made in writing to the
Township Clerk and shall contain an agreement by the applicant to
abide by and accept all the provisions of this article as conditions
governing the use of the Township water supply by the applicant.
B. The initial fee for the right to connect directly or indirectly to the
Township's potable water system shall include a connection charge or
fee per unit, as well as fees for application, review and inspection work
to be accomplished by the applicant in keeping with the provisions of
this article and rules and regulations as established by the Township.
(1) Residential dwelling units, one-family, two-family, three-family,
garden, high-rise, apartment units, trailers, mobile homes:
(a) A dwelling unit which has one bedroom, but not more than 800
square feet of living area*: $776.
(b) A dwelling unit which has two bedrooms, but not more than
1,000 square feet of living area*: $822.
221. Editor's Note: This ordinance was amended 5-23-1983 by Ord. No. 35-83 to delete all
references to the "Legler Water Distribution System" and replace them with "Jackson
Water System." Section 3 of Ord. No. 35-83 provided that "Said 'Jackson Water System' is
hereby established as a division of the Department of Public Works of the Township of
Jackson."
§ 437-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 437-14
1:1561
§ 437-15. Additional deposits and fees.
A water deposit in the amount of $45 shall be made with each such
application, this sum to be retained by the Township, to ensure payment
of all bills and repair or replacement of the water meter in the event of
its damage or destruction by the consumer. When service to the applicant
is discontinued permanently, this deposit, less any amount still due the
Township for water service, shall be refunded without interest. A meter fee
of $55 shall be paid to the Township with each application, said fee to be
retained by the Township.
§ 437-16. Plumbing.
No water shall be turned on for service in premises in which the plumbing
does not comply with the National Standard Plumbing Code, provided
that temporary water service may be turned on for construction work in
unfinished buildings, subject to the provisions of this article. All plumbing
fixtures and methods of installation shall comply with the requirements of
the State Uniform Construction Code.222
(c) A dwelling unit which has three bedrooms or more than 1,000
square feet of living area*: $1,176.
* "Living area" is defined as gross area within a dwelling unit,
including hallways, storage area, laundry and utility rooms,
physically located within the owned or rented area of the
water user.
(2) Other than residential.
(a) Hotel or motel, per unit: $588. This portion of the connection
fee applies to the number of living units only: An additional
connection fee is to be imposed for kitchens, restaurants,
taverns, laundries and the like, to be based on regulations and
rates for other than residential users.
(b) In cases where dormitory-style sleeping quarters are provided,
the total number of dwelling units shall be determined by the
total authorized occupancy capacity of the facility divided by
two.
(c) Boardinghouses and lodging houses will be handled on a caseby-
case basis, using either the residential charges, the
commercial charges, or a combination of both.
(d) All classes of users other than residential shall pay a
connection charge computed on the basis of water usage as
determined by the Township's Engineer. The charge per gallon
per day of water usage will be $2.94. In no case shall be the
connection charge be less than the charge for a one-family
residential unit (three-bedroom unit).
§ 437-14 JACKSON CODE § 437-17
1:1562
§ 437-17. Existing mobile home parks, campgrounds or multifamily
establishments. [Added 7-27-1981 by Ord. No. 36-81; amended
5-23-1983 by Ord. No. 35-83]
In the event that the Jackson Water System is established or extended so as
to require that an existing multifamily dwelling establishment, campground
or mobile home park connect to the system, and in the further event that
such multifamily dwelling establishment, campground or mobile home park
has an existing approved water supply system providing adequate and
sufficient water service to existing multifamily dwelling units, campground
sites or mobile home park units, then, and in that event, any such
multifamily dwelling establishment, campground or mobile home park shall
be required to utilize the connection with the Township Water Supply
System for the purpose of providing a supplementary source of water
for the multifamily dwelling establishment, campground or mobile home
park by making a connection with the Township Water Supply System and
by providing such interconnections between the existing internal water
supply system and the Township Water System as are authorized by N.J.S.A.
58:11-9.1 et seq. (Chapter 308 of the Public Laws of 1942, as amended
by Chapter 47 of the Public Laws of 1966) and as are permitted by the
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection. Such interconnection
shall comply in full with all requirements of the State Department of
Environmental Protection and any rules and regulations applicable thereto.
In the event that the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
does not authorize or permit such interconnection between the existing
water system of any such establishment and the Township Water System,
then, and in that event only, any such establishment shall not be required to
connect to the Township Water System.
§ 437-18. Requirements for connections.
No connections with the water system at the curbline stop of the water
service lateral shall be made without a permit being issued and 24 hours'
notice having been given to the Superintendent of Public Works. All such
connections shall be made and all such work done at the expense of the
applicant, who shall also furnish materials necessary for such work. All such
connections shall be made under the supervision of the Plumbing Inspector,
and no water installation connections shall be covered until the work has
been inspected by him. Applications for such connections must be made to
the Clerk, and a fee of $500 shall be paid for each connection.
§ 437-19. Resale prohibited.
No water shall be resold or distributed by the recipient thereof from the
Township supply to any premises other than that for which application has
been made and the meter installed, except in case of an emergency of a
temporary nature.
222. Editor's Note: See Ch. 162, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 437-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 437-20
1:1563
§ 437-20. Tampering with system.
It shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by the Township to tamper
with, alter or injure any part of the Township waterworks or supply system
or any meter.
§ 437-21. Installation.
All service pipes from the mains to the premises served shall be installed by
and at the cost of the owner of the property to be served or the applicant for
the service. Such installation shall be under the inspection of the Plumbing
Inspector.
§ 437-22. Repairs.
All repairs to service lateral pipes and plumbing systems of buildings shall
be made by and at the expense of the owners of the premises served. The
Township may, in case of an emergency, repair any service pipes, and, if this
is done, the cost of such repair work shall be repaid to the Township by the
owner of the premises served.
§ 437-23. Excavations.
Excavations for installing new taps of the water main, for installing lateral
service pipes or repairing the same shall be made in compliance with the
ordinance provisions relating to making excavations in streets.
§ 437-24. Shutoff boxes.
Shutoff boxes or lateral service boxes shall be placed on every service pipe
and shall be located between the curbline and the sidewalk line. Such boxes
shall be so located that they are easily accessible and shall be protected
from frost.
§ 437-25. Meters required. [Amended 2-9-1981 by Ord. No. 3-81;
12-11-1989 by Ord. No. 47-89; 4-9-1990 by Ord. No. 21-90]
A. All premises using the Township water supply must be equipped with an
adequate water meter furnished by the Township but paid for by the
consumer, provided that such water service may be supplied by this
Township at a flat rate of charge until such meter may be installed, said
flat rate to be $30 for each calendar month or any part of such calendar
month where water service is provided for 10 or more days. Before any
premises is occupied, a water meter shall be installed therein as herein
required or application made for such water service at the flat rate of
charge until the meter can be installed, or no water shall be furnished
such premises.
B. In implementing the provisions of this section, a meter and meter
installation charge shall be payable to the Township as follows:
(1) TTR (gun reader): $75.
§ 437-20 JACKSON CODE § 437-25
1:1564
§ 437-26. Location of meters.
Meters shall be installed in a location that will be of easy access.
§ 437-27. Reading of meters.
The Superintendent of Public Works or some other person designated by the
Township Committee shall read or cause to be read every water meter used
in the Township-owned system at such times as are necessary to provide
that the bills may be sent out at the proper time.
§ 437-28. Rates.
All property upon which any building has been or may hereafter be erected
having a connection with any mains or pipes which may be hereafter
constructed and used in connection with the Township Water System shall
pay the following rates per quarter or part thereof:
(2) Five-eighths-inch and three-fourth-inch line: $75.
(3) One-inch line: $90.
(4) One-and-one-half-inch line: $235.
(5) Two-inch line: $350.
A. Residential and commercial meter rates:
(1) Meter size: 5/8 inch; quarterly gallonage allowance: 7,000 gallons;
quarterly rate: $21.65.
(2) Meter size: 3/4 inch; quarterly gallonage allowance: 12,000
gallons; quarterly rate: $37.07.
(3) Meter size: one inch; quarterly gallonage allowance: 125,000
gallons; quarterly rate: $77.19.
(4) Meter size: two inches; quarterly gallonage allowance: 150,000
gallons; quarterly rate: $385.95. [Added 4-9-1990 by Ord. No.
21-90]
(5) Meter size: three inches; quarterly gallonage allowance: 300,000
gallons; quarterly rate: $926.89. [Added 6-27-1983 by Ord. No.
37-83]
(6) All quantity of water consumed in excess of the quarterly gallonage
allowance for the respective meter sizes will be billed at the rate of
$1.35 per 1,000 gallons.
(7) For the purpose of this article, the quarters to which the above
rates apply are as follows: first quarter, January 1 to March 31;
second quarter, April 1 to June 30; third quarter, July 1 to
September 30; fourth quarter, October 1 to December 31.
§ 437-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 437-28
1:1565
§ 437-29. Bills.
Bills for water used shall be dated and sent out at such times as may be
directed by the Township Committee.
§ 437-30. Construction contractors.
During the construction of any building and before any water is installed
as is herein provided, the contractor so constructing such building may be
permitted to use the Township water supply by making application therefor
and paying the flat fee prescribed by the Township Committee.
§ 437-31. Nonpayment.
The water supply may be shut off from any premises for which the water
bill remains unpaid for a period of six weeks after the bill is rendered and
mailed. When shutoff occurs, water shall not be turned on except upon the
payment of a fee of $7.50 for turning on water.
§ 437-32. Lien.
Charges for water shall be a lien upon the premises as provided by N.J.S.A.
40:62-78 and 40:62-79.223
B. Fire service rates: [Amended 11-29-1982 by Ord. No. 55-82;
4-9-1990 by Ord. No. 21-90]
(1) For each public fire hydrant, rate per annum: $68.20.
(2) For each private fire hydrant, rate per annum: $137.50.
(3) For two-inch fire connection, rate per annum: $171.60.
(4) For four-inch fire connection, rate per annum: $343.20.
(5) For six-inch fire connection, rate per annum: $600.
(6) For eight-inch fire connection, rate per annum: $858.
C. Where there is no meter on premises where water service is provided,
the fee shall be as set forth in § 437-25. [Added 2-9-1981 by Ord. No.
3-81]
D. Where an industrial building, commercial store or establishment,
campground, mobile home park or multifamily development is
connected to that system, all service pipes from the mains to the
premises served shall be sufficient to provide an adequate supply of
water in accordance with state regulations for water pressure and
volume. [Added 7-27-1981 by Ord. No. 36-81]
223. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:62-78 and 40:62-79 were repealed by P.L. 1989, c. 109. See now
N.J.S.A. 40A:31-12.
§ 437-28 JACKSON CODE § 437-33
1:1566
§ 437-33. Violations and penalties.
In the event of the violation of any of the provisions of this article by any
person, firm or corporation, he or it shall be subject to a penalty not to
exceed $500 or imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or both. The imposition
of such penalties shall be in addition to any other legal remedies which may
be provided by law or by the terms of this article.
§ 437-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 437-33
1:1567

ARTICLE III
Water Emergencies
[Adopted 8-9-1977 by Ord. No. 47-77 (Ch. 107 of the 1972 Code)]
§ 437-34. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to the provisions of this article:
WATER EMERGENCY — Any unusual situation resulting from natural or
unnatural causes which causes a shortage or the imminent danger of a
shortage in the water supply or water reserves of the municipal or public
water supply system so as to endanger the health, safety or resources of the
residents of this municipality by reason of the lack of water supply or water
pressure for fire emergencies, for cooking and for basic sanitary purposes.
§ 437-35. Declaration of emergency. [Amended 7-14-1986 by Ord.
No. 25-86]
When, in the judgment of the Mayor and the Director of Emergency
Management, after consulting with the appropriate governing board of
officials of a municipal or public water supply system, a water emergency, as
defined herein, is determined to exist, said Mayor shall forthwith proclaim
in writing the existence of such water emergency.
§ 437-36. Use of water restricted. [Amended 7-14-1986 by Ord. No.
25-86]
After the declaration of a water emergency by the Mayor, he may order the
cessation of use of water from the municipal or public water supply system,
except for cooking, for necessary sanitary purposes and for fire or other
emergencies for which water is needed.
A. Pursuant to such declaration, the Mayor may order the cessation of the
use of municipal or public water supply for the following uses and
purposes:
(1) The sprinkling, watering or irrigation of shrubbery, trees, lawns,
grass, ground, ground covers, plants, vines, gardens, vegetables,
flowers or any other vegetation.
(2) The washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, trailer houses,
railroad cars, buses or other types of mobile equipment.
(3) The washing of sidewalks, driveways, filling station aprons,
porches and other outdoor services.
(4) The washing of the outside of dwellings and the washing of the
inside and outside of office buildings and business establishments
of any type.
(5) The washing and cleaning of any business or industrial equipment
and machinery.
§ 437-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 437-36
1:1569
§ 437-37. Enforcement. [Amended 7-14-1986 by Ord. No. 25-86]
The Mayor is hereby empowered to issue and enforce such other orders and
regulations as may be necessary to implement and carry out the purposes of
this article and to protect the health, safety and resources of the residents
of this municipality.
§ 437-38. Posting and publishing of regulations. [Amended
7-14-1986 by Ord. No. 25-86]
All regulations and orders authorized by this article and adopted pursuant
to this article by the Mayor shall be promulgated by posting copies of such
orders and regulations on the official bulletin board of the Township of
Jackson and in such other public places as the Mayor may deem appropriate
and by publishing a copy of such orders and regulations once each week in
an official newspaper of the Township during the existence of such water
emergency situations.
§ 437-39. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-14-1986 by Ord. No.
25-86]
Any person who violates any one or more of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500 for each separate offense
and/or confinement in the Ocean County Jail for a period of not more
than 90 days. In the case of a continuing violation or violations, a fine of
not more than $500 may be assessed for each day that said violation or
violations continue unabated, until such time as said violation or violations
are corrected. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(6) The operation of any ornamental fountain or other structure
making a similar use of water.
(7) Swimming and wading pools and bathhouses and bathing
establishments of any nature whatsoever.
B. In the alternative, the Mayor may adopt regulations which will promote
conservation of water by limiting the nonessential use of the municipal
or public water supply at certain hours and on certain days, according
to schedules to be established by the Mayor.
§ 437-36 JACKSON CODE § 437-39
1:1570
Chapter 443
ZOOLOGICAL OR ANIMAL EXHIBITION PARKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusements — See Ch. 92.
Animals — See Ch. 98.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 162.
Land use and development regulations — See
Ch. 244.
Licensing — See Ch. 251.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 474.
Swine — See Ch. 499.
§ 443-1. License required; definitions.
§ 443-2. Application for license; fee.
Application for a license shall be made to the Township Clerk in triplicate on
a form provided for such application by the Township Clerk. An application
must be accompanied by payment to the Township Clerk of $1,500 as an
application fee, except as otherwise provided, which fee is nonreturnable
unless application is not accepted as provided for hereinafter. The
application will not be accepted by the Township Clerk if the limit of
licenses, permits and applications has been met as provided hereinafter. If
applicant has not been granted a permit as provided for hereinafter within
one year of the date of its application, then said application will be deemed
to be abandoned and of no further force and effect.
§ 443-3. Consideration of application.
An application for a license shall only be considered by the Township
Committee after the applicant has received the following approvals and
permits and has complied with Subsection E of this section:
A. Within the limits of the Township of Jackson, in the County of Ocean, no
person, firm or corporation shall conduct or carry on the business of the
operation of a zoological park or garden or animal exhibition park, or
work in, occupy or directly or indirectly in any manner whatsoever
utilize any place or premises in which is conducted or carried on a
zoological park or garden or animal exhibition park, unless and until
there shall be granted by the governing body of said Township, in
accordance with the terms of this chapter, and shall be in force and
effect, a license to conduct said zoological park or garden or animal
exhibition park, for the place and premises in or at which the same shall
be conducted and carried on.
B. For the purpose of this chapter, a "zoological park or garden or animal
exhibition park" is defined as any park, garden or area used for the
public exhibition and display of living domestic or foreign animals.
§ 437-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 443-3
1:1571
§ 443-4. Investigation by Police Department.
The Police Department of the Township of Jackson shall use the information
required under § 443-3 to aid it in acquiring additional information
concerning the background and good moral character of the aforesaid
stockholders, officers, directors or principals of any applicant. Report of
such information acquired by the Police Department shall be submitted
to the Township Committee and shall be used as a basis for determining
A. Applicant has been issued a special use permit or variance pursuant to
the Code of the Township of Jackson, its amendments and supplements,
by the Board of Adjustment. [Amended 5-28-1974 by Ord. No.
17-74]
B. Applicant has secured approvals of the Jackson Township Board of
Health and the Municipal Utilities Authority for the proposed provision
of water supply systems and facilities and sanitary sewerage systems,
and complied with any applicable rules and regulations of the State
Board of Health.
C. Applicant has received Planning Board approval for the site plan of the
proposed park in accordance with the standards as hereinafter
provided.
D. Applicant has complied with all other applicable ordinances of the
Township of Jackson and statutes of the State of New Jersey.
E. Applicant, if a corporation, has submitted to the Township Committee
the following:
(1) Names and addresses of all stockholders who own at least 10% of
the outstanding stock in such corporation. [Amended 5-28-1974
by Ord. No. 17-74]
(2) Names and addresses for preceding five years of all officers and
directors of such corporation.
(3) Corporate status report and franchise tax report; or applicant, if
not a corporation but trading under a trade name, has submitted a
list of all principals, together with their addresses for the preceding
five years.
F. Applicant shall have delivered to the Township Clerk a certificate of
public liability insurance, reflecting the issuance to the applicant of a
policy of public liability insurance wherein the Township is named as
coinsured for damages arising out of any activity of the applicant under
a license issued under this chapter, in an amount not less than
$500,000/$1,000,000 for death or bodily injury and $50,000/$100,000
for property damage. Termination of said policy of public liability
insurance shall be cause for immediate revocation of any license issued
hereunder. [Amended 5-28-1974 by Ord. No. 17-74]
§ 443-3 JACKSON CODE § 443-4
1:1572
whether consideration of such application would be in the best interests of
the Township of Jackson.
§ 443-5. Approval of license; proration of fee. [Amended 5-28-1974
by Ord. No. 17-74]
When the requirements of § 443-3 herein have been complied with, and
after examining the application and the accompanying map or maps as
elsewhere herein provided and after approval of the application and
supporting documents by the Township Engineer and the Township
Attorney, and after due consideration of the application and such factors as
adequacy of provisions for public safety and public health, if the Township
Committee shall be of the opinion that the proposed operation will not
create conditions inimical to public health, safety and welfare and will not
result in the creation of any public health or public safety problems or other
conditions of danger, a license, to expire on the following 30th day of June,
may, at the direction of the Township Committee, be granted under the
terms and conditions of this chapter. The first year's license fee shall be
prorated to the remainder of the annual license period, but in no case shall
such prorated fee be less than the sum of $1,000. Approval by the Township
Committee shall entitle the applicant to a license, said license to be issued
by the Township Clerk. Such approval shall be given at an open meeting and
shall be by resolution.
§ 443-6. Location of parks restricted.
No permit for a park shall be issued and no license for a park shall be
granted except in the R-20 and R-40 (R-A) Zones, and such parks shall be
prohibited in all other zones.
§ 443-7. Construction.
A. A permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall provide that the applicant
must complete construction of either a section of the proposed park, if a
sectionalized time schedule applies, or the entire proposed park, said
construction to be in accordance with the approved site plan and the
provisions of this chapter, within one year of the date of issuance of the
permit. If not completed within the prescribed time as aforesaid, any
permit issued hereunder shall be null and void.
B. The Township Committee may extend the time period of the permit
granted hereunder for a period of not more than six months in the event
that the applicant demonstrates to the Township Committee that the
applicant, through no fault of its own and for justifiable cause, was
unable to complete the said park within the time period allotted to the
same in this chapter.
C. The granting of a permit hereunder shall not entitle the applicant to in
any manner operate said park until the granting of a license hereunder.
§ 443-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 443-8
1:1573
§ 443-8. Building permit for construction. [Amended 5-28-1974 by
Ord. No. 17-74]
Upon receipt of a special use permit or variance and all necessary
approvals, the applicant shall apply to the Building Inspector of the
Township of Jackson and pay such fees as may be due the Township for a
building permit for the construction of any and all permanent structures,
buildings and appurtenances, according to the Building Code.224
§ 443-9. Inspection; issuance of license.
§ 443-10. Expiration date of license.
All licenses for such parks shall expire on the 30th day of June next
following the date of issuance and shall be valid for a period of one year.
§ 443-11. License renewal.
A renewal of a zoological park or garden or animal exhibition park license
shall and may be obtained from the Township Committee for each
succeeding year in which the operation of the existing park is sought to
be continued upon the payment to said Clerk of the operating license fees
as provided hereinafter, submitting of a map as described in § 443-14 of
this chapter to reflect any proposed changes in the park or its use, and the
compliance with § 443-3F of this chapter dealing with insurance; provided,
however, that no such renewal shall be issued if, in respect to said park:
A. Upon completion of a park in accordance with this chapter, all
applicable standards, the site plan or amended site plan as approved
and the granting of all other applicable approvals, the applicant shall
notify the Township Engineer, who shall inspect the park and submit a
report to the Township Committee, who shall consider said report as a
basis for the issuance or denial of a license. [Amended 5-28-1974 by
Ord. No. 17-74]
B. Upon the finding by the Township Committee that the applicant has
completed the park in accordance with the applicable standards, the
Township Clerk shall be directed to issue a license to the applicant.
A. There is any notice of an alleged violation issued by an enforcing official
pursuant to this chapter outstanding and unresolved. [Amended
5-28-1974 by Ord. No. 17-74]
B. The licensee has not paid to the Township any sum due to the Township
under this chapter.
C. The licensee has failed or refused to correct a condition that would
constitute a violation of this chapter.
D. The licensee fails to submit any map required under this chapter.
224. Editor's Note: See Ch. 162, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 443-8 JACKSON CODE § 443-11
1:1574
§ 443-12. Transferability of license or permit.
§ 443-13. Operating license fees. [Amended 5-28-1974 by Ord. No.
17-74]
The annual operating license fee for each park is hereby fixed at the sum of
$3,000.
§ 443-14. Site plan requirements.
E. The licensee has failed to pay or cause to be paid any taxes upon the
lands covered by such license.
F. The licensee is in violation of any federal, state, county or municipal law
or ordinance or health regulation as a result of any activity or operation
under this chapter.
G. Any operation of the licensee under this chapter endangers the person
or property of adjoining landowners or other persons in the Township.
A. A license or permit shall not be transferable without the permission of
the Township Committee. Any party so desiring to transfer a license or
permit shall notify the Township Committee, whereupon a hearing shall
be held to determine the qualifications of the transferee.
B. In the event such transferee is a corporation of the State of New Jersey
or a foreign corporation licensed to do business in the State of New
Jersey or is operating under a trade name, such transferee must comply
with the requirements of § 443-3E.
A. The site plan shall be prepared by a professional engineer or architect
licensed in the State of New Jersey and duly signed and sealed. Said site
plan shall be duly certified as to accuracy of everything represented
thereon.
B. The site plan to be submitted by the applicant to the Jackson Township
Planning Board and Township Committee shall be submitted in the
following form and shall contain the following information:
(1) The name and title of the applicant, the owner and of the person
preparing the plan maps and accompanying data.
(2) Place for the signatures of the Chairman and Secretary of the
Planning Board, and the Mayor and Township Clerk.
(3) Place for the signature of the Township Engineer.
(4) Tax Map lot and block numbers of the premises that will comprise
the site of the zoological or animal exhibition park.
(5) Date, scale and North arrow.
§ 443-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 443-14
1:1575
§ 443-15. Warning signs; internal roads.
Licensee shall provide adequate internal roads or walkways suitably paved,
and shall install or cause to be installed adequate and suitable signs and
other devices warning of any traffic hazards, or any other hazardous or
dangerous conditions of which it is necessary to warn patrons.
§ 443-16. Enforcement; inspections.
For the purpose of enforcing this chapter, the Municipal Health Officer, the
Building Inspector and the Township Engineer are hereby designated as
enforcing officers. It shall be the duty of the Municipal Health Officer, the
Building Inspector and the Township Engineer, or one of them, to make
physical inspections in connection with any application for a license or
renewal license hereunder and, in addition, to make at least one other
physical inspection after an interval of approximately six months.
§ 443-17. Notice of violation; hearings; emergency action.
(6) Names, blocks and lots of adjacent property owners and property
within 200 feet of the boundaries of the affected premises.
(7) Exterior lines or boundary limits of premises, setback lines, lines of
existing easements and proposed easements.
(8) Any proposed regulations or restrictive covenants which would
affect the premises.
(9) Detailed plans of all permanent structures.
(10) Location of all existing and proposed storm and water drainage
systems.
(11) Location of all existing and proposed utilities systems.
(12) Location of eating and restaurant facilities, recreational areas and
storage areas.
(13) Location of all signs.
(14) Location and layout of parking areas, and means of ingress and
egress.
(15) Topography of existing and proposed grades, with contours taken
at two-foot intervals.
(16) Location of all access and service roads within the affected
premises, showing access points to already existing public roads.
(17) Location of proposed fences, showing height, type and gate
locations.
§ 443-14 JACKSON CODE § 443-17
1:1576
A. Whenever the Jackson Township Engineer, Building Inspector or
Municipal Health Officer shall determine that there are reasonable
grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of
this chapter or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, he
shall give notice of such alleged violation to the person or persons
responsible therefor as hereinafter provided.
(1) Such notice shall:
(a) Be put in writing.
(b) Include a statement of the reasons why it is being issued.
(c) Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it
requires.
(d) Be served upon the owner or his agent, provided that such
notice shall be deemed to be properly served upon such owner
or agent if a copy thereof is served upon him personally, or if a
copy thereof is sent by certified mail to his last known address,
or if a copy thereof is posted in a conspicuous place in or about
the premises affected by the notice, or if he is served with such
notice by any other method authorized or required under the
laws of this state.
(2) Such notice may contain an outline of remedial action which, if
taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter and
with rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
B. Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection
with the enforcement of any provisions of this chapter or any rule or
regulation adopted pursuant thereto may request and shall be granted
a hearing on the matter before the Township Committee, provided such
person shall file in the office of the Township Clerk a written petition
requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the
grounds therefor within 10 days after the day the notice was served.
Upon receipt of such petition, the Township Clerk shall set a time and
place for such hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice
thereof. At such hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to
be heard and to show why such notice should be modified or withdrawn.
The hearing shall be commenced not later than 16 days after the day on
which the petition was filed; provided that, upon application of the
petitioner, the Township Committee may postpone the date of the
hearing for a reasonable time beyond such sixteen-day period if in its
judgment the petitioner has submitted a good and sufficient reason for
such postponement. After such hearing, the Township Committee shall
sustain, modify or withdraw the notice, depending upon its findings as
to whether the provisions of this chapter and the rules and regulations
adopted pursuant thereto have been complied with. If the Township
Committee sustains or modifies such notice, it shall be deemed to be an
order, which, at the discretion of the Township Committee, may operate
as a revocation of the license. Any notice served pursuant to this
§ 443-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 443-17
1:1577
§ 443-18. Authority to adopt rules and regulations.
The Board of Health of the Township of Jackson is hereby authorized and
empowered to make and adopt such written rules and regulations as it
may deem necessary for the proper enforcement of the provisions of this
chapter; provided, however, that such rules and regulations shall not be in
conflict with the provisions of this chapter nor in any way alter, amend or
supersede any of the provisions thereof. The Board of Health shall file a
certified copy of all rules and regulations which it may adopt in the office of
the Clerk of the Township of Jackson.
§ 443-19. Posting of license and regulations.
The license certificate and a copy of this chapter shall be conspicuously
posted in the office of the park at all times.
Part III: Board of Health Legislation
Chapter 450
GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH
chapter shall automatically become an order if a written petition for
a hearing is not filed in the office of the Township Clerk within 10
days after such notice is served. The proceedings at such hearing,
including the findings and decision of the Township Committee, shall
be summarized, reduced to writing and entered as a matter of public
record in the office of the Township Clerk. Such record shall also
include a copy of every notice or order issued in connection with
the matter. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Township
Committee may seek relief therefrom in any court of competent
jurisdiction, as provided by the laws of this state.
C. Whenever the Municipal Health Officer of the Township of Jackson shall
find that an emergency exists which requires immediate action to
protect the public health or safety, he may, without notice or hearing,
issue an order reciting the existence of such an emergency and
requiring that such action be taken as he deems necessary to meet the
emergency. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this chapter, such
order shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom such order is
directed shall comply therewith immediately, but upon petition to the
Township Committee shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible.
After such hearing, depending upon its findings as to whether the
provisions of this chapter and the rules and regulations adopted
pursuant thereto have been complied with, the Township Committee
shall continue such order in effect, modify it or revoke it.
§ 443-17 JACKSON CODE § 443-19
1:1578
ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code by Board of Health
[Adopted 12-21-1972 by Ord. No. H3-72 (Ch. 1, Art. II, of the 1972
Code)]
§ 450-1. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the Board of Health of the
Township of Jackson of a general and permanent nature, as revised, codified
and consolidated into chapters and sections by General Code Publishers
Corp., and consisting of Chapters 112 to 142,225 are hereby approved,
adopted, ordained and enacted as the "Code of the Township of Jackson,"
hereinafter known and referred to as the "Code."
§ 450-2. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances of the Board of Health enacted prior to the
enactment of this Code, except such ordinances as are expressly saved from
repeal or continued in force and effect hereinafter.
§ 450-3. When effective.
All provisions of this ordinance and the Code shall be in full force and effect
on and after December 21, 1972.
§ 450-4. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
Secretary of the Board of Health and shall remain there for the use and
examination of the public until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if
this ordinance shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to as provided
by law, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the
Secretary of the Board of Health, to be made available to persons desiring
to examine the same during all times while the said Code is in effect.
§ 450-5. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the Board of
Health to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into
such Code so that reference to the Code of the Township of Jackson shall
be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments.
Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall
be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
inserted in the loose-leaf book containing the said Code, as amendments
and supplements thereto.
225. Editor's Note: See Art. II, Adoption of 2012 Renumbering of Code by Board of Health.
§ 450-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-6
1:1579
§ 450-6. Publication; filing.
The Secretary of the Board of Health, pursuant to law, shall cause to be
published, in the manner required, a copy of this adopting ordinance in
a newspaper of general circulation in the Township. Sufficient copies of
the Code shall be maintained in the office of the Secretary for inspection
by the public at all times during regular office hours. The enactment and
publication of this adopting ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of
the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered
to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 450-7. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Secretary, or someone authorized and directed by
him, to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the Code
required to be filed in his office for the use of the public. All changes in said
Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective date of this
codification, which shall be adopted specifically as part of the Code, shall,
when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until such changes
or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code book, at which
time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 450-8. Altering or tampering with Code; violations and penalties.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion thereof, or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of the Board of
Health to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this
ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to a fine of not less than $5 nor
more than $500.
§ 450-9. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code, and every part of each section, is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed
to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other section or part thereof.
§ 450-10. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 450-11. Repeal of ordinances.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature, adopted by the Board of
Health and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance and not
contained in the Code, are hereby repealed as of the effective date of this
adopting ordinance, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 450-6 JACKSON CODE § 450-12
1:1580
§ 450-12. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 450-11 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
§ 450-13. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
A. Any ordinance of the Board of Health adopted subsequent to March 9,
1970.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance, or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision, or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending,
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property, or any lawful contract or obligation.
G. Any provisions of an ordinance or resolution of the Board of Health
creating employments, positions or offices and fixing duties therefor
which are not provided in the Code hereby adopted and which are not in
conflict or inconsistent therewith.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances of the Board of Health for
adoption and revision as part of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4,
certain grammatical changes and other minor changes were made in
one or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the Board of Health
that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the
ordinances so changed had been previously formally amended to read
as such.
B. In addition, the following changes, amendments or revisions are made
herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance.
(Chapter and section number references are to the ordinances as they
have been renumbered and appear in the Code.)
(1) Chapter 120, Food Handlers and Food Handling Control.226
226. Editor's Note: Original Ch. 120, Food Handlers and Food Handling Control, of the 1972
Code, was repealed 7-14-1975 by Ord. No. H2-75.
§ 450-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-13
1:1581
(a) In § 120-7, Application fee (formerly Section 7 of Ord. No.
2-67H, adopted 4-19-1967), the application fee is raised from
$1 to $15.
(2) In the following sections, the penalty provisions were revised to
provide that violators will be punishable by a fine of not more than
$500 nor less than $2, the imposition of such penalties being
authorized by N.J.S.A. 26:3-70 and 26:3-70.1: § 117-7227 (formerly
Section 7 of Ord. No. 4-66H, adopted 10-18-1966); § 118-6228
(formerly Section 6 of Ord. No. 1-66, adopted 4-19-1966);
§ 120-10229 (formerly Section 10 of Ord. No. 2-67H, adopted
4-19-1967); § 122-7230 (formerly Section 7 of Ord. No. 1-63, adopted
10-18-1963); § 126-4231 (formerly Section 4 of Ord. No. 4-62,
adopted 9-20-1962); § 128-7232 (formerly Section 7 of Ord. No. 2-65,
adopted 9-21-1965); § 134-5233 (formerly Section 5 of an ordinance
adopted 10-6-1958); § 136-6234 (formerly Section 6 of Ord. No.
6-68H, adopted 12-18-1968); § 138-10235 (formerly Section 10 of
Ord. No. 2-64, adopted 11-23-1964); § 140-11236 (formerly Section
11 of Ord. No. H2-66, adopted 5-17-1966); § 142-9237 (formerly
Section 9 of Ord. No. 1-67H, adopted 3-15-1967).
227. Editor's Note: See now § 456-7.
228. Editor's Note: Original § 118-6 of the 1972 Code was repealed 5-9-1977 by Ord. No. 4-77.
229. Editor's Note: Original § 120-10 of the 1972 Code was repealed 7-14-1975 by Ord. No.
H2-75.
230. Editor's Note: See now § 469-7.
231. Editor's Note: See now § 474-4.
232. Editor's Note: Original § 128-7 of the 1972 Code was repealed 1-24-2005 by Ord. No.
03-05.
233. Editor's Note: Original § 134-5 of the 1972 Code was repealed 1-27-1992 by Ord. No. 1-92.
234. Editor's Note: Original § 136-6 of the 1972 Code was repealed 8-27-2001 by Ord. No.
38-01.
235. Editor's Note: See now § 493-10.
236. Editor's Note: Original § 140-11 of the 1972 Code was repealed 1-24-2005 by Ord. No.
03-05.
237. Editor's Note: See now § 505-9.
§ 450-13 JACKSON CODE § 450-13
1:1582
ARTICLE II
Adoption of 2012 Renumbering of Code by Board of Health
[Adopted 5-8-2012 by Ord. No. 15-12]
§ 450-14. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
The ordinances of the Board of Health of the Township of Jackson of a
general and permanent nature adopted by the Board of Health of the
Township of Jackson, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters and
sections by General Code, as set forth in the Derivation Table included at
the end of the Code, and as renumbered to consist of Chapters 450 through
505, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as Part III of the
"Code of the Township of Jackson," hereafter known and referred to as the
"Code."
§ 450-15. Nonsubstantive changes in previously adopted legislation.
In compiling and preparing the ordinances and 1972 Code for publication
as the 2012 Code of the Township of Jackson, no changes in the meaning
or intent of such legislation have been made. Certain grammatical changes
and other minor nonsubstantive changes were made in one or more of said
pieces of legislation. Chapters, articles and sections have been renumbered
pursuant to the Derivation Table included at the end of the Code, including
all internal references and cross-references. It is the intention of the Board
of Health of the Township of Jackson that all such changes be adopted as
part of the Code as if the ordinances had been previously formally amended
to read as such.
§ 450-16. Continuation of provisions.
A. The provisions of Part III of this Code, insofar as they are substantively
the same as those of ordinances and the 1972 Code in force
immediately prior to the enactment of this Code by this ordinance, are
intended as a continuation of such ordinances and not as new
enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the
date of adoption of the prior ordinance. All such provisions are hereby
continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their
adoption by the Board of Health of the Township of Jackson, and it is the
intention of said Board of Health that each such provision contained
within Part III of the Code is hereby reaffirmed as it appears in said
Code.
B. For purposes of transition from the 1972 Code to this Code, any
reference to a chapter or section number from the 1972 Code on or in
any form, license, permit, ticket or other Township document shall be
deemed to refer to the corresponding chapter or section in this Code
until such form, license, permit, ticket or other Township document is
revised or reprinted to refer to the numbering in this Code.
§ 450-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-17
1:1583
§ 450-17. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
§ 450-17 JACKSON CODE § 450-17
1:1584
Chapter 456
CAMPGROUNDS, PRIVATE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Campgrounds — See Ch. 145.
Land use and development regulations — See
Ch. 244.
Mobile home parks — See Ch. 280.
Mobile homes and trailers — See Ch. 285.
Trailers and campsites — See Ch. 400.
§ 456-1. Enforcement officer.
The Sanitarian and/or Health Officer of the Board of Health is hereby
designated as the officer to exercise the powers prescribed by the within
chapter, and he shall serve in such capacity without any additional salary.
§ 456-2. Adoption of standards.
Pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 21, P.L. 1946, as amended (N.J.S.A.
40:49-5.1), the "Private Campgrounds Code," as approved by the
Department of Health and the Department of Conservation and Economic
Development and filed in the Secretary of State's office, is hereby accepted,
adopted and established as a standard to be used as a guide in determining
whether campground dwellings, as well as their facilities, located in this
municipality, are safe, sanitary and fit for human habitation and rental. A
copy of the Private Campgrounds Code is annexed to this chapter, and three
copies of the same have been placed on file in the office of the Board of
Health and are available to all persons desiring to use and examine the
same.
§ 456-3. Inspections.
The Sanitarian and/or Health Officer is hereby authorized and directed to
make inspections to determine the condition of camp dwellings as well as
their facilities located within the Township of Jackson, in order that he may
perform his duty of safeguarding the health and safety of the occupants of
camp dwellings as well as their facilities and of the general public. For the
purpose of making such inspections, the Sanitarian and/or Health Inspector
is hereby authorized to enter, examine and survey at all reasonable times
all camp dwellings as well as their facilities. The owner or occupant of
every camp dwelling as well as its facilities, or the person in charge thereof,
shall give the Sanitarian and/or Health Officer free access to such camp
dwelling as well as its facilities at all reasonable times for the purpose of
such inspection, examination and survey. Every occupant of a camp dwelling
shall give the owner thereof or his agent or employee access to any part
of such camp dwelling as well as its facilities at all reasonable times for
the purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter or with any lawful rule or
§ 450-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 456-3
1:1585
regulation adopted or any lawful order issued pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter.
§ 456-4. Notice of violation; hearing; emergency action.
A. Whenever the Sanitarian and/or Health Officer determines that there
are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any
provision of this chapter or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant
thereto, he shall give notice of such alleged violation to the person or
persons responsible therefor as hereinafter provided.
(1) Such notice shall:
(a) Be put in writing;
(b) Include a statement of the reasons why it is being issued;
(c) Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it
requires; and
(d) Be served upon the owner or his agent, or the occupant, as the
case may require, provided that such notice shall be deemed to
be properly served upon such owner or agent or upon such
occupant if a copy thereof is served upon him personally, of if a
copy thereof is sent by registered mail to his last known
address, or if a copy thereof is posted in a conspicuous place in
or about the dwelling affected by the notice, or if he is served
with such notice by any other method authorized or required
under the laws of this state.
(2) Such notice may contain an outline of remedial action which, if
taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter and
with rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
B. Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection
with the enforcement of any provision of this chapter or of any rule or
regulation adopted pursuant thereto may request and shall be granted
a hearing on the matter before the Board of Health, provided such
person shall file in the office of the Board of Health a written petition
requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the
grounds therefor within 10 days after the day the notice was served.
Upon receipt of such petition the Board of Health shall set a time and
place for such hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice
thereof. At such hearing the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to
be heard and to show why such notice should be modified or withdrawn.
The hearing shall be commenced not later than 10 days after the day on
which the petition was filed, provided that, upon application of the
petitioner, the Board of Health may postpone the date of the hearing for
a reasonable time beyond such ten-day period if in its judgment the
petitioner has submitted a good and sufficient reason for such
postponement. After such hearing, the Board of Health shall sustain,
modify or withdraw the notice, depending upon its findings as to
§ 456-3 JACKSON CODE § 456-4
1:1586
§ 456-5. Authority to adopt rules and regulations.
The Sanitarian and/or Health Officer is hereby authorized and empowered
to make and adopt such written rules and regulations as he may deem
necessary for the proper enforcement of the provisions of this chapter;
provided, however, that such rules and regulations shall not be in conflict
with the provisions of this chapter nor in anywise alter, amend or supersede
any of the provisions thereof. The Sanitarian and/or Health Officer shall file
a certified copy of all rules and regulations which he may adopt in his office
and in the office of the Board of Health.
§ 456-6. Occupancy or rental of nonconforming camp dwellings.
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or rent to another for occupancy
any camp dwelling, as well as its facilities, for the purpose of living therein,
which does not conform to the provisions of the Private Campgrounds Code
established hereby as the standard to be used in determining whether a
camp dwelling is safe, sanitary and fit for human habitation.
whether the provisions of this chapter and the rules and regulations
adopted pursuant thereto have been complied with. If the Board of
Health sustains or modifies such notice, it shall be deemed to be an
order. Any notice served pursuant to this chapter shall automatically
become an order if a written petition for a hearing is not filed in the
office of the Board of Health within 10 days after such notice is served.
The proceedings at such hearing, including the findings and decision
of the Board of Health, shall be summarized, reduced to writing and
entered as a matter of public record in the office of the Board of Health.
Such record shall also include a copy of every notice or order issued in
connection with the matter. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the
Board of Health may seek relief therefrom in any court of competent
jurisdiction, as provided by the laws of the state.
C. Whenever the Sanitarian and/or Health Officer finds that an emergency
exists which requires immediate action to protect the public health or
safety, he may, without notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the
existence of such an emergency and requiring that such action be taken
as he deems necessary to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding the
other provisions of this chapter, such order shall be effective
immediately. Any person to whom such order is directed shall comply
therewith immediately, but upon petition to the Board of Health, shall
be afforded a hearing as soon as possible. After such hearing,
depending upon its findings as to whether the provisions of this chapter
and of the rules and regulation adopted pursuant thereto have been
complied with, the Board of Health shall continue such order in effect,
modify it or revoke it.
§ 456-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 456-7
1:1587
§ 456-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-21-1972 by Ord. No.
H3-72]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than
two $2 nor more than $500; and each violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter, and each day the same is violated, shall be deemed and taken
to be a separate and distinct offense.
Chapter 465
HEALTH OFFICER
§ 465-1. Position created.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-3 et seq., there is hereby created the position of
Health Officer in the Board of Health of the Township of Jackson.
§ 465-2. Duties.
The duties of the said Health Officer shall be as follows:
§ 465-3. Compensation.
The annual salary for the position of Health Officer shall be determined
from time to time by the Jackson Township Board of Health and shall be paid
in accordance with the provisions of the Salary Ordinance of the said Board
of Health.
§ 465-4. Appointment.
The Board of Health shall appoint the Health Officer, who shall serve in
accordance with the applicable civil service rules and regulations.
A. To enforce relevant public health laws.
B. When violations of relevant sanitary, health and other laws are found, to
determine the cause and take proper corrective action.
C. To give testimony in cases.
D. To prepare suitable reports and maintain necessary records and files.
E. Such other duties as may from time to time be determined by the Board
of Health of the Township of Jackson.
§ 456-7 JACKSON CODE § 465-4
1:1588
Chapter 469
HOUSING STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unsafe buildings and structures — See Ch.
133.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 162.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 204.
Housing standards — See Ch. 233.
Land use and development regulations — See
Ch. 244.
Sanitary sewers — See Ch. 336.
Individual sewage disposal systems — See Ch.
493.
Individual and semipublic water
supplies — See Ch. 505.
§ 469-1. Enforcement officer.
The Health Officer of the Township of Jackson is hereby designated as the
officer to exercise the powers prescribed by the within chapter, and he shall
serve in such capacity without any additional salary.
§ 469-2. Adoption of standards.
Pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 21, P.L. 1946 (N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.1),
the "New Jersey State Housing Code," as approved by the Departments
of Health and Conservation and Economic Development and filed in the
Secretary of State's office, is hereby accepted, adopted and established as
a standard to be used as a guide in determining whether dwellings in this
municipality are safe, sanitary and fit for human habitation and rental. A
copy of the New Jersey State Housing Code is annexed to this chapter,
and three copies of the same have been placed on file in the office of the
Township Clerk and are available to all persons desiring to use and examine
the same.
§ 469-3. Inspections.
The Health Officer is hereby authorized and directed to make inspections
to determine the condition of dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units and
premises located within the Township of Jackson in order that he may
perform his duty of safeguarding the health and safety of the occupants
of dwellings and of the general public. For the purpose of making such
inspections, the Health Officer is hereby authorized to enter, examine and
survey at all reasonable times all dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units
and premises. The owner or occupant of every dwelling, dwelling unit
and rooming unit, or the person in charge thereof, shall give the Health
Officer free access to such dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit and
its premises at all reasonable times for the purpose of such inspection,
examination and survey. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall
give the owner thereof or his agent or employee access to any part of such
§ 465-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 469-3
1:1589
dwelling or dwelling unit or its premises at all reasonable times for the
purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter or with any lawful rule or
regulation adopted or any lawful order issued pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter.
§ 469-4. Notice of violation; hearing; emergency action.
A. Whenever the Health Officer determines that there are reasonable
grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provisions of
this chapter or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, he
shall give notice of such alleged violation to the person or persons
responsible therefor as hereinafter provided.
(1) Such notice shall:
(a) Be put in writing;
(b) Include a statement of the reasons why it is being issued;
(c) Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it
requires; and
(d) Be served upon the owner or his agent, or the occupant, as the
case may require, provided that such notice shall be deemed to
be properly served upon such owner or agent or upon such
occupant if a copy thereof is served upon him personally, or if a
copy thereof is sent by registered mail to his last known
address, or if a copy thereof is posted in a conspicuous place in
or about the dwelling affected by the notice, or if he is served
with such notice by any other method authorized or required
under the laws of this state.
(2) Such notice may contain an outline of remedial action which, if
taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter and
with rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
B. Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection
with the enforcement of any provision of this chapter or of any rule or
regulation adopted pursuant thereto may request and shall be granted
a hearing on the matter before the Board of Health, provided such
person shall file in the office of the Township Clerk a written petition
requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the
grounds therefor within 10 days after the day the notice was served.
Upon receipt of such petition, the Township Clerk shall set a time and
place for such hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice
thereof. At such hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to
be heard and to show why such notice should be modified or withdrawn.
The hearing shall be commenced not later than 10 days after the day on
which the petition was filed, provided that, upon application of the
petitioner, the Board of Health may postpone the date of the hearing for
a reasonable time beyond such ten-day period if in its judgment the
§ 469-3 JACKSON CODE § 469-4
1:1590
§ 469-5. Authority to adopt rules and regulations.
The Health Officer is hereby authorized and empowered to make and adopt
such written rules and regulations as he may deem necessary for the proper
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter; provided, however, that such
rules and regulations shall not be in conflict with the provisions of this
chapter nor in anywise alter, amend or supersede any of the provisions
thereof. The Health Officer shall file a certified copy of all rules and
regulations which he may adopt in his office and in the office of the Clerk of
the Township of Jackson.
§ 469-6. Rental or occupancy of nonconforming dwellings.
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or rent to another for occupancy
any dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein which does
not conform to the provisions of the New Jersey State Housing Code
established hereby as the standard to be used in determining whether a
dwelling is safe, sanitary and fit for human habitation.
petitioner has submitted a good and sufficient reason for such
postponement. After such hearing, the Board of Health shall sustain,
modify or withdraw the notice, depending upon its findings as to
whether the provisions of this chapter and of the rules and regulations
adopted pursuant thereto have been complied with. If the Board of
Health sustains or modifies such notice, it shall be deemed to be an
order. Any notice served pursuant to this chapter shall automatically
become an order if a written petition for a hearing is not filed in the
office of the Township Clerk within 10 days after such notice is served.
The proceedings at such hearing, including the findings and decision
of the Board of Health, shall be summarized, reduced to writing and
entered as a matter of public record in the office of the Township Clerk.
Such record shall also include a copy of every notice or order issued in
connection with the matter. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the
Board of Health may seek relief therefrom in any court of competent
jurisdiction, as provided by the laws of the state.
C. Whenever the Health Officer finds that an emergency exists which
requires immediate action to protect the public health or safety, he may,
without notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such
an emergency and requiring that such action be taken as he deems
necessary to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding the other provisions
of this chapter, such order shall be effective immediately. Any person to
whom such order is directed shall comply therewith immediately, but
upon petition to the Board of Health, shall be afforded a hearing as soon
as possible. After such hearing, depending upon its findings as to
whether the provisions of this chapter and of the rules and regulations
adopted pursuant thereto have been complied with, the Board of Health
shall continue such order in effect, modify it or revoke it.
§ 469-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 469-7
1:1591
§ 469-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-21-1972 by Ord. No.
H3-72]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than
$2 nor more than $500. Each violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter and each day the same is violated shall be deemed and taken to be
a separate and distinct offense.
§ 469-8. Board of Health certificate to transfer buildings. [Added
10-18-1966 by Ord. No. 6-66H]
No owner, agent of owner, real estate agent or broker, firm, company,
partnership, corporation or person or persons shall sell, rent, transfer,
grant, lease, let, mortgage with right of occupancy or otherwise dispose
of the ownership or occupancy of, whether or not for a consideration
and whether such disposal of ownership or occupancy be temporary or
permanent, any dwelling, dwelling unit, hotel, motel, rooming house,
rooming unit, boardinghouse or premises on which a building is located and
is used or intended to be used for human occupancy, until a certificate of
approval shall first have been obtained from the Jackson Township Board of
Health, stating the building and premises comply with the requirements of
the Jackson Township Housing Code. Any persons occupying such premises,
or any person, corporation, partnership, organization or agency contracting
with the owner for occupancy of premises by another, shall be bound by the
provisions of this section and the penalties imposed for the violation of the
same.
Chapter 474
NUISANCES, PUBLIC HEALTH
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 98.
Brush, weeds, trash and debris — See Ch. 115.
Unsafe buildings and structures — See Ch.
133.
Garbage, rubbish and waste material — See
Ch. 216.
Noise — See Ch. 291.
Toxic and hazardous materials — See Ch. 394.
Swine — See Ch. 499.
§ 474-1. Adoption of standards.
A code defining and prohibiting certain matters, things, conditions or acts,
and each of them, as a nuisance; prohibiting certain noises or sounds;
requiring the proper heating of apartments; prohibiting lease or rental
of certain buildings; prohibiting spitting in or upon public buildings,
conveyances or sidewalks; authorizing the inspection of premises by an
§ 469-7 JACKSON CODE § 474-1
1:1592
enforcing official; providing for the removal or abatement of certain
nuisances and recovery of expenses incurred by the Board of Health in
removing or abating such nuisances; and prescribing penalties for
violations, is hereby established pursuant to Chapter 188, Laws of 1950.238
A copy of said code is annexed hereto and made a part hereof without the
inclusion of the text thereof herein.
§ 474-2. Title.
The said code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the "Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey
(1953)."
§ 474-3. Copies on file.
Three copies of the said Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey (1953)
have been placed on file in the office of the Health Officer, Secretary, Clerk
or other similar officer of this local Board of Health upon the introduction of
this chapter and will remain on file there for the use and examination of the
public.
§ 474-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-21-1972 by Ord. No.
H3-72]
Any person who violates or neglects to comply with any provision of this
chapter or code established herein or notice issued pursuant thereto shall,
upon conviction thereof, be liable to a penalty of not less than $2 nor more
than $500 for each violation.
Chapter 479
RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 86. Land use and development regulations — See
Ch. 244.
238. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 et seq.
§ 474-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 474-4
1:1593

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 7-14-1975 by Ord. No. H3-75 (Ch. 130, Art. I, of the 1972
Code)]
§ 479-1. Adoption of standards.
A code regulating retail food establishments and fixing penalties for
violations is hereby established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 to 26:3-69.6.
A copy of said code is annexed hereto and made a part hereof without the
inclusion of the text thereof herein.
§ 479-2. Title.
The said code established and adopted by this article is commonly known as
the "Retail Food Establishment Code of New Jersey (1965)."
§ 479-3. Copies on file.
Three copies of the said Retail Food Establishment Code of New Jersey
(1965) have been placed on file in the office of the Health Officer of this
local Board of Health upon the introduction of this article and will remain
on file there until final action is taken on this article for use and examination
by the public.
§ 479-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of or order promulgated under this
article or code established herein shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to
a penalty of not less than $2 nor more than $100 for each violation. Each
day a particular violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 479-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 479-4
1:1595

ARTICLE II
Licensing
[Adopted 7-14-1975 by Ord. No. H4-75 (Ch. 130, Art. II, of the 1972
Code)]
§ 479-5. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person or any body corporate to conduct a
retail food establishment as defined in and governed by the Retail Food
Establishment Code of New Jersey (1965) established by ordinance of the
local Board of Health, dated July 14, 1975, without first having procured a
license from the local Board of Health to do so or without complying with
any or all of the provisions concerning operation and maintenance of the
same as contained in the aforementioned Retail Food Establishment Code
of New Jersey (1965).
§ 479-6. Fees.
The fees for licensing of food establishments are hereby fixed as follows:
§ 479-7. Revocation of license; hearing; subsequent licenses.
A. Retail food establishment, permanent locale: $20.
B. Temporary food establishments: $15.
A. Any license issued under the terms and provisions of this article may be
suspended or revoked by the Board of Health of this municipality for the
violation by the licensee of any provision of this article or the Retail
Food Establishment Code of New Jersey (1965), or whenever it shall
appear that the business, trade, calling, profession or occupation of the
person, firm or corporation to whom such license was issued is
conducted in a disorderly or improper manner, or in violation of any law
of the United States, the State of New Jersey, or any ordinance of this
municipality, or that the person or persons conducting the retail food
establishment is of an unfit character to conduct the same, or that the
purpose for which the license has been issued is being abused to the
detriment of the public, or is being used for a purpose foreign to that for
which the license was issued.
B. A license issued under the terms and provisions of this article shall not
be revoked, canceled or suspended until a hearing thereon shall have
been had by the Board of Health. Written notice of the time and place of
such hearing shall be served upon the licensee at least three days prior
to the date set for such hearing. Such notice shall also contain a brief
statement of the grounds to be relied upon for revoking, canceling or
suspending such license. Notice may be given either by personal
delivery thereof to the person to be notified or shall be deposited in the
United States Post Office in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid,
addressed to such person to be notified at the business address
appearing upon said license. At the hearing before the Board of Health,
§ 479-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 479-7
1:1597
§ 479-8. Construal of provisions.
No provision in this article shall be applied so as to impose any unlawful
burden on either interstate commerce or any activity of the state or federal
government.
§ 479-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not to exceed
$200 or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not to exceed
90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment; and each violation of any
of the provisions of this article and each day the same is violated shall be
deemed and taken to be a separate and distinct offense.
the person aggrieved shall have an opportunity to answer and may
thereafter be heard, and upon due consideration and deliberation by
the Board of Health, the complaint may be dismissed, or, if the Board
of Health concludes that the charges have been sustained and
substantiated, it may revoke, cancel or suspend the license held by the
licensee.
C. If any such license shall have been revoked, neither the holder thereof
nor any person acting for him, directly or indirectly, shall be entitled to
another license to carry on the same business within the Township
unless the application for such license shall be approved by the Board
of Health.
§ 479-7 JACKSON CODE § 479-9
1:1598
ARTICLE III
Mobile Food and Retail Sales and Service Units
[Adopted 5-18-1982 by Ord. No. H2-82 (Ch. 130, Art. III, of the 1972
Code)]
§ 479-10. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MOBILE FOOD RETAIL SALES AND SERVICE UNIT (hereinafter referred
to as a "MOBILE UNIT") — Any movable restaurant, truck, van, cart, bicycle
or other movable unit, including hand-carried portable containers, or on
which food or beverage is transported, stored or prepared for retail sale or
given away at temporary or permanent locations.
§ 479-11. Compliance with specifications.
Mobile units shall comply with the following specifications.
§ 479-12. Potable water supply tent.
A potable water supply tent, with a minimum capacity of 30 gallons, heated
electrically or otherwise and tilted toward a capped drain cock, shall be
provided; the water inlet pipe shall be of removable flexible copper or other
tubing approved by the local Board of Health of Jackson Township, with
the nozzle for hose connection capped when not being used. A hose for
connection to potable water supply shall be provided and shall be equipped
with an approved vacuum breaker and check valve.
§ 479-13. Three-compartment sink.
A seamless three-compartment sink, supplied with running hot and cold
water, which shall have a swivel faucet, shall be provided, and it shall be
large enough to accommodate the largest piece of equipment to be cleansed
therein.
§ 479-14. Hand-wash sink.
A hand-wash sink, seamless, with running hot and cold water, soap and
single-service individual towels or mechanical hand dryer, shall be provided.
§ 479-15. Waste tank.
A suitable waste tank with an adequate method of gauging the contents and
having a capacity at least equal to the capacity of the water supply tank
shall be provided and shall be tilted toward a drain cock. It shall be emptied
and flushed into a sanitary sewer or septic system as often as necessary in
a sanitary manner in order to maintain sanitary conditions.
§ 479-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 479-16
1:1599
§ 479-16. Refrigerated box.
A mechanical refrigerated box that shall maintain a temperature of 45° F.
or below and equipped with indicating thermometer shall be provided for
various ingredients carried with metal racks or platforms provided to store
ingredients.
§ 479-17. Floors.
Floors shall be of metal or similar approved material and properly sloped to
provide proper drainage. Junctures of floor wall and adjoining fixtures shall
be watertight and covered.
§ 479-18. Refuse container.
A refuse container with a cover must be available for deposit of papers and
other solid wastes by customers and operators and must be so constructed
and designed and placed so that it can be readily used, cleaned and kept
clean and located where it will not create a nuisance.
§ 479-19. Lighting.
Mobile units operating after dark shall be well lighted with at least 30
footcandles of light intensity on all working surfaces.
§ 479-20. Posting of notice in service area.
Notice shall be posted in the service area of the mobile unit with
instructions as to proper handling of food materials and containers, proper
cleansing of equipment, utensils and appurtenances and proper waste
disposal.
§ 479-21. Clothing.
Persons handling food shall be clothed in clean, washable uniforms,
preferably white ones.
§ 479-22. Method of supplying water.
A hose-and-water connection equipped with a vacuum breaker shall be
provided for supplying water to the mobile unit, as well as a method of
handling the hose for draining to prevent contamination.
§ 479-23. Serving windows.
Serving windows shall be glassed or screened and shall be kept closed at all
times, except when being used to serve customers.
§ 479-24. Removal of refuse and waste.
Suitable covered storage facilities or containers shall be provided for all
refuse and waste, which must be removed daily.
§ 479-16 JACKSON CODE § 479-25
1:1600
§ 479-25. Construction materials.
Every mobile unit shall be constructed of such acceptable material as
to enable it to be readily cleaned, and equipment shall be installed in
such a manner that the unit can be kept clean and food will not become
contaminated. The unit of equipment shall be provided with a close-fitting
cover where required.
§ 479-26. Water supply.
The water supply shall be adequate, of a safe, sanitary quality and derived
from an approved source. Cold water and hot water (of a temperature not
less than 140° F. under pressure) shall be provided in all processing and
washing areas.
§ 479-27. Cleaning of equipment.
All residues shall be removed from equipment after use each day, and
product contact surfaces shall be sanitized after use each day, and product
contact surfaces shall be sanitized just prior to use each day. Interior
surfaces contacted by foods shall be completely disassembled daily for
cleansing. However, installations and methods used for cleaning equipment
without disassembling same may be utilized by approval of the local Board
of Health of Jackson Township.
§ 479-28. Storing and handling of equipment.
After cleaning and sanitizing, all product contact surfaces of equipment
and all utensils shall be stored and handled as to be protected from
contaminations.
§ 479-29. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of this article shall be punishable by a fine of not less than
$25 nor more than $500 for each offense. Each day that a violation shall be
permitted to exist shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense.
§ 479-30. Construal of provisions.
This article shall be construed and interpreted in pari materia with the
Retail Food Establishment Code of New Jersey (1965), as amended and
supplemented from time to time.
§ 479-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 479-30
1:1601
Chapter 484
SANITARY FACILITIES, CERTIFICATION OF
§ 484-1. Authorization for issuance of certificate.
There is hereby authorized the issuance of a health certificate with respect
to all sanitary facilities, in conjunction with the sale of homes to be
mortgaged under the Federal Housing Authority and the Veterans'
Administration program or to any purchaser requesting said certificate
prior to purchasing a home in Jackson Township. Said certificate shall be
issued by the Board of Health of the Township of Jackson.
§ 484-2. Application for certificate; fee.
§ 484-3. Disposition of fees.
All fees shall be deposited in the general fund of the Township of Jackson.
Chapter 493
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS, INDIVIDUAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 162.
Housing standards — See Ch. 233.
Land use and development regulations — See
Ch. 244.
Sanitary sewers — See Ch. 336.
Water — See Ch. 437.
§ 493-1. Adoption of standards.
A code regulating the location, construction, use, maintenance and method
of emptying or cleaning individual sewage disposal systems; the issuance
of permits to locate, construct, empty or clean said systems; and fixing
penalties for the violation thereof, is hereby adopted pursuant to Chapter
188, P.L. 1950 (N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 to 26:3-69.6). A copy of said code is
A. Any person, persons, partnership or corporation desiring a health
certificate with respect to sanitary facilities in conjunction with the sale
of homes to be mortgaged under the Federal Housing Authority and
Veterans' Administration program, or otherwise, shall file an
application with the Board of Health.
B. Said person, persons, partnership or corporation shall pay to the Board
of Health a fee of $25 for each certification, when requested separately,
for the purpose of covering the costs of said inspection.
§ 479-30 JACKSON CODE § 493-1
1:1602
annexed hereto and made a part hereof without inclusion of the text thereof
herein.
§ 493-2. Title.
The said code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the "Individual Sewage Disposal System Code of New
Jersey (1963)."
§ 493-3. Copies on file.
Three copies of the said Individual Sewage Disposal System Code of New
Jersey (1963) have been placed on file in the office of the Secretary, Clerk
or other similar officer of this Board of Health upon the introduction of this
chapter and will remain on file in said office for the use and examination of
the public.
§ 493-4. Permit required; issuance.
§ 493-5. Certificate of compliance.
A. No person shall locate, construct or alter any individual sewage
disposal system until a permit for the location, construction or
alteration of said sewage disposal system shall have been issued by the
Board of Health.
B. The Board of Health may issue a permit if an application for the same is
accompanied by a certificate made by an engineer licensed to practice
professional engineering in New Jersey, stating that the design of the
individual sewage disposal system as proposed is in compliance with
the code.
A. New individual disposal systems shall not be placed in operation, nor
shall new dwellings or buildings or additions thereto be sold or
occupied which must rely on such a system for sewage disposal, until
the Board of Health shall have issued a certificate indicating that said
disposal system has been located and constructed in compliance with
the terms of the permit issued and the requirements of the aforesaid
code. Issuance of such certificate shall not be required for alterations to
an existing individual sewage disposal system.
B. The Board of Health may issue such a certificate if an engineer licensed
to practice professional engineering in New Jersey submits a statement
in writing, signed by him, to the Board of Health that the said disposal
system has been located and constructed in accordance with the terms
of the permit issued and the requirements of the aforesaid code.
§ 493-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 493-6
1:1603
§ 493-6. Emptying or cleaning of septic tanks or cesspools.
[Amended 5-12-1975 by Ord. No. H1-75]
Persons shall not engage in the business of emptying or cleaning septic
tanks, cesspools, privies or any place used for the reception or storage of
human excrement who do not hold a license to engage in such business
issued by the Board of Health. Such licenses shall be valid for a period of
one year from the date of issuance but may be renewed by the Board of
Health. Said license may be revoked for failure of the licensee to comply
with the provisions of the code or any rule or ordinance of the Board of
Health.
§ 493-7. Denial of certificate or permit.
In case any permit or certification required by this chapter is denied by the
Board of Health, a hearing shall be held thereon before the Board within 15
days after request therefor is made by the applicant, and upon such hearing,
the Board of Health shall affirm, alter or rescind its previous determination
and take action accordingly within 15 days after the date of such hearing.
§ 493-8. Stop-work orders.
The Board of Health may order all further work in and about any individual
sewage disposal system which is being erected or installed in violation of
the code to be stopped forthwith, except such work as shall be necessary
to remedy such violation, and thereafter the work continued without any
violation of any of the provisions of the code, and after issuance of any such
order and the service of a copy thereof upon any person connected with
or working in and about the erection or installation of any such disposal
system or any part thereof, no further work shall be done thereon except as
aforesaid.
§ 493-9. Fees.
The following fees and charges are herewith established:
A. For the filing of an application and plans for a permit to locate and
construct an individual sewage disposal system: $10.
B. For the filing of an application and plans for a permit to alter an existing
individual sewage disposal system: $8.
C. For each reinspection of an individual sewage disposal system or part
thereof caused by the failure of the permittee to locate and construct or
alter the same in accordance with the terms of the permit issued or the
terms of the aforesaid code, an inspection fee of $5 shall be charged.
D. For the issuance or renewal of a license to a person or corporation
engaged in the business of cleaning or emptying receptacles for the
reception and storage of human excrement or other putrescible matter,
there shall be an annual fee of $5 for each vehicle or conveyance.
[Amended 5-12-1975 by Ord. No. H1-75]
§ 493-6 JACKSON CODE § 493-10
1:1604
§ 493-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-21-1972 by Ord.
No. H3-72]
Chapter 499
SWINE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 98.
Pet waste — See Ch. 216, Art. I.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 474.
§ 499-1. Adoption of standards.
A code regulating premises on which swine are maintained; establishing
minimum standards governing the location and maintenance of such
premises; authorizing inspections of such premises; declaring and defining
certain acts or conditions on such premises as nuisances; declaring and
fixing penalties for violations thereof, is hereby adopted pursuant to
Chapter 188, P.L. 1950 (N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 to 26:3-69.6). A copy of said code
is annexed hereto and made a part hereof without inclusion of the text
thereof herein.
§ 499-2. Title.
The said code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the "Maintenance of Swine Code of New Jersey
(1957)."
§ 499-3. Copies on file.
Three copies of said Maintenance of Swine Code of New Jersey (1957) have
been placed on file in the office of the Secretary, Clerk or other similar
officer of this Board of Health upon the introduction of this chapter and will
remain on file in said office for the use and examination of the public.
§ 499-4. License required; number of swine restricted. [Amended
4-21-1981 by Ord. No. H1-81]
A. Any person or persons, firm or corporation violating any of the
provisions of or any order promulgated under this chapter or the
Individual Sewage Disposal System Code of New Jersey (1963) made a
part hereof shall, upon conviction thereof, pay a penalty of not less than
$2 nor more than $500 for each violation.
B. Each day a particular violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 493-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 499-4
1:1605
§ 499-5. Denial or suspension of license.
Licenses required by this chapter or code may be denied or suspended by
this Board of Health for failure to comply with this chapter or code. This
Board of Health shall afford the person whose license to maintain swine on
premises has been denied or suspended an opportunity to be heard in public
hearing and, following this, to be informed of the Board's decision within
two weeks thereafter.
§ 499-6. License fee. [Amended 4-21-1981 by Ord. No. H1-81]
The fee for a license to maintain swine on premises shall be $25.
§ 499-7. Duration of license.
Licenses issued for the maintenance of swine on premises shall expire
annually on the last day of each year, and application for renewal thereof
shall be submitted, together with the required fee, prior to January 1 of each
year.
§ 499-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or neglects to comply with any provision of this
chapter or code established herein or notice issued pursuant thereto shall,
upon conviction thereof, be liable to a penalty of not less than $5 nor more
than $500 for each violation.
Chapter 505
WATER SUPPLIES, INDIVIDUAL AND SEMIPUBLIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 162.
Housing standards — See Ch. 233.
Land use and development regulations — See
Ch. 244.
Sanitary sewers — See Ch. 336.
Water — See Ch. 437.
A. No person shall maintain more than three swine, as defined in said
code, on premises within the boundaries of this municipality until a
valid license therefor shall have been issued by the Board of Health;
provided, however, that in no case shall any person maintain more than
nine swine and no more than nine piglets per sow on any single
premises within the boundaries of this municipality for any purpose or
reason whatsoever.
B. For the purposes of this chapter, only swine which have attained the age
of six months shall be included herein.
§ 499-4 JACKSON CODE § 499-8
1:1606
§ 505-1. Adoption of standards.
A code regulating the location, construction, alteration, uses and
supervision of individual and semipublic water supplies; requiring certain
permits; providing for the inspection of such supplies and the fixing of fees;
and prescribing penalties for violations, is hereby adopted pursuant to P.L.
1950, c. 188 (N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 to 26:3-69.6). A copy of said code is annexed
hereto and made a part hereof without inclusion of the text thereof herein.
§ 505-2. Title.
The said code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the "Individual and Semipublic Water Supply Code of
New Jersey (1966)."
§ 505-3. Copies on file.
Three copies of the said Individual and Semipublic Water Supply Code of
New Jersey (1966) have been placed on file in the office of the Secretary,
Clerk or other similar officer of this Board of Health upon the introduction
of this chapter and will remain on file in said office for the use and
examination by the public.
§ 505-4. Permits.
§ 505-5. Certificates of compliance. [Amended 4-11-1977 by Ord.
No. 3-77; 11-18-1986]
A. No person shall locate, construct or alter any water supply until a
permit for the location, construction or alteration of said water supply
shall have been issued by the Board of Health.
B. The Board of Health may issue a permit if an application for the same is
accompanied by a certificate made by an engineer licensed to practice
professional engineering in New Jersey, stating that the design of the
water supply as proposed is in compliance with the code.
A. New water supplies shall not be placed in operation, nor shall new or
existing dwellings or buildings or additions thereto be sold or occupied
which must rely on such a supply for water, until the Board of Health
shall have issued a certificate indicating that said water supply has
been located and constructed in compliance with the terms of the
permit issued and the requirements of the aforesaid code and a
satisfactory analysis of a water sample collected by a Board of Health
representative, indicating that the water supply meets all state and
local potable water standards, which standards shall include a pH level
of 6.5 to 8.0. Issuance of such certificate shall not be required for
alteration to an existing water supply.
§ 499-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 505-5
1:1607
§ 505-6. Denial of permit or certificate.
In case any permit or certification required by this chapter is denied by the
Board of Health, a hearing shall be held thereon before the Board within 15
days after request therefor is made by the applicant, and upon such hearing,
the Board of Health shall affirm, alter or rescind its previous determination
and take action accordingly within 15 days after the date of such hearing.
§ 505-7. Stop-work orders.
The Board of Health may order all further work in and about any water
supply which is being erected or installed in violation of the code to be
stopped forthwith, except such work as shall be necessary to remedy such
violation, and thereafter the work continued without any violation of any of
the provisions of the code, and, after issuance of any such order and the
service of a copy thereof upon any person connected with or working in
and about the erection or installation of any such water supply or any part
thereof, no further work shall be done thereon except as aforesaid.
§ 505-8. Fees.
The following fees and charges are hereby established:
B. The Board of Health may issue such a certificate if an engineer licensed
to practice professional engineering in New Jersey submits a statement,
in writing, signed by him, to the Board of Health that said water supply
has been located and constructed in accordance with the terms of the
permit and the requirements of the aforesaid code.
A. For the filing of an application and plans for a permit to locate and
construct a water supply: $1.
B. For the filing of an application and plans for a permit to alter an existing
water supply: $1.
C. For the issuance of a permit to locate and construct or alter a water
supply: $5.
D. For each reinspection of a water supply or part thereof caused by the
failure of the permittee to locate and construct or alter the same in
accordance with the terms of the permit issued or the terms of the
aforesaid code, an inspection fee of $5 shall be charged.
E. The Board of Health shall fix yearly or as often as necessary, by duly
adopted resolution, the amount to be charged for each water sample
taken and administered by a Board of Health representative. In the
event that the Board fails to adopt such a resolution for whatever
reason, then the water sample fee to be charged shall remain the same
as that set forth in the Board's last adopted resolution fixing said fee,
and said fee shall remain in effect until changed by the Board as herein
provided. [Added 4-11-1977 by Ord. No. 3-77; amended 3-16-1982
by Ord. No. H1-82]
§ 505-5 JACKSON CODE § 505-9
1:1608
§ 505-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-21-1972 by Ord. No.
H3-72]
Appendix
Chapter A510
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
§ A510-1. Purpose.
WHEREAS, the governing body of the Township of Jackson (hereinafter
referred to as the "Township") determined that Cablevision of Monmouth,
Inc., (hereinafter referred to as "the company" or "Cablevision") has the
technical competence and general fitness to operate a cable system in
the Township, and by prior ordinance granted its municipal consent for
Cablevision to obtain a nonexclusive franchise for the placement of facilities
and the establishment of a cable television system in the Township; and
WHEREAS, by application for renewal consent filed with the Township and
the Office of Cable Television on or about December 10, 2003, Cablevision
has sought a renewal of the franchise; and
WHEREAS, the Township having held public hearings has made due inquiry
to review Cablevision's performance under the franchise, and to identify
the Township's future cable-related needs and interests and has concluded
that Cablevision has substantially complied with its obligations under the
franchise and has committed to certain undertakings responsive to the
Township's future cable-related needs and interests; and
WHEREAS, the governing body of the Township has accordingly concluded
that the consent should be renewed subject to the requirements set forth
below; and that, provided Cablevision's proposal for renewal complies with
the requirements set forth below, the Township's municipal consent to the
renewal of the franchise should be given;
WHEREAS, the imposition by the Township of similar burdens and costs
upon franchise competitors is assumed by both parties;
NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Mayor and Council of the
Township of Jackson, County of Ocean, and State of New Jersey, as follows:
A. Any person or persons, firm or corporation violating any of the
provisions of or any order promulgated under this chapter or the
Individual and Semipublic Water Supply Code of New Jersey (1966)
made a part hereof shall, upon conviction thereof, pay a penalty of not
less than $2 nor more than $500 for each violation.
B. Each day a particular violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 505-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A510-2
1:1609
§ A510-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the terms defined above shall have the
meanings there indicated, and the following additional terms shall have the
following meanings:
ACT or CABLE TELEVISION ACT — That statute of the State of New Jersey
relating to cable television, known as the "Cable Television Act," N.J.S.A.
48:5A-1 et seq., and any subsequent amendment thereto.
APPLICATION — Cablevision's application for renewal of municipal
consent, which application is on file in the Township Clerk's office and
is incorporated herein by reference and made a part hereof, except as
modified, changed, limited or altered by this ordinance.
BOARD — The Board of Public Utilities of the State of New Jersey or its
successor agency.
COMPANY — Cablevision of Monmouth, Inc. (Cablevision), the grantee of
rights under this ordinance.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
FEDERAL ACT — That federal statute relating to cable communications
commonly known as the "Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984," 47
U.S.C. § 521 et seq., and the Telecommunications Act of 1996, or as those
statutes may be amended.
FEDERAL REGULATIONS — Those federal regulations relating to cable
television services, 47 CFR 76.1 et seq. (and, to the extent applicable, any
other federal rules and regulations relating to cable television, including but
not limited to those described in 47 CFR 76.3), or as such regulations may
be amended.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, or organization of any kind.
STANDARD INSTALLATION — The installation of drop cable to a customer's
premise where the distance from the point of entry into the building being
served is less than 150 feet from the active cable television system plant.
STATE — The State of New Jersey.
STATE REGULATIONS — Those regulations of the State of New Jersey
Board of Public Utilities relating to cable television, N.J.A.C. 14:17-1.1 et
seq. and N.J.A.C. 14:18-1.1 et seq., or as such regulations may be amended.
STREET — The streets, avenues, highways, parks, parkways, driveways,
concourses, boulevards, bridges, viaducts, tunnels, public places, or any
property to which the Township has title or over which the public has an
easement or right-of-way.
SYSTEM — The lines, fixtures, equipment, attachments and all the
appurtenances thereto of whatsoever kind, which are used or intended for
use in the construction, operation, maintenance and transmission of audio,
video and/or other signals by the cable company herein authorized.
§ A510-2 JACKSON CODE § A510-2
1:1610
TOWNSHIP — The governing body of the Township of Jackson in the County
of Ocean, and the State of New Jersey.
§ A510-3. Statement of findings.
A public hearing concerning the consent herein granted to Cablevision was
held after proper public notice pursuant to the terms and conditions of the
Act. Said hearing having been held and fully open to the public, and the
municipality having received all comments regarding the qualifications of
Cablevision to receive this consent, the Township hereby finds Cablevision
possesses the necessary legal, technical, character, financial and other
qualifications to support municipal consent, and that Cablevision's
operating and construction arrangements are adequate and feasible.
§ A510-4. Grant of consent.
The Township hereby grants to Cablevision its nonexclusive consent to
place in, upon, along, across, above, over, and under its highways, streets,
alleys, sidewalks, public ways, and public places in the municipality poles,
wires, cables, and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation
in the Township of a system. Operation and construction, pursuant to said
consent, is conditioned upon prior approval of the Board of Public Utilities.
§ A510-5. Duration of franchise.
This consent granted herein shall be nonexclusive and shall be for a term of
15 years from the date of issuance of a certificate of approval by the Board.
§ A510-6. Expiration and subsequent renewal.
If Cablevision seeks a renewal of the consent provided herein, it shall,
prior to the expiration of this consent, apply for a municipal consent and
certificate of approval in accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-16, and applicable
state and federal rules and regulations. The company shall also petition
the Board for approval authorizing continued operation during the period
following expiration of the consent granted herein, and until such a time
that a decision is made by the Township and the Board relative to the
renewal of said consent.
§ A510-7. Franchise territory.
The consent granted under this ordinance to Cablevision shall apply to the
entirety of the Township and any property hereafter annexed.
§ A510-8. Service area.
Cablevision shall be required to proffer video programming service along
any public right-of-way to any person's residence within the portion of the
franchise territory, as described in the application for municipal consent, at
tariffed rates for standard and nonstandard installation.
§ A510-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A510-9
1:1611
§ A510-9. Extension of service.
Cablevision shall extend service along any public right-of-way outside its
service area to those residences within the franchise territory which are
located in areas that have a residential density of 25 homes per mile or
greater, or areas with less than 25 homes per mile where residents agree
to share the costs of such extension in accordance with the line extension
formula as provided by the company in its application for municipal consent.
§ A510-10. Franchise fee.
Cablevision shall pay to the Township an annual franchise fee, in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-30.
§ A510-11. Free service.
§ A510-12. Construction/system requirements.
A. Cablevision shall, upon request, provide free of charge, one standard
installation and monthly cable television reception service to all state or
locally accredited public elementary and secondary schools and all
municipal public libraries, each police building, fire station, and first
aid building as well as municipal buildings located within the Township
that are used for municipal governmental purposes.
B. Upon written request from the Township, the company shall provide to
state and locally accredited elementary and secondary schools and
municipal public libraries in the Township, without charge, the
following: one standard installation per school or library; one cable
modem per installation; and, basic Internet service via cable modem for
the term of this ordinance for each installation. This offer shall be
subject to the terms, conditions and use policies of the company, as
those policies may exist from time to time; provided, however, that
these changes in policy affect only changes in use, and not the
elimination of the free service provided for herein.
C. Upon written request from the Township, the company shall provide to
Jackson Town Hall, without charge, the following: one standard
installation; one cable modem per installation; and basic Internet via
cable modem service for the term of this ordinance for each installation.
This offer shall be subject to the terms, conditions and use policies of
the company as those policies may exist from time to time; provided,
however, that these changes in policy affect only changes in use, and
not the elimination of the free service provided for herein.
A. All transmission and distribution structures, lines end equipment
erected or operated by the company within the Township shall be
located and operated so as to cause the minimal interference with the
rights or reasonable convenience of property owners adjoining any of
said streets, alleys or other public ways and places of location or
operation.
§ A510-9 JACKSON CODE § A510-12
1:1612
§ A510-13. Technical and customer service standards.
Cablevision shall comply with the technical and customer service standards
established for the cable industry under applicable federal and state laws,
rules and regulations.
§ A510-14. Local office or agent.
Cablevision shall establish and maintain during the entire term of this
consent a local area business office or agent for the purpose of receiving,
investigating and resolving complaints regarding the quality of service,
equipment malfunctions and similar matters. Said office shall be open daily
B. Restoration. In the event that the company or its agents shall disturb
any pavement, street surfaces, sidewalks, driveways or other surfaces
in the natural topography, the company shall, at its sole expense,
restore and replace such places or things so disturbed in as good
condition as existed prior to the commencement of said work.
C. Relocation. If at any time during the period of this consent, the
Township shall alter or change the grade of any street, alley, or other
way or place, the company, upon reasonable notice by the Township,
shall remove, relay and relocate its equipment at the expense of the
company.
D. Placement of fixtures. The company shall not place or operate any
fixture or equipment in such locations as will or may interfere with any
other public or private utility system or any part thereof, and the
location by the company of its lines and equipment shall be in such
manner as not to interfere with the usual travel or use of said streets,
alleys and public or private ways or places and the use and enjoyment
thereof by all of such public and private utility companies, or the owner
of such places.
E. Temporary removal of cables. The company shall, upon request of the
Township, at the company's sole expense, temporarily raise, lower or
remove its lines in order to facilitate the moving of buildings or
machinery or in other like circumstances. If by private request, the
party requesting same shall be responsible for the company's expenses.
F. Removal or trimming of trees. During the exercise of its rights and
privileges under this franchise, the company shall be responsible for
the trimming of trees upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks
and public places of the Township so as to prevent the branches of such
trees from coming in contact with the wires and cables of the company.
Such trimming shall be only to the extent necessary to maintain proper
clearance for the company's facilities.
G. Restoration of landscaping. The company shall restore all landscaping,
streets, etc., to prior condition for any installation, retrofit and/or
maintenance without additional costs to the owner.
§ A510-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A510-14
1:1613
during normal business hours, and in no event less than 9:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m., Monday through Friday, with the exception of holidays.
§ A510-15. Designation of complaint officer.
The Office of Cable Television is hereby designated as the complaint officer
for the Township pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 48:5A-26. All
complaints shall be reviewed and processed in accordance with N.J.A.C.
14:17-6.5.
§ A510-16. Liability insurance.
The company agrees to maintain and keep in full force and effect at its
sole expense at all times during the term of this consent, sufficient liability
insurance naming the Township as an additional insured and insuring
against loss by any such claim, suit, judgment, execution or demand in
the minimum amounts of $1,000,000 for bodily injury or death to any one
person; $1,000,000 for property damage resulting from any one accident;
$1,000,000 for all other types of liability; $5,000,000 umbrella excess
liability; and worker's compensation with statutory limits. Such coverage
shall be written by a company or companies authorized and qualified to do
business in the State of New Jersey. Upon written request, certificates of all
such policies shall be promptly filed by the company with the Township.
§ A510-17. Performance bond.
Cablevision shall obtain and maintain, at its sole cost and expense, during
the entire term of this ordinance, a bond in form acceptable to the
municipality in the amount of $25,000. Such bond shall be to insure the
faithful performance of its obligations as provided in this franchise.
§ A510-18. Rates.
A. The rates of the company for cable television services shall be subject
to regulation to the extent permitted by federal and state law.
B. Senior citizen discount.
(1) Cablevision shall implement a senior citizen discount in the amount
of 25% off the monthly rate of the broadcast basic level of cable
television reception service to any person 62 years of age of older
who subscribes to the company's cable television service, subject to
the following:
(a) Such discount shall only be available to eligible senior citizens
who do not share the subscription with more than one person
in the same household who is less than 62 years of age; and
(b) In accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-11.2, subscribers seeking
eligibility for the discount must meet the income and residence
requirements of the Pharmaceutical Assistance to Aged and
§ A510-14 JACKSON CODE § A510-18
1:1614
§ A510-19. Equitable terms. [Amended 3-23-2010 by Ord. No.
09-10]
Disabled (PAAD) program in the state pursuant to N.J.S.A.
30:4D-21; and
(c) The senior citizen discount herein relates only to the broadcast
basic level of cable television service, and shall not apply to
any subscribers receiving service under a bulk arrangement,
or to any additional service, feature, or equipment offered by
the company, including premium channel services and pay-perview
services; and
(d) Senior citizens who subscribe to a level of cable television
service beyond expanded basic service, including any premium
or per channel a la carte service, shall not be eligible for the
discount.
(2) Cablevision may, at its sole discretion and without prior notice to
the Town, eliminate the senior citizen discount specified herein
under any one of the following conditions:
(a) The company is required to increase the franchise fee in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-30d, which increase, if
required, would automatically set aside a portion of the
franchise fee to fund cable television services for low-income
senior citizens; or
(b) Cablevision obtains a system-wide franchise in the Township
under the Cable Television Act; or
(c) The company is no longer legally required to offer the current
twenty-five-percent senior citizen discount in neighboring
Howell and Lakewood Townships. If Cablevision is legally
obligated to provide a reduced discount in those two
neighboring communities, the company shall offer residents of
the Township at least the senior citizen discount required in
Howell and Lakewood; or
(d) Any other provision of applicable law that would permit
Cablevision to eliminate the senior citizen discount specified
herein.
A. In the event that the service of another multichannel video program
provider not subject to the Township's regulatory authority within the
Township creates a significant competitive disadvantage to Cablevision,
the company shall have the right to request from the Township lawful
amendments to its franchise that relieve it of the burdens which create
the unfair competitive situation. Should the company seek such
amendments to its franchise, the parties agree to negotiate in good
faith appropriate changes to the franchise in order to relieve the
company of such competitive disadvantages. If the parties can reach an
§ A510-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A510-19
1:1615
§ A510-20. Emergency uses.
Cablevision shall be required to have the capability to override the audio
portion of the system in order to permit the broadcasting of emergency
messages by the Township pursuant to state and federal requirements.
The company shall in no way be held liable for any injury suffered by
the Township or any other person, during an emergency if for any reason
the municipality is unable to make full use of the cable television system
as contemplated herein. The Township shall utilize the state-approved
procedures for such emergency uses.
§ A510-21. Removal of facilities.
Upon expiration, termination or revocation of this ordinance, Cablevision, at
its sole cost and expense and upon direction of the Board, shall remove the
cables and appurtenant devices constructed or maintained in connection
with the services authorized herein, unless Cablevision, its affiliated entities
or assignees should, within six months after such expiration, termination
or revocation, obtain certification from the FCC to operate an open video
system or any other federal or state certification to provide
telecommunications.
§ A510-22. Public, educational and governmental access.
agreement on such terms, the Township agrees to support the
company's petition to the Board for modification of the consent in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47 and N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.7.
B. If the parties are unable to reach an agreement on appropriate
amendments to the franchise, the Township acknowledges that the
company shall have the right to petition the Board directly for such
amendments in accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47 and N.J.A.C.
14:17-6.7; provided, however, that the Township shall be under no
obligation to support Cablevision's request for such relief from the
Board.
C. In any subsequent municipal consent, the Township shall require, at a
minimum, the same terms and conditions of any other provider of
multichannel video programming subject to the Township's regulatory
authority as those contained in the instant consent. In the event such
subsequent consent does not contain the same terms and conditions as
the instant consent, the Township agrees to support the company's
petition to the Board for modification of the consent in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47 and N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.7 to relieve the company of
competitive disadvantages identified in the company's petition.
A. Cablevision shall continue to make available noncommercial public,
educational and governmental (PEG) access as described in the
application for municipal consent.
§ A510-19 JACKSON CODE § A510-22
1:1616
§ A510-23. Incorporation of application.
All of the commitments contained in the application and any amendment
thereto submitted in writing to the Township by the company, except as
modified herein, are binding upon Cablevision as terms and conditions of
B. Upon written request by the Township, Cablevision shall install two
fiber access return feeds at municipally designated buildings. Upon
completion of the installations, Cablevision shall provide the Township,
in lieu of the regional PEG channel described in the application, with its
own designated channel, which the Township will use exclusively for
education and government access.
C. The Township agrees that Cablevision shall retain the right to use the
any public, education or government access channel, or portion thereof,
for non-PEG access programming during times when the Township is
not utilizing the channel capacity for purposes of providing access
programming. In the event that the company uses the access channel
for the presentation of such other programming, the access
programming shall remain the priority use and the company's rights
with respect to using the channel for non-access programming shall be
subordinate to the Township's provision of access programming on such
channel.
D. In consideration for the rights granted in this ordinance, the company
shall provide the Township with an initial grant in the amount of $7,500.
Such amount shall be paid to the Township within 60 days following the
adoption of this consent ordinance and its acceptance by the company,
or within 30 days of the grant of the certificate from the Board,
whichever comes first. In addition, beginning in the second year of the
municipal consent and annually thereafter through the fifteen-year
term of the franchise, Cablevision shall pay a grant to the Township in
the amount of $4,300 in each of the following years of the term of the
ordinance within 30 days of the anniversary date of the date of adoption
of the ordinance (the annual grant). The amount of the annual grant
shall be increased to $8,800 if prior to the date said annual grant is
payable, the company has eliminated or reduced the senior citizen
discount in accordance with § A510-18B(2)(c) or (d). The annual grant
may be used by the Township for any cable- and/or other
telecommunications related purpose as the Township, in its discretion,
may deem appropriate. Cablevision shall not be obligated to make any
additional payments beyond year 15 of the franchise.
E. Notwithstanding the foregoing, should Cablevision apply for a systemwide
certification or otherwise convert its municipal consent to a
system-wide certification in accordance with applicable law, it shall be
relieved of any payments due and owing after the date such systemwide
certification is granted by the Board of Public Utilities with the
exception of the initial grant of $7,500 as provided above, which shall,
in all cases, remain due and payable if the Township adopts its
municipal consent prior to September 1, 2008.
§ A510-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A510-23
1:1617
this consent. The application and any other written amendments thereto
submitted by Cablevision in connection with this consent are incorporated
in this ordinance by reference and made a part hereof, except as specifically
modified, changed, limited, or altered by this ordinance, or to the extent
that they conflict with state or federal law.
§ A510-24. Consistency with applicable laws.
This consent shall be construed in a manner consistent with all applicable
federal, state and local laws.
§ A510-25. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this
ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct
and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portion thereof.
§ A510-26. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect upon issuance of a certificate of approval as
issued by the Board of Public Utilities.
Derivation Table
Chapter DT
DERIVATION TABLE
§ DT-1. Derivation Table of 1972 Code to 2012 Code.
NCM = Not Code material (legislation is not general or permanent in nature).
REP = Repealed effective with adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, Art. III.
NI = Not included in Code but saved from repeal.
NLP = New legislation is pending.
Chapter/Title From 1972 Code Location in 2012 Code
PART I ADMINISTRATIVE LEGISLATION
Ch. 1, General Provisions
Art. I, Adoption of Code by Township
Committee
Ch. 1, Art. I
Art. II, Adoption of Code by Board of
Health
Ch. 450, Art. I
Art. III, Adoption of Administrative
Code
Ch. 1, Art. II
§ A510-23 JACKSON CODE § DT-1
1:1618
Chapter/Title From 1972 Code Location in 2012 Code
Ch. 3, Administration of Government Superseded by Ord. No. 32-06;
see Ch. 3
Ch. 6, Claims Approval Superseded by Ord. No. 32-06;
see Ch. 10
Ch. 7, Code Enforcement Officer Superseded by Ord. No. 32-06;
see Ch. 3
Ch. 9, Economic Development Advisory
Committee
Superseded by Ord. No. 32-06;
see Ch. 3
Ch. 10, Environmental Commission Superseded by Ord. No. 32-06;
see Ch. 3
Ch. 11, Court, Municipal Superseded by Ord. No. 32-06;
see Ch. 3
Ch. 13, Forester Superseded by Ord. No. 32-06;
see Ch. 3
Ch. 15, Health, Board of Superseded by Ord. No. 32-06;
see Ch. 3
Ch. 18, Recreation Commissioners,
Board of
Superseded by Ord. No. 32-06;
see Ch. 3
Ch. 19, Motor Pool and Vehicle
Maintenance, Dept. of
Superseded by Ord. No. 32-06;
see Ch. 3
Ch. 20, Personnel Superseded by Ord. No. 32-06;
see Ch. 50
Ch. 24, Police Department Superseded by Ord. No. 32-06;
see Ch. 3
Ch. 25, Prosecutor, Municipal Superseded by Ord. No. 32-06;
see Ch. 3
Ch. 27, Public Defender Superseded by Ord. No. 32-06;
see Ch. 3
Ch. 28, Removal of Public Officials Superseded by Ord. No. 32-06;
see Ch. 3
Ch. 29, Shade Tree Commission Superseded by Ord. No. 32-06;
see Ch. 3
Ch. 30, Tourism and Business
Development Council
Superseded by Ord. No. 32-06;
see Ch. 3
Ch. 31, Utilities Authority, Municipal Superseded by Ord. No. 32-06;
see Ch. 3
PART II GENERAL LEGISLATION
Ch. 36, Alarm Systems Ch. 80
Ch. 37, Alcoholic Beverages
Art. I, Licensing Ch. 86, Art. I
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:1619
Chapter/Title From 1972 Code Location in 2012 Code
Art. II, Use by Minors Ch. 86, Art. II
Art. III, Consumption and Possession
in Public
Ch. 86, Art. III
Ch. 38, Amusements
Art. I (Reserved) Omitted
Art. II, Licensing of Games Ch. 92, Art. I
Ch. 40, Brush, Weeds, Trash and Debris Ch. 115
Ch. 41, Buildings and Facilities, Public
Use of
Ch. 121
Ch. 42, Building Construction; Uniform
Construction Codes
Ch. 162
Ch. 43, Buildings and Structures,
Moving of
Ch. 127
Ch. 44, Buildings and Structures,
Unsafe
Ch. 133
Ch. 45, Building Standards,
Commercial
Ch. 139
Ch. 46, Campgrounds Ch. 145
Ch. 46A, Charitable Clothing Bins Ch. 148
Ch. 47, Checks, Returned Ch. 150
Ch. 48, Claims for Damages Repealed by Ord. No. 02-10
Ch. 49, Criminal Offenders,
Registration of
Ch. 166
Ch. 50, Curfew Ch. 172
Ch. 51, Dogs and Other Animals
Part 1, General Regulations
Art. I, Licensing of Dogs Ch. 98, Art. I
Art. II, Control and Care of
Animals
Ch. 98, Art. II
Art. III, Kennels; Pet Shops Ch. 98, Art. III
Art. IV, Animal Control Officer;
Impoundment
Ch. 98, Art. IV
Art. V, Wildlife Feeding Ch. 98, Art. IX
Part 2, (Reserved) Omitted
Part 3, Police Dogs
Art. IX, Harassment of Dogs Ch. 98, Art. VI
Part 4, Nuisances
Art. X, Duty of Owner or Keeper Ch. 98, Art. VII
§ DT-1 JACKSON CODE § DT-1
1:1620
Chapter/Title From 1972 Code Location in 2012 Code
Part 5, Feral Cats
Art. XI, Management Ch. 98, Art. X
Ch. 52, Drug-Free Zones Ch. 179
Ch. 53, Sex Offenders, Residency
Requirements
Ch. 342
Ch. 56, Excavations, Mining and
Dredging
Ch. 185
Ch. 59, Fences
Art. I, (Reserved) Omitted
Art. II, Fencing of Horses and Other
Livestock
Ch. 98, Art. V
Ch. 60, Firearms and Other Weapons Ch. 192
Ch. 61, Fire Prevention Ch. 204
Ch. 62, Flood Damage Prevention Ch. 210; see Land Use and
Related Regulations Volume
Ch. 62A, Fertilizer
Art. I, Application Requirements Ch. 189
Ch. 63, Garbage, Rubbish and Waste
Material
Art. I, Pet Waste Ch. 216, Art. I
Art. II, Proof of Service; Hours of
Operation
Ch. 216, Art. II
Art. III, (Reserved) Omitted
Art. IV, Storage and Collection Ch. 216, Art. III
Art. V, Recycling Ch. 216, Art. IV
Art. VI, Transfer Station and Bulky
Waste Compactor
Ch. 216, Art. V
Art. VII, Bulky Waste and Brush
Collection
Ch. 216, Art. VI
Ch. 64, Graffiti
Art. I, Placement Ch. 222, Art. I
Art. II, Removal Ch. 222, Art. II
Ch. 64A, Handicapped Parking Ch. 227
Ch. 65, Hawking, Peddling and
Soliciting
Ch. 310
Ch. 67, Horses and Other Livestock Ch. 98, Art. VIII
Ch. 68, Housing Standards Ch. 233
Ch. 69, Insurance
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:1621
Chapter/Title From 1972 Code Location in 2012 Code
Art. I, Fire Insurance Claims Ch. 198
Ch. 71, Junk and Junk Dealers Ch. 239, Art. I
Ch. 72, Length of Service Awards
Program
Art. I, First Aid Squad Ch. 33, Art. I
Ch. 73, Licenses
Art. I, Licensing of Businesses and
Occupations
Ch. 251, Art. I
Art. II, Enlargement or Transfer of
Licenses
Ch. 251, Art. II
Art. III, Screening of Applicants Ch. 251, Art. III
Ch. 73A, Liquefied Petroleum Gas
Art. I, Termination of Service Ch. 256, Art. I
Ch. 74, Littering
Art. I, Litter Control Ch. 262, Art. II
Art. II, Newspapers and Handbills Ch. 262, Art. I
Ch. 75, (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. 75A, Massage Parlors Ch. 268
Ch. 76, Mobile Home Dealerships Ch. 275
Ch. 77, Mobile Home Parks
Art. I, Senior Citizens' Parks Ch. 280, Art. I
Art. II, Adult Parks Ch. 280, Art. II
Ch. 78, Mobile Homes and Trailers Ch. 285
Ch. 79, Noise Ch. 291
Ch. 79A, Nonprofit Youth-Serving
Organizations
Ch. 107
Ch. 80, Open Space Trust Fund Ch. 29, Art. I
Ch. 81, Parades and Assemblies
Art. I, Parades Ch. 298, Art. I
Art. II, Rock Festivals Ch. 298, Art. II
Ch. 81A, (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. 82, Parks and Recreation Facilities
Art. I, General Regulations Ch. 304, Art. I
Art. II, Camp Joy Municipal
Recreation Area
Ch. 304, Art. II
Art. III, Skateboarding/In-Line
Skating Facility
Ch. 304, Art. III
§ DT-1 JACKSON CODE § DT-1
1:1622
Chapter/Title From 1972 Code Location in 2012 Code
Art. IV, Recreation Event Fees Ch. 304, Art. IV
Art. V, Administrative Fees Ch. 304, Art. V
Ch. 83, Permit Parking Ch. 315
Ch. 84, Secondhand Dealers Ch. 338
Ch. 85, Raffles and Bingo Ch. 322
Ch. 85A, (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. 86, Rent Control for Apartments
and Mobile Home Parks
Ch. 334
Ch. 87, (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. 88, Shopping Carts Ch. 348
Ch. 89, Smoking
Art. I, Public Buildings Ch. 357, Art. I
Art. II, School Grounds Ch. 357, Art. II
Art. III, Amusement Parks Ch. 357, Art. III
Ch. 90, Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control
Ch. 363; see Land Use and
Related Regulations Volume
Ch. 90A, Solid Waste
Art. I, Dumping and Disposal Ch. 216, Art. VII
Art. II, Refuse Containers and
Dumpsters
Ch. 216, Art. VIII
Art. III, Private Storm Drain Inlet
Retrofitting
Ch. 216, Art. IX
Ch. 91, Streets and Sidewalks
Art. I, Sidewalks and Curbs:
Construction, Repair
Ch. 372, Art. I
Art. II, Snow, Ice, Grass and
Impediment Repair
Ch. 372, Art. II
Art. III, Street Openings Ch. 372, Art. III
Art. IV, Street Acceptance
Procedures
Ch. 372, Art. IV
Art. V, Street Vacation Procedure Ch. 372, Art. V
Art. VI, Street Numbering System Ch. 372, Art. VI
Art. VII, Street and Highway
Construction and Maintenance
Operations
Ch. 372, Art. VII
Ch. 97, Taxicabs, Limousines and
Jitneys
Ch. 380
Ch. 97A, Towers and Wreckers Ch. 388
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:1623
Chapter/Title From 1972 Code Location in 2012 Code
Ch. 98, Toxic and Hazardous Materials
Art. I, General Provisions Ch. 394, Art. I
Art. II, Required Reimbursement for
Cleanup
Ch. 394, Art. II
Ch. 99, Trailers and Campsites
Art. I, Automobile Trailers Ch. 400, Art. I
Art. II, Trailer Camps and Campsites Ch. 400, Art. II
Art. III, Conversion of Trailer Parks
to Mobile Home Parks
Ch. 400, Art. III
Ch. 100, Tree Removal Ch. 405; see Land Use and
Related Regulations Volume
Ch. 101, Trespassing on Public
Property
Ch. 412
Ch. 102, Vehicles and Other Machinery,
Abandoned or Inoperable
Ch. 418
Ch. 103, Vehicles and Traffic Ch. 103
Ch. 104, Vehicles: Secondhand Dealers Ch. 239, Art. II
Ch. 105, Vehicles, Unlicensed Ch. 431
Ch. 106, Water Ch. 437, Art. I
Ch. 106A, Water Distribution System Ch. 437, Art. II
Ch. 107, Water Emergencies Ch. 437, Art. III
Ch. 108, (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. 109, Land Use and Development
Regulations
Ch. 244; see Land Use and
Related Regulations Volume
Ch. 111, Zoological or Animal
Exhibition Parks
Ch. 443
PART III BOARD OF HEALTH LEGISLATION
Ch. 117, Campgrounds, Private Ch. 456
Ch. 118, (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. 120, (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. 121, Health Officer Ch. 465
Ch. 122, Housing Standards Ch. 469
Ch. 126, Nuisances, Public Health Ch. 474
Ch. 128, (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. 130, Retail Food Establishments
Art. I, Adoption of Code Ch. 479, Art. I
Art. II, Licensing Ch. 479, Art. II
§ DT-1 JACKSON CODE § DT-1
1:1624
Chapter/Title From 1972 Code Location in 2012 Code
Art. III, Mobile Food and Retail Sales
and Service Units
Ch. 479, Art. III
Ch. 133, Sanitary Facilities,
Certification of
Ch. 484
Ch. 136, Sanitary Sewers Ch. 336
Ch. 138, Sewage Disposal Systems,
Individual
Ch. 493
Ch. 140, (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. 141, Swine Ch. 499
Ch. 142, Water Supplies, Individual and
Semipublic
Ch. 505
APPENDIX
Ch. A150, Cable Television Franchise Ch. A510
Disposition Lists
Chapter LUDL
LAND USE DISPOSITION LIST
§ LUDL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
02-13 2-13-2013 Neighborhood Commercial
Zone amendment
Ch. 244, § 244-56
03-13 2-26-2013 Variance fee amendment Ch. 244, § 244-12
13-14 8-12-2014 Joint Base-McGuire-Fort
Dix-Lakehurst Compatible
Commercial Development
Zone; use of Pinelands
development credits
amendment; solar energy
facilities
Ch. 244, § 244-79,
§ 244-96.1,
§ 244-101,
§ 244-104,
§ 244-133.1
18-14 11-12-2014 Signs amendment Ch. 244, § 244-207
01-15 1-27-2015 Solar energy facilities in
Highway Commercial Zone,
Commercial Recreation
Zone 1 and Commercial
Recreation Zone 2
Ch. 244, § 244-57,
§ 244-58, § 244-59
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § LUDL-1
1:1625
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
20-15 8-25-2015 Solar energy facilities in
Highway Commercial Zone,
Commercial Recreation
Zone 1 and Commercial
Recreation Zone 2
amendment
Ch. 244, § 244-57,
§ 244-58, § 244-59
25-15 10-27-2015 Signs amendment Ch. 244, § 244-207
01-16 2-2-2016 Planned Mixed Unit
Residential Development
Zone amendment
Ch. 244, § 244-54
05-16 3-8-2016 Solar energy facilities in
Highway Commercial Zone,
Commercial Recreation
Zone 1 and Commercial
Recreation Zone 2
amendment
Ch. 244, § 244-57,
§ 244-58, § 244-59
21-16 9-13-2016 Portable buildings and
trailers
Ch. 244,
§ 244-176.1
22-16 9-27-2016 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 244, § 244-43
03-17 3-16-2017 Amendments regarding
public schools and
dormitories in residential
zones; prohibited uses
Ch. 244, § 244-6,
§ 244-46, § 244-48,
§ 244-50,
§ 244-176.2
04-17 3-16-2017 Prohibited uses amendment Ch. 244, § 244-6,
§ 244-176.2
06-17 5-9-2017 Mixed Use Neighborhood
Center/Highway
Commercial Zone; Mixed
Use Neighborhood Center/
Light Industrial Zone;
Mixed Use Neighborhood
Centers
Ch. 244, § 244-42,
§ 244-57.1,
§ 244-62.1, Art. XV
10-17 6-13-2017 List of non-Pinelands Area
zones amendment; Zoning
Map amendment
Ch. 244, § 244-42,
§ 244-43
12-17 6-27-2017 Mixed Residential-
Affordable Housing-8 Zone
Ch. 244, § 244-42,
§ 244-51.2
13-17 6-27-2017 Multifamily Affordable
Housing-7 Zone
Ch. 244, § 244-42,
§ 244-57.3
15-17 8-22-2017 Fees amendment Ch. 244, § 244-12
§ LUDL-1 JACKSON CODE § LUDL-1
1:1626
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
22-17 11-21-2017 RG-2 Regional Growth Zone
amendment; RG-3 Regional
Growth Zone amendment;
Toms River Corridor Buffer
Overlay amendment;
Limitations on use of
Pinelands development
credits amendment; Use of
Pinelands development
credits amendment
Ch. 244, § 244-90,
§ 244-91,
§ 244-101;
§ 244-103;
§ 244-104
23-17 11-21-2017 Affordable housing
amendment
Ch. 244, Art XIII
03-18 3-13-2018 MF-AH-8 Mixed Residential-
Affordable Housing-8 Zone
amendment
Ch. 244, § 244-51.2
05-18 3-27-2018 Fees amendment;
performance guaranty
amendment; maintenance
guaranty amendment
Ch. 244, § 244-12,
§ 244-32, § 244-39
07-19 3-12-2019 Definitions amendment;
Exempt development
amendment, Development
approval procedures
amendment; Design
standards and management
programs amendment;
Recording of deed
restriction amendment
Ch. 244, § 244-65,
§ 244-67, § 244-68,
§ 244-79, § 244-107
08-19 3-12-2019 PRC Planned Retirement
Community Zone
amendment
Ch. 244, § 244-53
27-19 10-29-2019 Outdoor display of goods
amendment
Ch. 244, § 244-158
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
02-20 2-11-2020 Land Use and
Development
Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 244 16
Chapter DL
§ LUDL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § LUDL-1
1:1627
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
11-12 4-10-2012 Feral cats repealer Ch. 98, Art. X,
footnote only
14-12 5-8-2012 Adoption of 2012 renumbering
of Code
Ch. 1, Art. III
15-2012 5-8-2012 Adoption of 2012 renumbering
of Code by Board of Health
Ch. 450, Art. II
17-12 6-12-2012 Administrative code
amendment
Ch. 3
18-12 6-12-2012 Administrative code
amendment
Ch. 3
23-12 12-11-2012 Administrative code
amendment
Ch. 3
02-13 2-13-2013 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 244
03-13 2-26-2013 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 244
05-13 3-12-2013 Administrative code
amendment
Ch. 3
06-13 5-14-2013 Towers and wreckers
amendment
Ch. 388
08-13 5-14-2013 Administrative code
amendment
Ch. 3
09-13 6-11-2013 Uniform construction codes Ch. 162
10-13 6-11-2013 Administrative code
amendment
Ch. 3
11-13 6-11-2013 Garbage, rubbish and waste
material: recycling
amendment
Ch. 216, Art. IV
12-13 6-11-2013 Fingerprinting Ch. 190
13-13 6-11-2013 Parks and recreation facilities:
recreation event fees
amendment
Ch. 304, Art. IV
15-13 6-25-2013 Commercial building
standards amendment
Ch. 139
20-13 11-12-2013 Bulky waste and brush
collection
Ch. 216, Art. VI
§ LUDL-1 JACKSON CODE § DL-1
1:1628
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
04-14 3-11-2014 Recreation event fees
amendment
Ch. 304, Art. IV
05-14 3-11-2014 Rent control for apartments
and mobile home parks
amendment
Ch. 334
06-14 4-8-2014 Permit parking amendment Ch. 315
09-14 6-10-2014 Taxicabs, limousines and
jitneys amendment
Ch. 380
11-14 7-8-2014 Personnel policies and
procedures amendment
Ch. 50
12-14 7-22-2014 Registration of property:
properties pending
foreclosure
Ch. 331, Art. I
13-14 8-12-2014 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 244
14-14 8-26-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 103
18-14 11-12-2014 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 244
21-14 11-25-2014 Registration of property:
properties pending
foreclosure amendment
Ch. 331, Art. I
01-15 1-27-2015 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 244
02-15 1-27-2015 Administrative code
amendment
Ch. 3
03-15 2-10-2015 Uniform construction codes
amendment
Ch. 162
04-15 2-10-2015 Noise amendment Ch. 291
07-15 3-24-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 103
08-15 4-14-2015 Rent control for apartments
and mobile home parks
amendment
Ch. 334
09-15 4-14-2015 Administrative code
amendment
Ch. 3
10-15 4-28-2015 Uniform construction codes
amendment
Ch. 162
11-15 5-12-2015 Fire prevention amendment Ch. 204
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1629
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
14-15 5-26-2015 Parks and recreation facilities:
general regulations
amendment
Ch. 304, Art. I
15-15 5-26-2015 Parks and recreation facilities:
general regulations
amendment
Ch. 304, Art. I
16-15 5-26-2015 Control and care of animals
amendment
Ch. 98, Art. II
18-15 8-25-2015 Peddling and soliciting
amendment
Ch. 310
20-15 8-25-2015 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 244
22-15 10-13-2015 Parks and recreation facilities:
rules and regulations for
spray park facility
Ch. 304, Art. VI
25-15 10-27-2015 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 244
26-15 11-10-2015 Peddling and soliciting
amendment
Ch. 310
27-15 11-10-2015 Secondhand dealers
amendment
Ch. 338
30-15 12-8-2015 Fire prevention amendment Ch. 204
31-15 12-8-2015 Fire prevention amendment Ch. 204
33-15 12-22-2015 Administrative code
amendment
Ch. 3
01-16 2-2-2016 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 244
04-16 3-8-2016 Parks and recreation facilities:
recreation event fees
amendment
Ch. 304, Art.. IV
05-16 3-8-2016 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 244
06-16 3-22-2016 Licensing: licensing of
businesses and occupations
amendment
Ch. 251, Art. I
07-16 3-22-2016 Animals: kennels and pet
shops amendment
Ch. 98, Art. III
12-16 5-24-2016 Landlord registration and
responsibility
Ch. 245
§ DL-1 JACKSON CODE § DL-1
1:1630
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
13-16 6-28-2016 Rent control for apartments
and mobile home parks
amendment
Ch. 334
14-16 7-12-2016 Registration of property:
vacant or abandoned property
list
Ch. 331, Art. II
15-16 7-26-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 103
16-16 7-26-2016 Uniform construction codes
amendment
Ch. 162
20-16 9-13-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 103
21-16 9-13-2016 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 244
22-16 9-27-2016 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 244
23-16 10-12-2016 Raffles and bingo amendment Ch. 322
24-16 10-25-2016 Towers and wreckers
amendment
Ch. 388
25-16 10-25-2016 Peddling and soliciting
amendment
Ch. 310
26-16 11-29-2016 Animals: kennels and pet
shops amendment
Ch. 98, Art. III
31-16 12-27-2016 Garbage, rubbish and waste
material: storage and
collection amendment
Ch. 216, Art. III
32-16 12-27-2016 Landlord registration and
responsibility amendment
Ch. 245
01-17 2-14-2017 Parks and recreation facilities:
recreation event fees
amendment; rules and
regulations for spray park
facility amendment
Ch. 304, Art. IV;
Ch. 304, Art. VI
03-17 3-16-2017 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 244
04-17 3-16-2017 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 244
07-17 4-25-2017 Administrative Code
amendment
Ch. 3
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1631
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
10-17 6-13-2017 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 244
11-17 6-27-2017 Public use of buildings and
facilities amendment
Ch. 121
12-17 6-27-2017 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 244
13-17 6-27-2017 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 244
15-17 8-22-2017 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 244
16-17 8-22-2017 Streets and sidewalks: street
numbering system
amendment
Ch. 372, Art. VI
17-17 8-22-2017 Housing standards
amendment
Ch. 233
20-17 9-12-2017 Streets and sidewalks: snow,
ice, grass and other
impediments amendment
Ch. 372, Art. II
22-17 11-21-2017 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 244
23-17 11-21-2017 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 244
01-18 2-27-2018 Parks and recreation facilities:
recreation event fees
Ch. 304, Art. IV
02-18 2-27-2018 Fire prevention amendment Ch. 204
03-18 3-13-2018 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 244
05-18 3-27-2018 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 244
07-18 4-10-2018 Landlord registration and
responsibility amendment
Ch. 245
09-18 5-8-2018 Uniform Construction Codes
Amendment
Ch. 162
10-18 5-8-2018 Garbage, Rubbish and Waste
Material: Disposal Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 216, Art. VII
13-18 6-12-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 103
04-19 2-26-2019 Noise Amendment Ch. 291
§ DL-1 JACKSON CODE § DL-1
1:1632
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
06-19 3-12-2019 Parks and Recreation
Facilities: Recreation Event
Fees Amendment
Ch. 304, Art. IV
10-19 4-23-2019 Alcoholic Beverages
Amendment
Ch. 86
11-19 5-14-2019 Parks and Recreation
Facilities: Parks and
Playgrounds Fund
Ch. 304, Art. VII
12-19 5-14-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 103
18-19 8-13-2019 Construction Codes, Uniform
Amendment
Ch. 162
19-19 8-13-2019 Landlord Registration and
Responsibility Amendment
Ch. 245
20-19 8-13-2019 Housing Standards, Resale
Amendment
Ch. 233
21-19 8-13-2019 Housing Standards, Rental/
Lease
Ch. 234
23-19 8-13-2019 Towers and Wreckers
Amendment
Ch. 388
25-19 9-24-2019 Garbage, Rubbish and Waste
Material: Bulky Waste and
Brush Collection Amendment
Ch. 216, Art. VI
27-19 10-29-2019 Land Use and Development
Regulations Amendment
Ch. 244
29-19 11-12-2019 Animals: Humane and Ethical
Animal Rules and Treatment
Ch. 98, Art. X
31-19 12-17-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 103
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
01-20 1-31-2020 Building
Standards,
Commercial
Amendment
Ch. 139 27
02-20 2-11-2020 Land Use and
Development
Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 244 16
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1633

LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
244 Attachment 2
Township of Jackson
Schedule A
§ 244-48D Schedule of Bulk Regulations
[Added 11-9-2010 by Ord. No. 31-10]
Zoning
District
Area
(square
feet)
Minimum Dimensions
(feet)
Accessory Setback
Side/Rear
(feet)
Maximum Height
(feet) Coverage
Width Frontage Depth
Front
Yard
Rear
Yard
Side
Yard
Garage
(detached) Shed Pool Principal Accessory Building Lot
R-9
Single Family
9,000 90 90 100 25 35 10 10 10 10 35 15 30% 70%
R-15
Single Family
15,000 100 100 150 30 35 15 10 10 10 35 15 30% 70%
R-20
Single Family
20,000 100 100 200 30 35 15 20 15 15 35 15 30% 70%
In all zones above:
All new principal development other than single-family homes [§ 244-48A(1), (2) and (8) exempt] must comply with the bulk requirements for the R-1
Residential District.
Accessory structures are not permitted in the front yard area.
All lots that existed, either as part of an approved subdivision or isolated with an existing residential principal structure, prior to November 9, 2010,
may continue to exist as conforming lots, but shall be subject to the above yard, setback, height and coverage standards for any new development
requiring a zoning permit for construction.
244 Attachment 2:1 03 - 01 - 2012