Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
General Penalty
[Adopted 9-25-1979 by Ord. No. 79-25]
§ 1-1. Violations and penalties.
Any person committing any offense in violation of Borough ordinances or
failing to comply with any order issued by a Borough official for which
no punishment is specifically provided shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punished by a fine not to exceed $500 or imprisonment not to exceed 90
days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-1
1:3

ARTICLE II
Adoption of Code by Mayor and Council
[Adopted 9-12-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-14]
§ 1-2. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the Borough of Kenilworth of
a general and permanent nature adopted by the Mayor and Council of the
Borough of Kenilworth, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters
and sections by General Code, and consisting of Chapters 1 through 197,
together with an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and
enacted as "Parts I and II of the Code of the Borough of Kenilworth,"
hereinafter known and referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-3. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code, except
such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or
continued in force.
§ 1-4. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
§ 1-5. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
Borough Clerk and shall remain there for use and examination by the public
until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if this ordinance shall
be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Clerk of the Borough of
Kenilworth by impressing thereon the Seal of the Borough, as provided by
law, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Clerk of
the Borough, to be made available to persons desiring to examine the same
during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-6. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the governing
body to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into
such Code so that reference to the "Code of the Borough of Kenilworth"
shall be understood and intended to include such additions and
amendments. Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the
Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided
hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as
amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-7
1:5
§ 1-7. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the Borough of Kenilworth, pursuant to law, shall cause this
Adopting Ordinance to be published, in the manner required, in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Borough. Sufficient copies of the
Code shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk for inspection by the
public at all times during regular office hours. The enactment and
publication of this Adopting Ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of
the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered
to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-8. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk or someone authorized and directed by
the Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the
Code required to be filed in his or her office for the use of the public. All
changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the
Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until
such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code
book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-9. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the Clerk, or an authorized agent of the Clerk, upon the payment of a fee
authorized by the Borough. The Clerk shall also arrange for procedures for
the periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-10. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Borough of
Kenilworth to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section or
any part of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to one or more
of the following: a fine of not more than $2,000, imprisonment for not more
than 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, in the
discretion of the Judge imposing the same.
§ 1-11. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed
to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts
thereof.
§ 1-7 KENILWORTH CODE § 1-12
1:6
§ 1-12. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-13. Inconsistent ordinances repealed.
A. Except as provided in § 1-14, Ordinances saved from repeal, below, all
ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions
contained in the Code adopted by this ordinance are hereby repealed;
provided, however, that such repeal shall only be to the extent of such
inconsistency, and any valid legislation of the Borough of Kenilworth
which is not in conflict with the provisions of the Code shall be deemed
to remain in full force and effect.
B. Repeal of specific ordinances. The Mayor and Council of the Borough of
Kenilworth has determined that the following ordinances are no longer
in effect and hereby specifically repeals the following legislation:
(1) Ordinance No. 201-03, Fees and Licenses amendment, adopted
February 26, 2014.
(2) Former Chapter 13, Cooperative Pricing (Ord. No. 94-1).
(3) Former Chapter 23, Flood Control Commission (Ord. No. 76-17).
(4) Former Chapter 30, Land Use Procedures (Ord. No. 77-1).
(5) Former Chapter 63, Barbershops (Ord. No. 62-5).
(6) Former Chapter 80, Contractors (Ord. No. 96-22).
(7) Former Chapter 87, Article II, Public Dances (part of Ord. No.
79-19).
(8) Former Chapter 87, Article IV, Pool and Billiard Halls (Ord. No.
67-4).
(9) Former Chapter 88, Ticket Resales (Ord. No. 80-12).
(10) Former Chapter 106, Article III, Clothing Recycling (Ord. No.
2013-01).
(11) Former Chapter 106, Article V, Medical Waste Disposal (Ord. No.
88-34).
(12) Former Chapter 110, Golf Courses, Miniature (Ord. No. 107).
(13) Former Chapter 140, Article I, Park Lot Nos. 1, 2, 3 and 4 (Ord. No.
76-23).
(14) Former Chapter 140, Article II, David Brearley High School (Ord.
No. 82-21).
§ 1-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:7
§ 1-14. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-13 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
(15) Former Chapter 140, Article III, Lot Adjacent to Kenilworth Free
Public Library (Ord. No. 82-22).
(16) Former Chapter 141, Article I, Joseph DiMario Playground (Ord.
No. 79-22).
(17) Former Chapter 163, Site Plan Review (Ord. No. 77-20).
(18) Former Chapter 174, Subdivision of Land (Ord. No. 78-3).
(19) Former Chapter 182, Trailers Used for Storage (Ord. No. 88-16).
(20) Former Chapter 197, Zoning (Ord. No. 99-10).
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to January 24, 2018.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
issuance and delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of
the Borough's indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges or the approval
of the municipal budget.
§ 1-13 KENILWORTH CODE § 1-14
1:8
§ 1-15. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
J. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
K. All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of
payment of salaries and compensation of officers and employees.
L. Any ordinance adopting or amending the Zoning Map.
M. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for municipal employees.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as
part of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, certain grammatical
changes and other minor changes were made in one or more of said
ordinances. It is the intention of the Mayor and Council that all such
changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so changed
had been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the changes, amendments or revisions as set forth in
Schedule A1 attached hereto and made a part hereof are made
herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance.
(Chapter and section number references are to the ordinances as they
have been renumbered and appear in the Code.)
C. Nomenclature changes.
(1) All references to the "Chairman" or the "Chair" are hereby revised
to "Chairperson."
(2) All references to the "Police Committee" are hereby revised to
"Public Safety Committee."
(3) All references to the "Construction Department" are hereby revised
to "Building Department."
(4) All references to the "Code Enforcement Department" are hereby
revised to "Building Department."
(5) All references to the "Construction Code Official" are hereby
revised to "Construction Official."
(6) All references to the "Borough Hall" are hereby revised to
"Municipal Building."
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-15B, the chapters, parts and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: "Amended (added, deleted) 9-12-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-14." Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in
the Borough offices.
§ 1-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:9
(7) All references to the "Zoning Official," the "Zoning Enforcement
Officer," or the "Zoning Enforcement Official" are hereby revised to
"Zoning Officer."
§ 1-15 KENILWORTH CODE § 1-15
1:10
Chapter 5
ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Court — See Ch. 14.
Departmental structures — See Ch. 15.
Personnel policies — See Ch. 37.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 43.
Land use — See Ch. 120.
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:11

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 5-1. General structure of government.
The Borough of Kenilworth shall be governed by an elected Council, an
elected Mayor and by such other officers and employees as may be duly
appointed pursuant to law.
§ 5-2. Definitions and word usage.
A. Definitions. For the purposes of this chapter, except as otherwise
required by the context, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Kenilworth, in the County of Union and
State of New Jersey.
DEPARTMENT — An organizational unit or group of organizational
units of the Borough government, established or designated by or
pursuant to this chapter as a department, and any agency or
instrumentality of the Borough government not allocated or assigned
within such an organizational unit.[Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
DIRECTOR — The administrative head of a department.
MONTH — A calendar month, unless otherwise specifically provided.
ORDINANCE — Any act of local legislation heretofore or hereafter
adopted, so long as it remains in force and effect pursuant to law.
PERSON — Any corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization or other entity, as well as an individual.
YEAR — A calendar year, unless otherwise specifically provided.
B. Word usage. "He" and "she" and the masculine and feminine genders,
where utilized herein, shall be construed to mean and shall be
applicable to the other gender as well, as the case may be, and the
neuter shall be applicable to both.
§ 5-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-2
1:13

ARTICLE II
Elective Officials
§ 5-3. Election and term of Mayor.
The Mayor shall be chosen at the general election by popular ballot of the
eligible voters of the Borough of Kenilworth. He shall serve for a term of
four years.
§ 5-4. Powers and duties of Mayor. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
The Mayor shall have all the powers and duties provided by state statute.
He shall, inter alia, see to the faithful execution of the laws of the state
and ordinances of the Borough, recommend to the Council those measures
he deems necessary or expedient, maintain peace and good order and
have power to suppress riots and tumultuous assemblies, all as provided
in N.J.S.A. 40A:60-5. He shall nominate and, with the advice and consent
of Council, appoint all officers in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:60-5. As
provided by N.J.S.A. 40A:60-5, he shall preside over meetings of the Council
and may, in the event of a tie, cast the deciding ballot. Otherwise, he shall
not vote. He may veto ordinances in accordance with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40A:60-5. Such veto may be overridden by a two-thirds vote of the
Council.
§ 5-5. Acting Mayor.
§ 5-6. Composition of Council; terms.
As provided by state statute, the members of the Borough Council shall be
chosen at the general election by popular ballot of the eligible voters of
the Borough of Kenilworth. The Council shall consist of six members. Their
terms of office shall be for three years beginning at 12:00 noon on January
1 following their election and shall be arranged in such a manner that the
terms of two Councilmen shall expire at the end of each year.
A. If the Mayor is absent from the Borough for three days or is otherwise
unable to act, the President of Council shall perform the duties of the
Mayor. The Mayor shall notify the President in writing if he intends to
be absent for more than three days at any one time, and the President
shall become Acting Mayor upon receipt of such notice and continue to
act until the Mayor's return.
B. In case of the inability of the President to assume the duties of Acting
Mayor, the member of the Council having the longest term of service
shall act temporarily for the President.
§ 5-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-7
1:15
§ 5-7. Compensation of Mayor and Councilmen. [Amended at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
Compensation for the Mayor and Councilmen shall be fixed by vote of
a majority of the members of the Council and shall be governed by the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:9-165 and 40A:9-165.1.
§ 5-8. (Reserved)2
§ 5-9. (Reserved)3
§ 5-10. (Reserved)
2. Editor's Note: Former § 5-8, Tax Collector, was repealed 12-14-1993 by Ord. No. 93-28. See
now § 5-35.
3. Editor's Note: Section 5-9, Assessor of Taxes, was relocated from Art. II, Elective Officials,
to Art. V, Appointive Officials, § 5-39.
§ 5-7 KENILWORTH CODE § 5-10
1:16
ARTICLE III
Council
§ 5-11. Powers. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
The powers of the Council are those vested by authority of statutory law as
enumerated in N.J.S.A. 40A:60-6 and as provided elsewhere in this chapter
and amendments thereto.
§ 5-12. Organization.
The Mayor shall preside over all meetings of the Council, which shall
organize annually on January 1 or during the first seven days of January in
each year.
§ 5-13. President of Council.
§ 5-14. Meetings and public participation. [Amended 2-28-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-01]
A. The Council shall, at its organizational meeting, elect from its number a
President of the Council. He shall hold office for one year until the next
organizational election. If the Council fails to elect a President at the
designated time, the Mayor shall appoint a President, and no
confirmation by the Council shall be necessary.
B. It shall be the duty of the President to preside at all meetings of the
Council in the absence of the Mayor, but he shall not lose his right to
debate or vote on all questions before the Council while presiding.
A. Open meetings. Any meeting or gathering, including those held by
means of electronic communication, attended to by three Council
members and the Mayor or four Council members and held with the
intent to discuss or act upon specific public business shall be open to
the public. All meetings that are open to the public as provided for
hereinabove shall have a published agenda which will be as complete as
reasonably possible.
B. Regular meetings. The Council shall conduct an annual meeting during
the first seven days of each year. All Council meetings shall be held
within the Borough, with preference to the Municipal Hall. Thereafter,
the Council shall meet regularly at 8:00 p.m. or shortly thereafter on
the second and fourth Wednesday of each month, with the exception of
the months of July, August, November and December, when the
meetings will only occur on the second Wednesday of the month. If the
regular meeting of the Council is also a legal holiday, such meeting shall
then be held on the next succeeding business day which is not a legal
holiday or at such other date and time as the Council may designate.
§ 5-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-14
1:17
C. Work sessions. In recognition that an initial presentation for each
subcommittee may facilitate a better understanding of a matter prior to
a formal vote, the Council shall hold a meeting for said purpose at 6:30
p.m. just prior to the regular meeting. In addition to the foregoing, the
Borough Engineer, Attorney, Clerk and advisory group or person may
provide a brief report of their concerns and/or activities at the work
session.
D. Closed executive session. The Council, after a resolution, may exclude
the public for any portion of either the regular meeting or work session
to discuss any one of the following:
(1) Any matter that federal or state law expressly requires it to be
confidential;
(2) Any matter that a court rule expressly denotes as being
confidential;
(3) Any matter in which the release would impair the right to receive
funds from the United States government;
(4) Any matter that constitutes an unwarranted invasion of one's
individual privacy if disclosed;
(5) Negotiations of terms for collective bargaining agreement;
(6) Any matter involving the purchase lease or acquisition of real
property or the investment of public funds;
(7) Techniques or methods used to protect the safety of the public,
including investigations of violations of law;
(8) Any pending or anticipated litigation or contract negotiations;
(9) Any matter involving employment, appointment, discipline or
promotion of a public employee;
(10) Deliberation that may result in the imposition penalties or
suspension of licenses.
E. Public participation. Public participation at Borough meetings is
permitted under the control of the presiding officer or his designee who
may impose time limits, provided that they are fairly and uniformly
applied. A member of the public may be permitted three minutes to talk
about any matter of importance to the Borough before being asked to
surrender the floor. If any other member of the public should address
the same matter and take a materially different position, then the initial
individual may be permitted up to one minute to publicly refute any
further comments.
§ 5-14 KENILWORTH CODE § 5-15
1:18
§ 5-15. Quorum.
Three Councilmen and the Mayor or, in the absence of the Mayor, four
Councilmen shall constitute a quorum, but a smaller number may meet and
adjourn from time to time.
§ 5-16. Roll call votes; minutes.
The vote upon every resolution or ordinance shall be taken by roll call,
and the yeas and nays shall be entered on the minutes. After approval
at public meetings, the official copy of the minutes of each meeting shall
be countersigned by the presiding officer, either the Mayor or the Council
President, and by the Clerk.
§ 5-17. Rules of Council.
The rules of procedure to be followed and the rules for the consideration of
nominations submitted by the Mayor and for the conduct of other business
of the Council shall be as adopted at the annual organizational meeting.
§ 5-18. (Reserved)
§ 5-19. (Reserved)
§ 5-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-19
1:19

ARTICLE IV
Local Legislation
§ 5-20. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LOCAL LEGISLATION — Includes "ordinance" and "resolution" as defined
by N.J.S.A. 40:49-1 and duly enacted according to law.
§ 5-21. Adoption and publication of ordinances. [Amended at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 5-22. Reconsideration of ordinances vetoed by Mayor;
certification.
A. All ordinances of the Borough of Kenilworth shall be introduced, read,
heard, published and enacted in the manner provided by law. Each
ordinance passed by the Council shall be returned by the Mayor to the
Clerk after the Mayor has signed or approved it. If the Mayor neither
signs nor disapproves an ordinance within 10 days from the date of its
delivery to the Mayor, it shall, as provided by N.J.S.A. 40A:60-5, take
effect in like manner as if signed.
B. The publication of ordinances shall be governed by the provisions set
forth in N.J.S.A. 40:49-1 et seq.
A. The Council shall reconsider any ordinance returned without approval
by the Mayor within the time permitted by law, together with a
statement setting forth his objections thereto or to any item or part
thereof. Such reconsideration shall take place at the next meeting of
the Council.
B. Whenever an ordinance has been reconsidered by the Council following
a veto by the Mayor, the Clerk shall append to such ordinance a
certification of the action of the Council upon such reconsideration in
substantially the following form:
I HEREBY CERTIFY that the above ordinance adopted by the Council
of the Borough of Kenilworth on the __________ day of __________ _____
was delivered to me on the _____ day of _____, together with the
Mayor's statement of the reasons for which he was constrained to
withhold his approval of such ordinance, item or part thereof.
On reconsideration thereof, on the _____ day of _____ (the Council duly
resolved by the affirmative vote of 2/3 of its members to enact such
ordinance, item or part thereof, notwithstanding the Mayor's veto) or
(the Mayor's veto was sustained).
Dated:
§ 5-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-22
1:21
§ 5-23. Effectiveness without signature; certification. [Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
Whenever an ordinance shall take effect without the Mayor's signature by
reason of his failure to return it to the Council by filing it with the Clerk
within 10 days after it has been presented to him, the Clerk shall append to
such ordinance a certificate in substantially the following form:
I HEREBY CERTIFY that the above ordinance was adopted by the Borough
Council on the ____ day of _____________ _____, and was presented to the
Mayor duly certified on the ____ day of _____________ _____, and upon his
failure to sign it or to return and file it with the Clerk within 10 days
thereafter, the said ordinance took effect in like manner as if the Mayor had
signed it.
Borough Clerk
§ 5-24. Record of local legislation required.
The Clerk shall record all ordinances and resolutions in permanent books
which shall be provided for that purpose and shall cause the codification to
be revised accordingly. After each ordinance he shall also record and certify
the proof of publication thereof as required by law. Each ordinance recorded
shall be signed by the Mayor and Clerk, who shall attest that it was duly
adopted upon a date stated, and shall be deemed to be a public record of
the ordinance.
§ 5-25. Resolutions relating to finances: approval or veto by Mayor.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
Every resolution appropriating money or in any way tending to obligate the
Borough pecuniarily and all resolutions auditing or directing the payment of
bills or demands, together with such bills, shall be presented to the Mayor
for his approval or veto in the same manner and within the same time as
is provided for the presentation of ordinances by N.J.S.A. 40A:60-5, and all
subsequent proceedings on such resolutions or bills shall be subject to and
shall conform to the provisions relating to ordinances contained in N.J.S.A.
40A:60-5 and 40A:60-6.
§ 5-26. (Reserved)
Borough Clerk
§ 5-22 KENILWORTH CODE § 5-26
1:22
ARTICLE V
Appointive Officials
§ 5-27. Appointment procedures. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
Certain offices of the Borough shall be filled by appointment unless
otherwise specified. Such appointments shall be made by the Mayor with
the advice and consent of the Council, including the filling of vacancies
which shall be for the unexpired term only. The method of appointment shall
be as provided in N.J.S.A. 40A:60-5 and 40A:60-6. The term of each office
shall be as provided by statute and Borough ordinances.
§ 5-28. Borough Clerk.
§ 5-28.1. Deputy Borough Clerk. [Added 6-14-1995 by Ord. No.
95-15]
There is hereby created in and for the Borough of Kenilworth the position
of Deputy Borough Clerk. Said position shall be subject to the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 40A:9-135 and shall be further subject to the duties and
responsibilities established by the governing body as may be amended from
time to time in the position's job description.
§ 5-28.2. Term of office; vacancies. [Added 6-14-1995 by Ord. No.
95-15]
The term of the office of the Deputy Borough Clerk shall be for one year.
The term shall run from January 1 in the year in which the individual is
appointed. All vacancies in the office of Deputy Borough Clerk shall be filled
for the unexpired term only.
§ 5-28.3. Appointment. [Added 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-15]
The Deputy Borough Clerk shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
confirmation of a majority of the members of the Council.
A. Appointment, qualifications and compensation. The Mayor, with the
advice and consent of Council, shall appoint a Borough Clerk for the
term prescribed by law. Prior to his appointment, the Borough Clerk
shall have been qualified by training and experience to perform the
duties of his office. He shall serve as the Clerk of the Council and have
such other functions, powers and duties as are provided by law. He shall
acquire tenure of office after five years of continuous service and as
provided by law. The compensation of the Borough Clerk shall be as set
forth in the annual Salary Ordinance.
B. Employees in office of Clerk. The number and type of employees in the
Borough Clerk's office shall be as determined by the Mayor and
Council.
§ 5-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-28.4
1:23
§ 5-28.4. Powers and duties. [Added 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-15]
The Deputy Borough Clerk shall have all the powers and duties established
by formal job description adopted by the governing body, as may be
amended from time to time. In the absence of the Borough Clerk or in case
of vacancy in the Borough Clerk's position, the Deputy Borough Clerk shall
exercise all of the powers and carry out all of the duties and responsibilities
of the Borough Clerk.
§ 5-29. Judge of the Municipal Court.4
There shall be a Judge of the Municipal Court of the Borough of Kenilworth.
He shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the
Council and shall serve for three years and until his successor has been
appointed and qualified.
§ 5-30. Attorney.
The Borough Attorney shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice
and consent of the Council, but need not serve full time and shall be
compensated by such retainer as shall be approved by the Council. He shall
serve for a term of one year, as provided by N.J.S.A. 40A:9-139.
§ 5-31. Prosecutor.
A. Office created. There is hereby created the office of Borough Municipal
Prosecutor, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2B:25-4a. The term of office of Borough
Municipal Prosecutor shall be one year. [Amended 1-24-2001 by Ord.
No. 2001-1]
B. Compensation. The Borough Prosecutor shall be paid a retainer as may
from time to time be provided by ordinance and, in addition thereto,
shall be paid for additional services performed by him as and when bills
are presented to and approved by the Borough Council of the Borough
of Kenilworth.
C. Duties. It shall be the duty of the Borough Prosecutor to prosecute
cases before the Municipal Court of the Borough of Kenilworth and to
represent the interest of the Borough of Kenilworth in the prosecution
of any appeal resulting from a conviction in the Municipal Court of the
Borough of Kenilworth, unless otherwise directed by Borough Council.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
D. Alternate Municipal Prosecutor. The Mayor may, with the advice and
consent of the governing body, appoint one or more Alternate Municipal
Prosecutors who shall be designated "Alternate Municipal Prosecutor
No. 1," "Alternate Municipal Prosecutor No. 2," and so on. Any such
alternate(s) may, but need not be, a legal associate or partner of the
4. Editor's Note: See Ch. 14, Court.
§ 5-28.4 KENILWORTH CODE § 5-31
1:24
§ 5-32. Treasurer.
The Borough Treasurer shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the Council. He shall hold office for one year. The salary of the
Borough Treasurer shall be as set forth in the annual Salary Ordinance. The
Mayor and Council may grant tenure in office to any person who shall have
held the office of Borough Treasurer for 10 consecutive years, as provided
by N.J.S.A. 40A:9-152.
§ 5-33. Engineer.
§ 5-34. Chief Financial Officer. [Added 2-14-1989 by Ord. No. 89-4]
Municipal Prosecutor. The Alternate Municipal Prosecutor shall serve
in the absence and/or unavailability of the Municipal Prosecutor to
ensure that the timely and effective administration of justice in the
Municipal Court is not interrupted. The compensation to be paid to such
Alternate Municipal Prosecutor(s) shall be fixed by ordinance. [Added
1-24-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-1]
A. Appointment. The Municipal Engineer shall be appointed by the Mayor
with the advice and consent of the Council.
B. Qualifications. To be eligible for appointment, the appointee shall hold a
degree in civil engineering from a recognized college of engineering
and be licensed in the State of New Jersey as a professional engineer.
C. Duties. The Municipal Engineer shall perform the duties as required by
law and by the ordinances of the Borough of Kenilworth. The Borough
Engineer shall render written reports to the Public Works Committee
Chairperson every 60 days or sooner if requested by the Public Works
Committee Chairman, with a copy to the Borough Clerk, stating his
specific recommendations and opinions, as well as a listing of work
performed by him and problems referred to him, stating how he
resolved the same. [Amended 2-25-1986 by Ord. No. 864]
D. Term. The term of office of the Municipal Engineer shall be for one year
unless otherwise provided by law.
A. Office created. There is hereby created the position of Chief Financial
Officer.
B. Appointment. The Chief Financial Officer shall be appointed by the
Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council.
C. Term. The term of the Chief Financial Officer shall be for one year. The
first appointee shall serve to January 1 of the year following such
appointment. All subsequent appointments shall be for the full term of
one year, to take effect as of January 1 unless the office holder shall
qualify for tenure of office pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.8.
§ 5-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-34
1:25
D. Qualification. Such appointee shall be certified as a municipal finance
officer pursuant to the certification requirements of N.J.S.A.
40A:9-140.1 et seq.
E. Compensation. The salary of the Chief Financial Officer shall be
established by ordinance in the manner set by law.
F. Duties. The Chief Financial Officer shall perform the duties required by
law and by the ordinances of the Borough of Kenilworth, which shall
include the following: [Amended 12-14-1993 by Ord. No. 93-29]
(1) Assisting the Mayor and members of the governing body in the
preparation of the annual budget.
(2) Supervision of the posting and maintenance of all books of original
entry of all funds.
(3) Compliance with N.J.S.A. 40A:2-1 et seq. (Local Bond Law), N.J.S.A.
40A:4-1 et seq. (Local Budget Law), N.J.S.A. 40A:5-1 et seq. (Local
Fiscal Affairs Law), N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq. (Local Public
Contracts Law) and N.J.A.C. 5:30 et seq. (Community Affairs).
(4) Supervision of the preparation of monthly reports for the
Treasurer, Tax Collector and investments.
(5) Compliance with all Department of Community Affairs, Division of
Local Government Services, directives.
(6) Compliance with single audit requirements.
(7) Development of an internal control system to safeguard municipal
assets.
(8) Supervision of petty cash and change funds.
(9) Preparation and signing of annual financial statement, annual debt
statement and supplemental debt statement.
(10) Coordination of bank reconciliations.
(11) Custody of all public funds.
(12) End of fiscal year report of all revenues and expenditures.
(13) Supervision over the maintenance of separate accounts for all
municipal budget appropriations.
(14) Suggestion of recommendations for better management of
municipal finances.
G. He/she shall also: [Added 12-14-1993 by Ord. No. 93-29]
(1) Maintain the Borough's accounting records and prescribe and
enforce a uniform system of accounts for all departments, offices
§ 5-34 KENILWORTH CODE § 5-34
1:26
§ 5-35. Tax Collector. [Added 12-14-1993 by Ord. No. 93-30]
and agencies of the Borough government. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
(2) Maintain a centralized payroll system with the use of a computer
system when directed.
(3) Preaudit all bills, claims and demands against the Borough.
(4) Certify all proposed contract resolutions and ordinances submitted
prior to passage by the Municipal Council as to available
appropriation in conformity with general law, the Charter and
ordinances of the Borough.
(5) Control all expenditures to ensure that budget appropriations are
not exceeded.
(6) Prepare all preliminary work in connection with the Borough
budget to include all required adjustments.
(7) Prepare all required data in connection with the Borough debts and
bond sales.
(8) Have control over all the investments of the Borough and be
responsible for the safekeeping of all bonds and notes of the
Borough and ensure that required statutory expenditures are made
when due.
(9) Maintain all Borough records on a centralized computer system
when directed to do so.
(10) Require reports of receipts and disbursements from each
department, office and agency of the Borough government to be
made daily or at such intervals as he/she may determine will most
efficiently protect the Borough's interest.
(11) Control all expenditures to ensure that budget appropriations are
not exceeded and pass upon each proposed expenditure for
conformity with general law, the Charter and ordinances of the
Borough, and, unless he/she shall certify that there is an
unencumbered balance of appropriation and available funds, no
appropriation shall be encumbered and no expenditure shall be
made.
H. He/she shall also be responsible for pre-auditing and control of all
Borough revenues and expenditures, the management of the Borough's
investment program and the management of the Borough's debt and
development of sound financial policies for recommendation to the
Mayor and Council. [Added 12-14-1993 by Ord. No. 93-29]
A. The Mayor will, with the advice and consent of the Council, appoint a
Tax Collector for the Borough pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-141.
§ 5-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-35
1:27
§ 5-36. Municipal Court Administrator.5 [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
The Municipal Court Administrator shall be appointed by the Mayor with
the advice and consent of the Council. He shall hold office at the pleasure
of the Council. The Administrator of the Municipal Court shall receive an
annual salary to be determined by the Mayor and Council, which shall be
paid in the same manner as the salaries of other municipal officers are paid
and which shall be in lieu of all fees, costs and other allowances whatsoever.
He shall perform such functions and duties as shall be prescribed for him
by the law, the court rules applicable to municipal courts and by the Judge
of the Municipal Court (N.J.S.A. 2B:12-10 et seq.). The Administrator of the
Municipal Court shall keep the docket of the Municipal Court; send out such
notices as the Judge of the Municipal Court shall order; collect fines from
persons convicted of violations of any regulation, ordinance or law in the
Municipal Court; keep records of postponements of court appearances; and
perform such other duties as may be prescribed by law and the court rules
applicable to municipal courts and by the Judge of the Municipal Court.
§ 5-37. Municipal Public Defender. [Added 9-14-1992 by Ord. No.
92-14; amended 4-22-1998 by Ord. No. 98-106]
B. Term of office. The Tax Collector shall hold office for a term of four
years from the first day of January next following his appointment.
Vacancies other than due to expiration of term shall be filled by
appointment for the unexpired term.
C. Qualifications. Any person appointed to the position of Tax Collector
must first establish that he possesses the requisite certification as
required by N.J.S.A. 40A:9-145.2.
A. Appointment and compensation. A Public Defender for the Borough of
Kenilworth is hereby appointed to represent such indigent defendants
who appear before the Municipal Court of the Borough of Kenilworth as
shall be assigned to the Public Defender by the Municipal Court Judge
in accordance with law and whenever justice so requires. The Public
Defender shall be an attorney at law of the State of New Jersey, shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the Council for a term of
one year effective January 1 of the year of appointment and shall
receive such fixed annual compensation as shall be provided by the
Salary Ordinance.
B. Application fee. Any person applying for representation by a Municipal
Public Defender in the Borough of Kenilworth shall pay an application
fee of not more than $200 to the Municipal Court Clerk at the time of
5. Editor's Note: See Ch. 14, Court.
6. Editor's Note: This ordinance also required that the application fee set forth herein shall
take effect immediately. Furthermore, in accordance with P.L. 1997, c. 256, Section 6c
(N.J.S.A. 2B:24-6c), the Borough shall not be required to pay for expert and lay
investigation or testimony prior to 3-22-1999.
§ 5-35 KENILWORTH CODE § 5-37
1:28
the application. The amount paid shall be only an amount necessary
to pay the costs of the Municipal Public Defender services. The Court
may waive the required fee in whole or in part if the Court determines,
upon a clear and convincing showing by the applicant, that the fee
represents an unreasonable burden on the person seeking the services
of the Public Defender. The Municipal Court may permit the applicant
to pay the fee over a specified time not to exceed four months.
C. Eligibility for services. Eligibility for services of the Municipal Public
Defender shall be determined by the Municipal Court on the basis of the
need of the defendant, except as provided in Subsection D of this
section. Need shall be measured as provided by law and in accordance
with guidelines promulgated by the New Jersey Supreme Court. In the
event that a determination of eligibility cannot be made before the time
when the first services are to be rendered, or if an initial determination
is found to be erroneous, the Municipal Court shall refer the defendant
to the Municipal Public Defender provisionally; and if subsequently it is
determined that the defendant is ineligible the Municipal Court shall
inform the defendant, and the defendant shall be obliged to engage his
own counsel and to reimburse the municipality for the cost of the
services rendered to that time.
D. Investigation of financial status. The Municipal Court shall make an
investigation of the financial status of each defendant seeking
representation and shall have the authority to require a defendant to
execute and deliver written requests or authorizations required under
applicable law to provide the Court with access to records of public or
private sources, otherwise confidential, as may be of aid in evaluating
eligibility. As provided by law, the Court is authorized to obtain
information from any public record office of the state or of any
subdivision or agency thereof on request and without payment of the
fees ordinarily required by law.
E. Financial obligation of parents or guardians. As provided by P.L. 1997,
Ch. 256,7 whenever a person entitled to representation by a Municipal
Public Defender pursuant to this act is under the age of 18 years, the
eligibility for services shall be determined on the basis of the financial
circumstances of the individual and the financial circumstances of the
individual's parents or legal guardians.
F. Reimbursement to Borough. Upon completion of the legal services
rendered by the Public Defender, N.J.S.A. 40:6A-1 permits the Borough
to create a lien upon the defendant's property for the cost of the
defense provided to the defendant; N.J.S.A. 40:6A-4 further permits the
Borough to compromise said lien. The Mayor and Council hereby
authorize the Municipal Court Judge, based upon his review of the
defendant's financial condition, to recommend an appropriate sum to
compromise the lien. The Municipal Court Judge shall advise the
defendant of his recommendation, and, upon the defendant's
7. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 2B:24-1 et seq.
§ 5-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-37
1:29
§ 5-38. Auditor.
There shall be a Borough Auditor appointed by the Mayor and Council, who
shall be a registered municipal accountant. The Auditor and the Borough
shall enter into a contract of employment not to exceed one year in duration.
The contract shall provide for those additional duties and obligations of
the Auditor not contained in this Code, required by law and desired by the
Mayor and Council, and shall provide for the compensation to be paid to the
Auditor during the term of the contract.
§ 5-39. Assessor of Taxes.8
acceptance of the same, said sum shall be paid to the Municipal Court
Administrator to be held in escrow pending the passage of a resolution
by the governing body either approving or disapproving the
compromise sum. In the event that the Mayor and Council disapprove
the sum recommended by the Municipal Court Judge, the Municipal
Court Administrator shall return the funds to the defendant and the
Borough shall retain all of its original statutory lien rights.
G. Establishment of fund. Funds collected from the application fee shall be
deposited in a dedicated fund administered by the Chief Financial
Officer of the Borough. The funds shall be used exclusively to meet the
costs incurred in providing the services of a Municipal Public Defender,
including, when required, expert and lay investigation and testimony.
H. Deputy Municipal Public Defender. The Mayor may appoint, with the
advice and consent of the governing body, one or more Deputy
Municipal Public Defenders to serve in the absence or disqualification
of the Municipal Public Defender. The compensation to be paid to such
Deputy Municipal Public Defender shall be as fixed by the Salary
Ordinance and shall be paid from the fund established in Subsection G
herein.
A. There shall be one Assessor of Taxes to be charged with the duty of
assessing property for taxation within the Borough of Kenilworth and
performing all the other duties prescribed by law.
B. The Mayor shall nominate and, with the advice and consent of the
Council, appoint the Assessor of Taxes. The Mayor shall make such
nomination within 30 days after the office becomes vacant. If the Mayor
fails to nominate within said 30 days or the Council fails to confirm any
nomination made by the Mayor, then after the expiration of said 30 days
the Council shall appoint the Assessor of Taxes. No appointment shall
be made except upon the vote of a majority of the members of the
Council present at the meeting, provided that at least three affirmative
votes shall be required for such purpose. The Mayor shall have no vote
except in the case of a tie.
8. Editor's Note: Section 5-39, Assessor of Taxes, was previously included as § 5-9 of this
chapter, but was relocated from Art. II, Elective Officials, to Art. V, Appointive Officials.
§ 5-37 KENILWORTH CODE § 5-39
1:30
§ 5-40. Superintendent of Public Works.
C. The Tax Assessor shall hold office for a term of four years from the first
day of July next following his appointment.
A. There shall be appointed an officer of the Borough of Kenilworth to be
known as the "Superintendent of Public Works."
B. The duties of the Superintendent of Public Works shall be as follows:
(1) Being the designated Road and Sewer Inspector for the Borough of
Kenilworth.
(2) Keeping and maintaining accurately all records pertaining to the
Department of Public Works in reference to purchases, receipts,
expenditures, inventory, personnel and all work performed by any
employees connected with this Department and all other matters
relating thereto.
(3) Personal supervision of the maintenance of all Borough-owned
property or property under municipal control such as:
(a) Boulevards.
(b) Avenues.
(c) Streets.
(d) Roads.
(e) Sidewalks.
(f) Curbs.
(g) Sewers.
(h) Storm drains.
(i) Public buildings.
(j) Public places.
(k) All public works of the Borough.
(l) Parks.
(m) Sanitation.
(4) Being responsible for the collection, removal and disposal of all
garbage and ash and waste in the Borough of Kenilworth.
(5) Supervision of shade tree planting, maintenance and removal.
(6) Cooperating with the Police Department, Recreation Committee
and all other departments in the Borough of Kenilworth.
§ 5-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-40
1:31
§ 5-41. (Reserved)
§ 5-42. Personnel Supervisor.
(7) The maintenance and care of all vehicles, machinery, tools and
apparatus used in connection with this Department shall be in his
charge. He shall make minor repairs to roads, police and fire
equipment and shall see that the equipment is maintained in
running order, free from mechanical defects.
(8) Any other duties prescribed by resolution of the governing body of
the Borough of Kenilworth not inconsistent with this chapter and
pertaining generally to the Department of Public Works. He shall
discharge such other duties, as the Mayor and Council may impose
from time to time, consistent with the duties specifically set forth in
this chapter. He shall be under the supervision of the Mayor and
Council, and when not contrary to any rule or regulation or
resolution or ordinance of the governing body, he shall be under the
supervision of the Mayor or the Chairperson of the Public Works
Committee.
C. The Superintendent of Public Works shall be appointed by the Mayor
with the advice and consent of the Council.
D. The Superintendent of Public Works shall be appointed for a period of
one year commencing on the first day of January until the 31st day of
December of each year unless he shall qualify for tenure of office under
the statutes in such case made and provided.
A. There is hereby constituted within the Borough of Kenilworth the office
of Personnel Supervisor.
B. The Personnel Supervisor shall keep a list of the pension employees of
the Borough which shall show in connection with each name:
(1) The date of employment of the pension employee and, if applicable,
the dates of his promotion, reduction, suspension, discharge or
reinstatement.
(2) The nature of duties of the pension employee.
(3) The title and compensation of the pension employee.
(4) A statement as to whether the pension employee is a veteran or
otherwise.
(5) Such other information as the Personnel Supervisor deems
necessary and desirable.
C. Each appointing authority shall forthwith report to the Personnel
Supervisor as to any appointment, employment, promotion, reduction,
suspension, discharge and reinstatement:
§ 5-40 KENILWORTH CODE § 5-42
1:32
(1) The name of the person affected.
(2) The nature and effective date of the action taken.
(3) Such other information as the Personnel Supervisor may require.
D. Every pension employee of the Borough shall, within five days of his
appointment or employment, report to the Personnel Supervisor and
furnish him with such information as he may require to comply with this
chapter and other provisions of law.
E. The Personnel Supervisor shall have the power to promulgate rules and
regulations which shall be binding upon all appointing authorities:
(1) Requiring persons applying for employment or appointment as
pension employees of the Borough to submit to medical
examinations prior to their employment or appointment.
(2) Providing for action, including suspension or discharge, that is to
be taken against any pension employee whose compensation from
the Borough becomes subject to execution, garnishment,
attachment or other legal process.
(3) Setting forth the records to be kept as to time worked by pension
employees paid on the basis of time worked.
F. The Personnel Supervisor shall have the power and authority, upon
written charges and hearing, by order, to suspend for an aggregate time
not to exceed two weeks without pay the employment of any employee
of the Borough who willfully fails to perform his duties. Any employee
aggrieved by any such order may appeal to the Mayor and Council by
filing a written notice of appeal with the Borough Clerk within five days
after the issuance of such order. If a notice of appeal is filed, the Mayor
and Council shall, within 15 days thereafter, conduct a hearing on the
charges and may set aside, reduce or affirm the suspension appealed
from. In no event shall any period of suspension commence until the
time for filing a notice of appeal shall have expired and, if a notice of
appeal is filed, until the Mayor and Council shall have taken final action
on the appeal.
G. For the purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
APPOINTING AUTHORITY — Includes any officers, departments,
boards, commissions or other political subdivisions of the Borough of
Kenilworth authorized by law to employ or appoint pension employees.
EMPLOYEE OF THE BOROUGH — Includes any pension employee
of the Borough except elected and appointed officers thereof and
members of the Police Department.
PENSION EMPLOYEE OF THE BOROUGH — Includes any person
employed by the Borough who is eligible for membership in either
the Consolidated Police and Firemen's Pension Fund, the Police and
§ 5-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-42
1:33
§ 5-43. (Reserved)
§ 5-44. (Reserved)
Firemen's Retirement System or the Public Employees' Retirement
Fund.
H. The Personnel Supervisor shall also act as purchasing agent and shall,
for the performance of his duties as such Personnel Supervisor and
such purchasing agent, receive the annual salary as provided in the
annual Salary Ordinance.
I. The purpose of this section is to supplement existing ordinances
governing the personnel policies of the Borough, and nothing herein
contained shall be deemed to repeal or amend any such existing
ordinances.9
9. Editor's Note: See Ch. 37, Personnel Policies.
§ 5-42 KENILWORTH CODE § 5-44
1:34
ARTICLE VI
Boards
§ 5-45. Planning Board.10
§ 5-46. Establishment of Board of Health. [Amended 4-10-1996 by
Ord. No. 96-5]
A local Board of Health is hereby established in and for the Borough of
Kenilworth pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 26:3-1 et seq.
§ 5-46.1. Membership; terms; removal for cause. [Added 4-10-1996
by Ord. No. 96-5]
§ 5-46.2. Residency requirement; qualifications. [Added 4-10-1996
by Ord. No. 96-5]
Except as otherwise provided for herein, with regard to the physician/
dentist/chiropractor member, each member and alternate member of the
Board must be a resident of the Borough of Kenilworth and, whenever
A. Members; terms.
(1) The local Board of Health shall consist of seven members who shall
be appointed by the governing body. The terms of Board members
shall be for three-year, staggered terms. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
(2) Upon the adoption of this section, the governing body shall appoint
two members in addition to those already sitting. One member
shall be appointed for a term to expire on December 31, 1997, and
one member for a term to expire on December 31, 1998.
Thereafter, all members' terms shall be for three years, as
hereinbefore provided.
B. The governing body may appoint, in addition to the seven-member
regular Board, two alternate members. Alternate members shall be
designated as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2." The terms of
alternate members shall be for two years, except that the terms of the
alternates first appointed shall be two years for Alternate No. 1 and one
year for Alternate No. 2, so that the term of not more than one alternate
member shall expire in any one year.
C. If any vacancy shall occur in the Board, the appointment to fill such
vacancy shall be made in the manner in which the original appointment
was made but for the unexpired term only.
D. Any member of the Board, including an alternate member, may, after
public hearing if requested by the member, be removed by the
governing body for cause.
10.Editor's Note: For provisions pertaining to the Planning Board, see Ch. 120, Land Use.
§ 5-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-46.2
1:35
feasible, shall be selected based on his or her education, training and/or
occupation, which shall fall within one or more of the following categories:
§ 5-46.3. Rules and regulations. [Added 4-10-1996 by Ord. No. 96-5]
The Board of Health shall adopt rules and regulations for its government
and that of its officers and employees. The Board may also adopt ordinances
consistent with law and the State Sanitary Code.
§ 5-46.4. Employment of personnel; officers; qualifications. [Added
4-10-1996 by Ord. No. 96-5]
§ 5-46.5. Removal of licensed health officers; procedure. [Added
4-10-1996 by Ord. No. 96-5]
No health officer, inspector or employee holding a license issued in the
name of the State Department of Health, after five years' consecutive
service in such position, shall be removed from office or reduced in pay or
position, except for just cause and only after public hearing as provided for
by law.
§ 5-46.6. Statutory authority. [Added 4-10-1996 by Ord. No. 96-5]
The Board shall have power to pass, alter or amend ordinances and make
rules and regulations in regard to the public health within its jurisdiction
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-31 et seq.
A. A physician/dentist/chiropractor duly licensed to practice in the State of
New Jersey who either resides in the Borough of Kenilworth or whose
primary office location and practice is within the Borough of
Kenilworth.
B. A registered or practical nurse.
C. A licensed pharmacist.
D. A citizen of the Borough not necessarily meeting the qualifications of
Subsection A, B or C of this section but who has expressed or
demonstrated an interest in Borough health matters.
A. The Board shall provide in its bylaws for the appointment/employment
of such personnel as it may deem necessary and as may otherwise be
required by law or administrative regulation. Any such duly appointed
officer or employee shall hold office during the term for which he or she
is appointed and shall not be removed except for cause and after an
opportunity has been given to him or her for a hearing.
B. The Board shall not appoint any person as health officer, sanitary
inspector or any other officer permitted by law unless such person
holds the requisite state license and is otherwise qualified to hold such
office pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-21.
§ 5-46.2 KENILWORTH CODE § 5-46.7
1:36
§ 5-46.7. Delegation of power; authority. [Added 4-10-1996 by Ord.
No. 96-5]
The Board may delegate, by resolution, any of its powers to any member
of the Board, or to any officer thereof, which power shall only be exercised
when the Board is not in session. Notice by any member or officer of the
Board shall be notice by the Board, and the person served therewith shall
be bound thereby.
§ 5-46.8. Budget; estimate of appropriation; appropriation. [Added
4-10-1996 by Ord. No. 96-5]
The Board shall, each year before the budget of municipal taxes to be levied
for the year shall be determined, present to the governing body an estimate
of the appropriation the Board believes is necessary for health purposes.
The governing body shall appropriate the amount of such estimate or such
other amount as it may determine.
§ 5-46.9. Declaration and abatement of nuisances; power to define;
abatement without ordinance. [Added 4-10-1996 by Ord. No. 96-5]
§ 5-46.10. Notification to abate nuisance. [Added 4-10-1996 by Ord.
No. 96-5]
§ 5-46.11. Failure to comply with notice; recovery of expenses;
expenses to become lien. [Added 4-10-1996 by Ord. No. 96-5]
A. The Board may pass, alter or amend ordinances and make rules and
regulations to declare and define what shall constitute a nuisance in all
public and private places within its jurisdiction.
B. The Board shall, within its jurisdiction, investigate and prohibit any
nuisance which may be known to the Board or brought to its attention
and shall cause the same to be removed and abated at the owner's
expense.
C. The power given to the Board pursuant to this section shall not depend
upon whether the Board has exercised its power to pass, alter or amend
ordinances in relation to the public health.
A. Where the Board determines a nuisance to exist on private property, the
Board shall notify the owner, in writing, by certified mail, to remove and
abate the same, within such time as the Board may specify. A duplicate
of the notice shall be left with one or more of the tenants or occupants.
B. In the case of a nuisance on public property, the Board shall give notice
to the person officially in charge thereof. Such notice shall be made in
the same manner as provided for in Subsection A of this section.
C. If an owner resides out of state or cannot be readily notified, a notice
left at the house or premises with the tenant or occupant, or posted on
the premises, shall suffice.
§ 5-46.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-46.11
1:37
§ 5-46.12. Injunctive relief; costs. [Added 4-10-1996 by Ord. No.
96-5]
The Board may, in lieu of proceeding in a summary manner to remove or
abate a nuisance, institute an action in the Superior Court, in the name
of the state, on relation of the Board, for injunctive relief to prohibit the
continuance of such nuisance and may recover the costs of such action
through the sale of the property upon which the nuisance was located or
from the person who caused the nuisance or allowed it to continue.
§ 5-46.13. Enforcement; violations and penalties. [Added 4-10-1996
by Ord. No. 96-5; amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
Unless otherwise provided for in this chapter, state law or regulation,
the provisions of §§ 5-46 through 5-46.13 shall be enforced by summary
proceedings in the Municipal Court. Unless otherwise provided by law, any
person found to have violated the provisions of this §§ 5-46 through 5-46.13
may be subject to a fine not to exceed $500, imprisonment for a period up
to 90 days, or both.
§ 5-47. Zoning Board of Adjustment.11
§ 5-48. Local Assistance Board.
A. If the owner or person notified, after proper notice, fails to abate a
nuisance, the Board may proceed to abate or cause to be abated such
nuisance, in a summary manner.
B. The Board may recover, by a civil action, from any such person who
shall have caused or allowed such nuisance, the expenses incurred in
the removal and/or abatement of such nuisance. In the event that the
Board fails to recover an amount sufficient to defray such expenses or
shall deem it inexpedient to bring such an action, it may present a bill,
certified by the Board, or a majority thereof, for such part thereof as
may not have been recovered, to the governing body, and it shall be
audited and paid by the municipality in the same manner as the bills for
the ordinary current expenses of the municipality are paid.
C. Any expense to remove or abate a nuisance paid for directly by the
municipality shall, in the case of a private property owner, become a
lien against the property of the owner and shall be entered as such on
the tax records.
A. Organization of Board; appointment and terms of members.
(1) A Local Assistance Board is hereby established. Said Board may
consist of three or five members, as fixed by the Borough Council,
11.Editor's Note: The Zoning Board of Adjustment was abolished and its duties transferred to
the Planning Board. See Ch. 120, Land Use.
§ 5-46.11 KENILWORTH CODE § 5-48
1:38
§ 5-49. through § 5-57. (Reserved)
and at least one of them shall be a woman. One member of the
Board shall be a member of the Borough Council, and the term of
such member shall be for one year. The terms of the other members
shall be as follows:
(a) For a Board consisting of three members, said terms shall be
for two years each, expiring in alternate years.
(b) For a Board consisting of five members, said terms shall be for
four years each, one term expiring in each year.
(2) The term of each member of the Local Assistance Board shall begin
on the first day of January, and each member shall continue in office
until his successor shall be appointed and shall qualify. Vacancies
shall be filled for the unexpired term only.
(3) The Local Assistance Board shall select a Chairperson and a
Secretary and shall appoint a Director of Welfare, who shall be the
executive and administrative officer of the Board and perform the
duties specified in the Laws of 1947, Chapter 156, Section 12
(N.J.S.A. 44:8-118), and other provisions of general law and
Borough ordinances.
(4) The Director of Welfare shall hold office for a term of five years
from the date of appointment and shall be paid such salary as may
be fixed by such Board, subject to the approval of the Council. The
Director of Welfare shall make monthly reports to the Mayor and
Council and members of the Local Assistance Board.
B. Powers and duties. The Local Assistance Board shall have the following
powers and duties:
(1) To administer programs of assistance to needy persons in
cooperation with federal, state, county and municipal agencies.
(2) To grant public assistance on a budget deficit basis for living
expenses, medical services and supplies, hospitalization,
convalescent and dental care and boarding care for children.
(3) To provide social services for family adjustment and rehabilitation.
(4) To participate in general community welfare interests, such as local
unemployment, child care and prevention of delinquency.
(5) To maintain complete social case records, comply with state
regulations and make such reports and analyses of welfare
problems and grants as are necessary or desirable.
§ 5-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-49
1:39

ARTICLE VII
Departments
§ 5-58. Department of Public Works.
There is hereby established a Department of Public Works, the head of
which shall be known as the "Superintendent of Public Works."12
§ 5-59. Police Department.
A Police Department has been established in the Borough of Kenilworth.
The composition and official membership of the Department are as provided
in Chapter 39, Police Department, of the Code of the Borough of
Kenilworth.13
§ 5-60. Department of Tax and Finance. [Added 12-14-1993 by Ord.
No. 93-31]
§ 5-61. through § 5-64. (Reserved)
A. There shall be a Department of Tax and Finance established in the
Borough of Kenilworth. The official head of the Department shall be the
Chief Financial Officer established pursuant to § 5-34 of this chapter.
B. The Department of Tax and Finance shall consist of the following
offices:
(1) Office of the Chief Financial Officer.
(2) Office of the Tax Collector.
(3) Office of the Treasurer.
12.Editor's Note: See § 5-40, Superintendent of Public Works, and Ch. 15, Departmental
Structures.
13.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 15, Departmental Structures.
§ 5-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-61
1:41

ARTICLE VIII
Special Advisory Committees
§ 5-65. Senior Handyman Program. [Added 6-26-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-04]
A. Establishment; eligibility.
(1) The Borough Senior Handyman Oversight Committee shall
establish a Senior Handyman Program and enforce standards of
eligibility for the program as follows:
(a) Must be an owner-occupied resident of Kenilworth.
(b) In the case of an owner-occupied multiple-family unit, the
approved repairs shall only pertain to the unit in which the
owner of the property legally resides.
(c) Must be age 62 or older or permanently and totally disabled as
defined and awarded by the Social Security Administration.
(d) The applicant's income must not exceed low-income limits
based on the United States Federal Housing and Urban
Development (HUD) Income Limits Schedule based on the
Newark, New Jersey, HUD Metro Fair Market Rents for Union
County for the current calendar year.
(2) Eligible repairs are as follows:
(a) Repairs to windows and screens, repairs to railings, replacing
locks and door handles, adjusting doors, and installing/
uninstalling window air-conditioner units.
(b) Minor plumbing, such as replacing washers, repairing leaky
faucets/toilets, and opening slow drains.
(c) Repairs to cabinet doors, changing light bulbs and smoke
detectors or installing batteries, flipping mattresses, taking
down curtains and blinds, rechanging curtains and blinds, and
ground-level caulking.
(3) Ineligible repairs are as follows:
(a) Electrical, major plumbing, painting or ladder climbing.
(b) Moving furniture, bringing furniture and items to curbside for
bulk pickup, installing ceiling fans, exterior window washing,
gutter cleaning, interior painting, exterior railing painting, and
waterproofing/painting decks.
B. At the annual reorganization, the governing body shall adopt guidelines
for the Senior Handyman Program by resolution. These guidelines shall
be enforced by the Senior Handyman Oversight Committee, which will
consist of three Council members appointed annually by the Mayor.
§ 5-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-65
1:43
§ 5-66. through § 5-70. (Reserved)
C. On an annual basis, the Senior Handyman Program Oversight
Committee shall evaluate and report to the governing body on the
effectiveness of the program and offer recommendations for
improvements.
D. Guidelines for the programs in accordance with this section, including
eligible services and/or repairs, shall be prepared by the Senior
Handyman Oversight Committee and adopted by the governing body
prior to dissemination.
E. Upon approval by the governing body, said guidelines shall be prepared
and made available for public use.
§ 5-65 KENILWORTH CODE § 5-66
1:44
ARTICLE IX
Commissions
§ 5-71. Environmental Commission.
An Environmental Commission has been established in the Borough of
Kenilworth pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 et seq., consisting of seven
members appointed by the Mayor with Council's approval. Provisions
concerning membership, terms of office, powers, duties and functions are
as provided in Chapter 17, Environmental Commission.
§ 5-72. through § 5-75. (Reserved)
§ 5-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-72
1:45

ARTICLE X
Emergency Management Coordinator
[Amended 10-13-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-18]
§ 5-76. Establishment; duties and powers.
A. There shall be appointed by the Mayor a Municipal Emergency
Management Coordinator who shall serve a term as provided by the
New Jersey Civilian Defense and Disaster Control Act.14 The
appointment of an individual shall not bar the Borough from
designating a coordinator pursuant to the Uniform Shared Services and
Consolidation Act, N.J.S.A. 40A:65-1 et seq., in lieu of the Police Chief
for the Borough. [Amended 9-12-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-14]
B. All the duties, powers, tenure and responsibilities of the Municipal
Emergency Management Coordinator shall coincide with those
enumerated by state statute, regulation and orders by the Governor of
the State of New Jersey.
14.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. App. A:9-40.1.
§ 5-76 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-76
1:47

ARTICLE XI
Code of Ethics
§ 5-77. Word usage. [Amended 9-12-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-14]
For the purposes of this article, the term "municipal officers and employees"
shall include all elected and appointed officers of the Borough, all
employees of the Borough, all members and employees of the Board of
Health, the Planning Board and the Volunteer Fire Department and the
Library Board and employees.
§ 5-78. Legislative findings.
The governing body of the Borough of Kenilworth hereby finds and declares:
§ 5-79. Rules governing conduct of officers and employees.
The following rules shall govern the conduct of the municipal officers and
employees:
A. We recognize that it is essential that the conduct of municipal officers
and employees shall hold the respect and confidence of the people.
Municipal officers and employees must, therefore, avoid conduct which
is in violation of their public trust.
B. We also recognize that qualified members of the community should not
be deterred from seeking municipal office or employment by
unwarranted limitations.
C. We adopt this article to provide municipal officers and employees with
guidance and to maintain uniformly high standards.
A. No municipal officer or employee shall have an interest, financial or
otherwise, direct or indirect, or engage in any business or transaction
or professional activity which is in substantial conflict with the proper
discharge of his duties in the public interest.
B. No municipal officer or employee shall use or attempt to use his official
position to secure unwarranted privileges for himself or others.
C. No municipal officer or employee shall act in his official capacity in any
manner wherein he has a direct or indirect personal financial interest
that impairs his objectivity or independence of judgment.
D. No municipal officer or employee shall undertake any employment or
service, whether compensated or not, which impairs his objectivity and
independence of judgment in the exercise of his official duties.
E. No municipal officer or employee shall solicit or accept any gift, favor,
service or other thing of value given or offered for the purpose of
influencing him in the discharge of his official duties.
§ 5-77 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-79
1:49
F. No municipal officer or employee shall solicit, receive or agree to
receive, whether directly or indirectly, any compensation, reward,
employment, gift or other thing of value for the performance of his
public duties from any source other than the Borough of Kenilworth
except with the written consent of the governing body of the Borough of
Kenilworth.
G. Nothing herein shall be deemed to regulate campaign contributions
and expenditures which are within the jurisdiction of the New Jersey
Election Law Enforcement Commission.
§ 5-79 KENILWORTH CODE § 5-79
1:50
Chapter 6
ACCESS TO PUBLIC RECORDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees and licenses — See Ch. 91.
§ 6-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a policy and procedure by which
the Borough of Kenilworth can meet its obligations to comply with the
provisions of the Right to Know Law (N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq.) in a timely
and efficient manner and to establish a schedule of fees to be charged to the
public for the service provided.
§ 6-2. Definitions.
Unless the context clearly implies otherwise, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
CUSTODIAN OF RECORDS — The Municipal Clerk of the Borough of
Kenilworth.
DEPUTY CUSTODIAN OF RECORDS — A person duly deputized by the
custodian of records for documents pertaining to Police Department
matters.[Added 6-26-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-10]
FEE — The fees established by this chapter for providing copies of public
records by the Borough or any of its departments, agencies, political
subdivision, officers, employees and/or elected officials.
PERSON — Any individual, incorporated or unincorporated business or
association, charitable or nonprofit entity, partnership or limited liability
company.
PUBLIC RECORDS — All records required by law to be made, maintained or
kept on file by any board, body, agency, department, commission or official
of the Borough of Kenilworth, or any political subdivision thereof, or any
official acting for or on behalf thereof or as otherwise may be provided for
in N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5.[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
RANDOM SEARCH — A request to review public documents without
identifying the document by name, date, number or other distinguishing
characteristic to enable the custodian of records to identify and retrieve
the document for inspection by the person making the request. Any random
search of public records shall be conducted at the Borough Clerk's office,
or such other location as she may designate, during regular business hours,
under the supervision of the custodian of records or her designee and
in such a manner so as to preserve the integrity of the records being
inspected.
§ 5-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-2
1:51
RIGHT TO KNOW LAW — The statutory terms set forth in N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1
et seq.
§ 6-3. Request for public records; application; response time.
[Amended 6-26-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-10]
§ 6-4. Public business to take priority.
All requests for public records shall be honored in a timely fashion; however,
the public business of the Borough shall take precedence over a request for
public records.
§ 6-5. Determination as to what records may be released.
When a request for a record is received and the custodian is unsure or
unable to determine if the record requested is a public record under the
Right to Know Law or common law, or if so, if it is a record that may
not be disclosed without violating the privacy rights of third parties, or its
disclosure may violate some other law, rule, regulation or court decision,
the custodian shall seek the opinion of the Borough Attorney. The custodian
shall be guided by such legal opinion.
§ 6-6. Fees for copying; reproduction of electronic records; random
search requests.
Unless otherwise provided for in Chapter 91 of this Code, the following fee
schedule shall apply:
A. All requests for public records shall be made to the custodian of
records, in writing, on an application form to be provided by the
custodian, except that requests for records pertaining to the Police
Department shall be made directly to the deputy custodian of records.
B. The custodian of records shall, except in the case of a request for police
records, forward a copy of the request to the department head or other
Borough employee or official immediately in charge of such records.
The department head, employee or official shall endeavor to locate the
document or documents specifically requested and make the same
available at the Borough Clerk's office within seven business days from
the date of the written application. The Borough Clerk shall notify the
person making the request by telephone, or in writing if no telephone
number is provided, that the documents may be inspected at the Clerk's
office between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, legal
holidays excepted. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
A. Photocopying of documents.
(1) First page to 10th page: $1 per page.
(2) Eleventh page to 20th page: $0.75 per page.
§ 6-2 KENILWORTH CODE § 6-6
1:52
§ 6-7. Repealer; severability.
Chapter 7
AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT COMPLIANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Personnel policies — See Ch. 37.
§ 7-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish compliance with the Americans
With Disabilities Act, and to designate Americans With Disabilities Act
Coordinators, and to establish an Americans With Disabilities Act Advisory
Board.
§ 7-2. Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA) Coordinator.
(3) All pages over 20: $0.50 per page.
B. Electronic records. The fee to be charged shall be based on the charge
to the Borough if the records are maintained and/or processed through
a third party contractor/vendor. If the records are maintained by the
Borough, the fee shall be based on the reasonable cost to duplicate the
records which shall include the cost of blank tapes, discs or other
medium to be used and the actual employee hours expended in
retrieving and reproducing the records, not to exceed actual costs to
the Borough.
C. Random search. In addition to any costs associated with Subsections A
and B of this section, the Borough Clerk shall establish a fee for such
search based on the circumstances of the request which shall not
exceed the actual cost to the Borough.
D. Any person may, during regular business hours and under the
supervision of the custodian of records or her designees, copy public
records by hand without charge.
A. All ordinances or parts of ordinances of the Borough of Kenilworth
inconsistent with this chapter are hereby repealed as to their
inconsistencies only.
B. In the event that any part of this chapter shall be deemed
unenforceable by a court of competent jurisdiction, it shall not affect
the remaining parts which shall remain in full force and effect.
A. The Mayor, with the consent of the Borough Council, shall appoint one
Borough of Kenilworth employee to serve with the Borough Attorney as
the ADA Coordinator. The ADA Coordinator shall be familiar with the
§ 6-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-2
1:53
§ 7-3. Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA) Advisory Board.
There is hereby established an Americans With Disabilities Act Advisory
Board of the Borough of Kenilworth. Three residents of the Borough of
Kenilworth shall be appointed by the Mayor with notice to the Council to
become advisory members of the Board for a period of two years. These
advisory members shall perform their duties as advisors to the ADA
Coordinator and Deputy ADA Coordinator (if such Deputy Coordinator is
appointed) in accordance with this chapter of the Code for the Borough.
The Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA) Advisory Board shall meet no
less than once every month during the term of its appointment. All such
meetings shall be with notice to the public.
§ 7-4. Notice.
§ 7-5. Self-evaluation.
requirements of the ADA and coordinate Borough efforts to comply
with and carry out Borough responsibilities under the ADA and the
rules promulgated pursuant thereto, including the investigation of
complaints alleging violations of the ADA.
B. The Borough Clerk shall make the name, office address and telephone
number of the ADA Coordinator available to any interested individuals.
C. The Mayor, with the consent of the Borough Council, may appoint an
individual to serve as the Deputy ADA Coordinator. The Deputy ADA
Coordinator shall assist the ADA Coordinator and perform such duties
as required by the ADA Coordinator.
D. The ADA Coordinator shall be appointed and serve with members of the
ADA Advisory Board as provided for in § 7-3 of this chapter.
E. The term of office for the ADA Coordinator and Deputy ADA
Coordinator shall be for one year, commencing on January 1 of the
appointment and ending on December 31 of the year of appointment.
A. The Borough shall disseminate sufficient information to inform all
interested persons of the rights and protections afforded by ADA and
the rules promulgated pursuant thereto related to the responsibilities
of the Borough of Kenilworth. This information shall be provided in a
manner consistent with the federal rules for effective communication.
B. The Borough may fulfill this requirement by publication of information
in handbooks, manuals or pamphlets which describe the Borough's
programs and activities and/or by the display of posters in service
centers and other public places or the broadcast of information on radio
or television.
A. The ADA Advisory Board shall evaluate all Borough programs and
services to ensure equal opportunity and equal access.
§ 7-2 KENILWORTH CODE § 7-5
1:54
§ 7-6. Maintenance of accessible features.
§ 7-7. Employment.
B. The ADA Advisory Board shall distribute the self-evaluating plan and
permit comment thereon by all interested parties.
C. The self-evaluation shall in all respects comply with the federal rules
adopted pursuant to the ADA and shall be kept on file by the Borough
Clerk for a period of three years.
A. The Borough shall maintain in proper working condition those features
of facilities and equipment that are required to be accessible and usable
by persons with disabilities.
B. This section of the Borough Code shall not be interpreted to prohibit
reasonable shutdown times for repairs.
A. The hiring practices of the Borough shall not discriminate against
persons with disabilities unless provided for by law.
B. All job descriptions shall precisely and accurately describe the essential
functions of the job performed by each employee.
C. Job applications shall pertain strictly to job performance.
D. All job interviews shall be limited to questions concerning the
applicant's ability to perform the job.
E. The interviewer shall not inquire about disabilities or conduct tests that
screen out people with disabilities.
F. Questions about the applicant's addiction to alcohol or drugs shall not
be asked.
G. The Borough shall not conduct medical examinations or inquiries of job
applicants prior to an offer of employment. The Borough may, however,
require medical examinations, and/or inquiries, after making an offer of
employment to a job applicant and before the applicant begins
employment with the Borough. The Borough may condition an offer of
employment on the results of the medical examination or inquiry. If the
Borough chooses to conduct such medical examination or inquiry or
inquiries, all entering employees in the same job category shall be
subjected to the examination or inquiry regardless of disability.
H. Any medical information obtained from employee medical examinations
and inquiries shall be maintained on separate forms and shall be
treated as confidential and not kept in an employee's personnel file if
the individual is ultimately hired.
I. Persons with mental or physical disabilities are eligible as long as they
can perform the essential functions of the job after reasonable
accommodation to their known limitations has been made. If the
§ 7-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-7
1:55
§ 7-8. Program accessibility.
§ 7-9. Communications.
accommodation cannot be made because it would cause the employer
undue hardship, such person may not be eligible.
A. The Borough shall make reasonable accommodations to make its
facilities accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities. An
individual shall not be excluded from participation in or be denied the
benefits of the services, programs or activities of the Borough due to
disability.
B. The Borough shall make reasonable accommodations to its facilities as
required by the ADA.
C. The Borough shall prepare a transition plan setting forth the steps
necessary to complete the structural changes in all public facilities. All
interested persons, including individuals with disabilities, shall be able
to participate in the development of the transition plan. After
completion, a copy of the transition plan shall be made available for
public inspection. The transition plan shall include, at a minimum, the
following:
(1) Identification of physical obstacles in the Borough's facilities that
limit the accessibility of its programs or activities to individuals
with disabilities;
(2) Description in detail of the methods that will be used to make the
facilities accessible;
(3) Specification of the schedule for taking the necessary steps to
achieve compliance;
(4) Identification of the official responsible for implementation of the
plan; and
(5) The rationale as to why certain Borough facilities cannot be made
accessible.
D. Effective immediately, the new construction and alteration provisions of
the ADA and the regulations adopted pursuant thereto shall apply to
Borough construction.
A. The Borough shall take whatever steps may be necessary to ensure that
communications with applicants, participants and members of the
public with disabilities are as effective as communications with others.
B. Auxiliary aids and/or services shall be furnished to afford individuals
with disabilities an equal opportunity to participate in and enjoy the
benefits of the Borough's services, programs and activities.
§ 7-7 KENILWORTH CODE § 7-9
1:56
Chapter 8
CHECKS, RETURNED
§ 8-1. Service charge.
§ 8-2. Collection.
Any service charge authorized by this chapter shall be collected in the same
manner prescribed by law for the collection of the account for which the
check or other written instrument was tendered.
§ 8-3. Future payments.
Once a check or other written instrument is returned for insufficient funds,
the appropriate municipal department head or officer may demand that
future payments on such account be tendered in cash or by cashier's or
certified check.
Chapter 10
CLAIMS APPROVAL; PAYROLL ACCOUNTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 43.
C. The Borough shall, as soon as reasonably possible, equip emergency
systems with telecommunications devices for the deaf (TDDs) and
computer modems.
D. All Borough communications required by § 7-4 of this chapter shall
comply with the communication requirements of the ADA and the
regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
E. The Borough shall place an appropriate access statement on all public
communications.
A. Any person who tenders a check or other written instrument to the
municipality or any department or administrative board or subdivision
thereof for the payment of an account or service which is returned for
insufficient funds shall be assessed a service charge of $20 for each
such check or instrument returned.
B. Whenever the account for which a check is returned is for a tax or
special assessment, the service charge shall be included on whichever
list of delinquent accounts is prepared for enforcement of such lien.
§ 7-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-3
1:57

ARTICLE I
Claims Approval
[Adopted 2-27-1962 by Ord. No. 62-6]
§ 10-1. Purchase order and authorization required. [Amended
10-23-1962 by Ord. No. 62-22]
Materials shall be purchased and services secured by the Borough of
Kenilworth only after the issuance of a purchase order and legal
authorization by the governing body.
§ 10-2. Submission of requisitions to purchasing agent; appeal from
decision. [Amended 10-23-1962 by Ord. No. 62-22]
§ 10-3. Restrictions on honoring of claims. [Amended 10-23-1962
by Ord. No. 62-22]
Unless prior legal municipal authorization shall have been had for the
making of a requisition for the issuance of a purchase order, no claim
shall be honored for payment by the governing body notwithstanding the
purchasing agent issued a purchase order based upon a requisition.
§ 10-4. Responsibility for authorization for purchasing. [Amended
10-23-1962 by Ord. No. 62-22]
The sole responsibility for the legal authorization for the purchase of
materials or the securing of services shall rest with the department
supervisor or Councilman who shall sign and submit any unauthorized
requisition to the purchasing agent.
§ 10-5. Submission of bill of demand.
Any person claiming payment from the Borough of Kenilworth shall present
a detailed bill of demand to the Municipal Clerk, duly certified and on forms
supplied by him and in the manner and form provided by law.
§ 10-6. Signature of designated person required on claim.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk to see that the signature of the officer or
employee who has been duly designated by the governing body to certify
A. Department heads, Councilmen and other officers shall submit written
requisitions for such materials or services to the purchasing agent,
designated by the governing body, who shall, in the first instance,
determine whether or not to issue a purchase order therefor.
B. If the purchasing agent determines that a purchase order should not be
issued, then the department head, Councilman, or other officer
requesting the issuance of the purchase order may appeal to the
governing body which may, after considering the matter, direct the
purchasing agent to issue the same.
§ 10-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-6
1:59
that the materials have been received by or the services rendered to the
municipality appears on every claim.
§ 10-7. Presentation of claims to Council; required signatures.
Claims shall then be presented by the Clerk to the members of the Borough
Council the night before the meeting of the Borough Council unless this
provision shall be waived by action thereon at the Council meeting. If some
other time for the examination of claims shall be agreed upon by members
of the Council, then such claims shall be presented at such time. Said
claims shall be presented as aforesaid by presenting the same to all of the
members of the Borough Council present in the committee meeting room
or in such other room where the Councilmen shall meet to approve claims
and discuss matters to come before the Council meeting, and such claims
shall be approved and signed by a member (preferably the chairman) of
the committee of the department, board, officer or body whose budgetary
appropriation is being charged. All claims shall also contain the signature of
a member (preferably the chairman) of the Finance Committee. All claims
before approval by the governing body for payment shall contain thereon
the signatures of at least three Councilmen.
§ 10-8. Approval or disapproval.
Claims shall be considered by the governing body which shall approve the
same, except that said governing body may reject any claim presented
to it, stating the reason for such rejection. Any disapproved claim shall
be referred back to the Municipal Clerk with such instructions as the
governing body may give at the time of disapproval.
§ 10-9. Recording of approval or disapproval.
It shall be the duty of the Municipal Clerk to record the names of the
claimants and the amounts of all claims in the official minutes, together with
the resolutions approving payment and with appropriate record as to any
claims disapproved or rejected.
§ 10-10. Indication of approval on claims.
It shall be the duty of the Municipal Clerk or such other officer designated
by resolution of the governing body to indicate on said claims that they have
been approved for payment, with date of approval thereof noted thereon.
§ 10-11. Preparation and distribution of checks. [Amended
1-27-1987 by Ord. No. 87-3]
After the claims have been approved, the Borough Clerk shall prepare the
necessary checks for payment thereof, which checks shall be signed by
the Mayor or the President of the Council, the Municipal Clerk and the
Treasurer. After the checks for payment of claims are signed, the Clerk shall
mail or otherwise distribute the checks to the claimants. The number of the
check given in payment shall be endorsed on the claims.
§ 10-6 KENILWORTH CODE § 10-11
1:60
ARTICLE II
Payroll Accounts
[Adopted 6-28-1949 by Ord. No. 238]
§ 10-12. Account established.
There is hereby authorized and established a bank account in such bank as
hereafter from time to time designated by resolution of the governing body,
to be designated as the "Borough of Kenilworth Payroll Account."
§ 10-13. Submission of payrolls for approval; consideration;
decision.
At each regular meeting of the governing body, the Borough Treasurer
shall submit for approval or ratification, as the case may be, the necessary
payrolls, showing the gross amount of compensation, the deductions
therefrom and the amount due the several officers and employees. The
payrolls shall be considered by the governing body and, if found correct,
shall in due course be approved. In case of an error or adjustment in the
payroll, it shall be the duty of the Borough Treasurer to have such error or
adjustment properly corrected and the appropriate record thereof made.
§ 10-14. Authorization for signing warrants.
Such officers as may be designated by resolution of the governing body are
hereby authorized to sign warrants in favor of the payroll account upon
notice that the appropriate payrolls have been approved by the proper
committee and the proper certifying authority, who shall be designated by
resolution of the governing body.
§ 10-15. Procedure by Treasurer upon receipt of warrant.
The Borough Treasurer shall, upon receipt of a warrant due such payroll
account, deposit the same to the credit of the payroll account charging the
appropriate budgetary accounts therewith.
§ 10-16. Drawing of checks on payroll account by Treasurer.
The Borough Treasurer shall draw checks on said payroll account to the
employees entitled to payment therefrom and to the agencies entitled to
the deductions made from the gross compensation of the officers and
employees.
§ 10-17. Compensation of officers and employees. [Amended
9-11-1979 by Ord. No. 79-19]
Unless otherwise provided by state law, the compensation of officers and
employees of the Borough of Kenilworth shall be paid in the manner set
forth in a resolution adopted by the governing body at its organization
meeting or thereafter.15
§ 10-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-17
1:61
15.Editor's Note: Original §§ 7, 8 and 9, concerning payment schedules for various Borough
officers and employees, and original § 10, concerning rates of compensation, of Ord. No.
238, which sections immediately followed this section, were repealed 9-11-1979 by Ord.
No. 79-19.
§ 10-17 KENILWORTH CODE § 10-17
1:62
Chapter 12
CONSUMER AFFAIRS, OFFICE OF
§ 12-1. Establishment.
There is hereby established in the Borough of Kenilworth a Borough Office
of Consumer Affairs headed by a Borough Consumer Assistance Officer.
§ 12-2. Appointment, term and training of Consumer Assistance
Officer.
The Borough Consumer Assistance Officer shall be appointed in the same
manner as is provided by law for other appointed officers of the Borough
and shall serve for a term of two calendar years, except for the officer first
appointed who shall serve until December 31, 1976. The Borough Consumer
Assistance Officer shall complete, as soon as is practicable, such training
and education as may be prescribed for consumer affairs local assistance
officers by the Division of Consumer Affairs in the Department of Law and
Public Safety of the State of New Jersey.
§ 12-3. Powers and duties. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
The Borough Office of Consumer Affairs shall:
Chapter 13
A. Receive, investigate and forward complaints from persons, firms and
corporations relating to consumer affairs to appropriate municipal,
state and federal agencies.
B. Mediate disputes between businessmen and consumers.
C. Advise the governing body in regard to matters affecting consumer
affairs and recommend the adoption of such ordinances as may be
deemed reasonable and proper.
D. Disseminate information to the public relating to consumer affairs.
E. Cooperate with other agencies, private and governmental, dealing with
consumer affairs and, insofar as is authorized by law and under the
supervision and direction of the Division of Consumer Affairs and the
Department of Public Law and Safety, enforce applicable laws and
ordinances.
F. Report monthly to the governing body on its activities.
G. Maintain regular office hours, including hours in the evening, at such
times as will adequately serve the public.
H. Perform such other acts as may be incidental to its powers and duties.
§ 10-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-3
1:63
(RESERVED)
Chapter 14
COURT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 5.
§ 14-1. Establishment. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
A Municipal Court is hereby established under Chapter 12 of Title 2B of
the Revised Statutes of New Jersey, as amended and supplemented (N.J.S.A.
2B:12-1 et seq.). The name of said Court shall be the "Municipal Court of
the Borough of Kenilworth."
§ 14-2. Jurisdiction. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
Said Municipal Court shall have and exercise the limited civil and criminal
jurisdiction prescribed by said Chapter 12 of Title 2B of the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey, as amended and supplemented from time to time.
§ 14-3. Judge.16 [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
Said Court shall have a Judge who shall be known as the "Municipal Judge."
He or she shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent
of the Council on January 1 for a term of three years and shall possess
the qualifications as set forth in said Chapter 12 of Title 2B of the Revised
Statutes.
§ 14-4. Administrator and other assistants.17 [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
The Borough Council may by ordinance or resolution provide for an
Administrator and other necessary clerical and other assistants for said
Municipal Court.
§ 14-5. Compensation. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
The compensation of the Municipal Judge shall be established by ordinance
and shall be in lieu of any and all fees. The compensation of the
16.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 5, Administration of Government, § 5-29.
17.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 5, Administration of Government, § 5-36.
§ 12-3 KENILWORTH CODE § 14-5
1:64
Administrator, clerical and other assistants may be established by ordinance
or resolution.
Chapter 14A
DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION
§ 14A-1. Provision of indemnification and legal defense.
Except as hereinafter provided, the Borough of Kenilworth, hereinafter
known as the "Borough," shall, upon the request of any present or former
official, employee or appointee of the Borough, provide for indemnification
and legal defense of any civil action brought against said person or persons
arising from an act or omission falling within the scope of their public
duties.
§ 14A-2. Construal of terms.
The terms of this chapter and the definition of "official," "employee" and
"appointee" are to be construed liberally in order to effectuate the purposes
of this chapter, except that these terms shall not mean:
§ 14A-3. Indemnification.
A. Any person who is not a natural person;
B. Any person while providing goods or services of any kind under any
contract with the Borough except an employment contract;
C. Any person while providing legal or engineering services for
compensation unless said person is a full-time employee of the
Borough; and
D. Any person who as a condition of his or her appointment or contract is
required to indemnify and defend the Borough and/or secure insurance.
A. The Borough shall provide for defense of and indemnify any present or
former official, employee or appointee of the Borough who becomes a
defendant in a civil action if the person or persons involved:
(1) Acted or failed to act in a matter in which the Borough has or had
an interest;
(2) Acted or failed to act in the discharge of a duty imposed or
authorized by law; and
(3) Acted or failed to take action in good faith.
B. For purposes of this chapter, the duty and authority of the Borough to
defend and indemnify shall extend to a cross-claim or counterclaim
against said person.
§ 14-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14A-4
1:65
§ 14A-4. Exceptions.
The Borough shall not indemnify any person against the payment of punitive
damages, penalties, or fines but may provide for the legal defense of such
claims in accord with the standards set forth herein. The Borough may
refuse to provide for the defense and indemnification of any civil action
referred to herein if the governing body determines that:
§ 14A-5. Defense in best interest of Borough.
In any other action or proceeding, including criminal proceedings, the
Borough may provide for the defense of a present or former official,
employee or appointee if the governing body concludes that such
representation is in the best interest of the Borough and that the person to
be defended acted or failed to act in accord with the standards set forth in
this chapter.
§ 14A-6. Borough to control representation.
Whenever the Borough provides for the defense of any action set forth
herein and as a condition of such defense, the Borough may assume
exclusive control over the representation of such persons defended, and
such person shall cooperate fully with the Borough.
§ 14A-7. Means of defense; settlement.
The Borough may provide for the defense pursuant to this chapter by
authorizing its Attorney to act in behalf of the person being defended or by
employing other counsel for this purpose or by asserting the right of the
Borough under any appropriate insurance policy that requires the insurer
to provide defense. In the event the Borough provides such defense and
it determines it is in its best interest to settle any matter, the employee's
consent to such settlement shall not be required, provided that the Borough
pays in full any compensation payable in such settlement.
A. The act or omission did not occur within the scope of a duty authorized
or imposed by law;
B. The act or failure to act was the result of actual fraud, willful
misconduct or actual malice of the person requesting defense and
indemnification; or
C. The defense of the action or proceeding by the Borough would create a
conflict of interest between the Borough and the person or persons
involved.
§ 14A-4 KENILWORTH CODE § 14A-7
1:66
Chapter 15
DEPARTMENTAL STRUCTURES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 5. Police Department — See Ch. 39.
§ 15-1. Public Works Department Table of Organization.
§ 14A-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-2
1:67
§ 15-2. Police Department Table of Organization. [Amended
9-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-16; 7-10-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-08;
2-12-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-01]
Kenilworth Police Department
Chapter 16
DRUG-FREE ZONES
§ 15-2 KENILWORTH CODE § 15-2
1:68
ARTICLE I
Drug-Free School Zones
[Adopted 9-13-1988 by Ord. No. 88-31]
§ 16-1. Statutory authority; adoption of map.
In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of P.L. 1988, c. 44 (N.J.S.A.
2C:35-7), the Drug-Free School Zone Map produced in October 1987 by
Michael Disko, PE, Borough Engineer, is hereby approved and adopted
as an official finding and record of the location and areas within the
municipality of property which is used for school purposes and which is
owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or school board
and of the areas on or within 1,000 feet of such school property.
§ 16-2. Map to constitute official record.
The Drug-Free School Zone Map approved and adopted pursuant to § 16-1
of this article shall continue to constitute an official finding and record as
to the location and boundaries of areas on or within 1,000 feet of property
owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or school board
which is used for school purposes until such time, if any, that this article
shall be amended to reflect any additions or deletions with respect to the
location and boundaries of school property and the Drug-Free School Zone.
§ 16-3. Notification of changes.
The school board or the chief administrative officer, in the case of any
private or parochial school, is hereby directed and shall have the continuing
obligation to promptly notify the Borough Engineer and the Borough
Attorney of any changes or contemplated changes in the location and
boundaries of any property owned by or leased to any elementary or
secondary school or school board and which is used for school purposes.
§ 16-4. Filing of map; availability of copies.
The Clerk of the Borough is hereby directed to receive and to keep on file
the original of the map approved and adopted pursuant to § 16-1 of this
article and to provide at a reasonable cost a true copy thereof to any person,
agency or court which may from time to time request such a copy, along
with a certification that such copy is a true copy of the map approved and
adopted herein and kept on file. It is hereby further directed that a true
copy of such map and of this article shall be provided without cost to the
County Clerk and to the office of the Union County Prosecutor.
§ 16-5. Additional determinations.
The following additional matters are hereby determined, declared, recited
and stated:
A. It is understood that the map approved and adopted pursuant to § 16-1
of this article was prepared and is intended to be used as evidence in
§ 16-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-5
1:69
prosecutions arising under the criminal laws of this state and that,
pursuant to state law, such map shall constitute prima facie evidence of
the following:
(1) The location of elementary and secondary schools within the
municipality.
(2) The boundaries of the real property which is owned by or leased to
such schools or a school board.
(3) That such school property is and continues to be used for school
purposes.
(4) The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within 1,000
feet of such school property.
B. Except as is otherwise expressly noted on the face of the approved and
adopted map, all of the property depicted on the map approved and
adopted herein as school property was owned by a school or school
board and was being used for school purposes as of July 9, 1987, that
being the effective date of P.L. 1987, c. 101 (N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7).
C. Pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 1988, c. 44,18 a prosecutor is not
precluded from introducing or relying upon any other evidence or
testimony to establish a violation of the offense defined in that statute,
including use of a map or diagram other than the one approved and
adopted pursuant to § 16-1 of this article. The failure of the map
approved herein to depict the location and boundaries of any property
which is, in fact, used for school purposes and which is owned by or
leased to any elementary or secondary school or school board, whether
the absence of such depiction is the result of inadvertent omission or
the result of any changes in the location and boundaries of such
property which have not yet been incorporated into a revised approved
map, shall not be deemed to be an official finding and record that such
property is not owned by or leased to a school or school board or that
such property is not used for school purposes.
D. All of the requirements set forth in P.L. 1988, c. 44, concerning the
preparation, approval and adoption of a Drug-Free School Zone Map
have been complied with.
18.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.
§ 16-5 KENILWORTH CODE § 16-5
1:70
ARTICLE II
Drunk-Driving-Free School Zones
[Adopted 3-22-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-3]
§ 16-6. Designation of school crossings.
In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of P.L. 1999, c. 185,19 the
following is a list of school crossings which have been so designated by the
Borough of Kenilworth:
§ 16-7. Adoption of map.
The Drunk-Driving-Free School Zone Map which is hereby designated as
an overlay to the Drug-Free School Zone produced on or about October
1987 by Michael Disko, the Borough Engineer, is hereby approved and
adopted as an official finding and record of the location and areas within
the municipality of property which is used for school purposes and which is
owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school on school land
and of the areas on or within 1,000 feet of such school property.
§ 16-8. Map and list to constitute official findings. [Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
The Drunk-Driving-Free School Zone Map approved and adopted pursuant
to § 16-7 of this article shall continue to constitute an official finding and
record as to the location and boundaries of areas on or within 1,000 feet
of property owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school
or school board which is used for school purposes until such time, if any,
A. Boulevard and North 19th Street.
B. Michigan and Clinton.
C. Monroe and North 20th Street.
D. Monroe and North 14th Street.
E. Boulevard and North 18th Street.
F. Boulevard and North 21st Street.
G. Boulevard and North 8th Street.
H. Washington and North 18th Street.
I. Boulevard and North 14th Street.
J. Boulevard and Coolidge Drive.
K. Washington and North 22nd Street.
L. Monroe and 17th Street.
19.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 39:4-50.
§ 16-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-8
1:71
that this article shall be amended to reflect any additions or deletions
with respect to the location and boundaries of school property and drunkdriving-
free school zones. The list of school crossings designated above
by the Mayor and Council shall continue to constitute an official finding
and record of the location of school crossing zones within the Borough of
Kenilworth until such time, if any, that this article shall be amended to
reflect any additions with respect to school crossing zones in the Borough
of Kenilworth.
§ 16-9. Changes in locations or boundaries.
The school board, or the chief administrative officer in case of any private or
parochial school, is hereby directed and shall have the continuing obligation
to promptly notify the office of the Borough Engineer and the Borough
Attorney of any changes or contemplated changes in the location and
boundaries of any property owned by or leased to any elementary or
secondary school or school board and which is used for school purposes or
of any additions or deletions to school crossings.
§ 16-10. Original map and list to be on file; copies.
The Borough Clerk is hereby directed to receive and to keep on file the
original of the map approved and adopted pursuant to § 16-7 of this article
and the list of school crossings and to provide at a reasonable cost a true
copy thereof to any person, agency or court which may from time to time
request such a copy, along with a certification that such copy is a true
copy of the map approved and adopted herein and kept on file. It is hereby
further directed that a true copy of such map and list and of this article shall
be provided without cost to the Union County Clerk and to the office of the
Union County Prosecutor.
§ 16-11. Map and list as evidence.
The following additional matters are hereby determined, declared, recited
and stated:
A. It is understood that the map and list approved and adopted pursuant to
this article were prepared and are intended to be used as evidence in
prosecutions arising under the criminal and traffic laws of this state and
that, pursuant to state law, such map and list shall constitute prima
facie evidence of the following:
(1) The location of elementary and secondary schools with the
municipality.
(2) The boundaries of the real property which is owned by or leased to
such schools or a school board.
(3) That such school property is and continues to be used for school
purposes.
§ 16-8 KENILWORTH CODE § 16-11
1:72
(4) The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within 1,000
feet of such school property.
(5) The location of all school crossings in the Borough of Kenilworth.
§ 16-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-11
1:73
Chapter 17
ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION
§ 17-1. Establishment.
The Borough of Kenilworth Environmental Commission is hereby
established pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 et seq.
§ 17-2. Membership; compensation; terms; removal; vacancies.
§ 17-3. Functions; duties; powers.
A. The Environmental Commission shall consist of seven members
appointed by the Mayor with Councilmanic approval, one of whom shall
also be a member of the Planning Board and one a member of the
Recreation Committee and all of whom shall be residents of the
Borough of Kenilworth. The members thereof shall serve without
compensation. The Commission shall designate one of the members to
serve as Chairperson and presiding officer of said Commission. The
term of office of each of the first Commissioners shall be designated by
the Mayor and Council in making the appointment, and their successors
shall be appointed for terms of three years and until the appointment
and qualification of their successors. The first members of the
Commission shall be appointed for the following terms: [Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
(1) Three members for the term expiring December 31, 1978.
(2) Two members for the term expiring December 31, 1979.
(3) Two members for the term expiring December 31, 1980.
B. The Mayor or Borough Council may remove any member of the
Commission for cause, on written charges served upon the member and
after a hearing thereon at which the member shall be entitled to be
heard in person or by counsel. A vacancy on the Commission occurring
otherwise than by expiration of a term shall be filled for the unexpired
term in the same manner as an original appointment.
A. The Environmental Commission shall have the authority to conduct
research into the use and possible use of the open land area of the
Borough and may advertise, prepare, print and distribute books, maps,
charts, plans and pamphlets which in its judgment it deems necessary
for its purposes, upon authorization by the Mayor and Council. It shall
keep an index of all open areas, publicly or privately owned, including
open marshlands, swamps and other wetlands, in order to obtain
information on the proper use of such areas and may from time to time
recommend to the Planning Board plans and programs for inclusion in
the Master Plan and the development and use of such areas.
§ 16-11 KENILWORTH CODE § 17-3
1:74
§ 17-4. Additional personnel.
The Commission may appoint such clerks and other employees as it may
from time to time require, provided that the same shall be within the limits
of funds appropriated to it by the Borough Council, with the approval of the
Mayor and Council.
Chapter 21
FIREMEN'S SURVIVORS' PENSIONS
§ 21-1. Payment of pensions.
A pension shall be paid to the widow of any volunteer fireman or first aid or
rescue squad worker who has died or shall have died as a result of injuries
sustained in the course of performance of duty as a member of the volunteer
fire company or first aid or rescue squad.
§ 21-2. Definition.
"First aid or rescue squad" as used in this chapter shall mean any duly
incorporated first aid or emergency or volunteer ambulance or rescue
squad association providing volunteer public first aid, ambulance or rescue
services within the Borough of Kenilworth.
§ 21-3. Amount of pensions limited.
No such pension shall exceed the sum of $5,000 annually. It shall be paid to
the widow of such fireman or worker during her widowhood.
B. The Environmental Commission may recommend that the Borough
Council acquire property, both real and personal, by gift, purchase,
grant, bequest, devise or lease for any of the Commission's or Council's
purposes, subject to the terms of the conveyance or gift.
C. The Environmental Commission shall keep records of its meetings and
activities and make an annual report to the Borough Council at the first
regular meeting of the Borough Council in January of each year. Other
reports will be furnished by the Commission whenever requested by the
Mayor and Council.
D. The Environmental Commission shall have the power to study and make
recommendations concerning open space preservation, water
resources management, air pollution control, solid waste management,
noise control, soil and landscape protection, environmental
appearance, marine resources and protection of flora and fauna.
§ 17-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-4
1:75
§ 21-4. Distribution to infant children. [Added 9-11-1979 by Ord.
No. 79-19]
If the decedent is not survived by a widow, pensions shall be paid to infant
children, during their minority, in equal shares.
Chapter 23
(RESERVED)
Chapter 25
(RESERVED)
Chapter 30
(RESERVED)
Chapter 32
LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM
§ 32-1. Program created.
A Length of Service Awards Program (LOSAP) is hereby created in
accordance with Chapter 388 of the Laws of 1997,20 to reward members of
the volunteer Fire Department and First Aid Squad for their loyal, diligent
and devoted services to the residents of the Borough of Kenilworth.
§ 32-2. Annual contributions.
The LOSAP shall provide for fixed annual contributions to a deferredincome
account for each volunteer member that meets the criteria set forth
below; that such contributions shall be made in accordance with a plan that
shall be established by the Borough of Kenilworth pursuant to P.L. 1997, c.
388, and that such plan shall be administered in accordance with the laws
of the State of New Jersey, the United States Internal Revenue Code and
this chapter.
§ 32-3. Criteria for eligibility.
The LOSAP shall provide for an annual contribution of $1,150 to each
eligible member who accumulates a minimum of 350 service points which
shall be awarded pursuant to the following criteria:
20.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:14-183 et seq.
§ 21-4 KENILWORTH CODE § 32-3
1:76
Service Category Points
Emergency response — fire 1
Emergency response — ambulance
ride
2
Emergency response — ambulance
sign in
1
Drills and training sessions1 1
Department meetings2 1
House duty3 24
Special training 2 per hour
Extra duty 2 per hour
Special events4 1 per hour
Miscellaneous meetings5 1 per hour
NOTES:
1 In order to be eligible, a member must attend a minimum of 22
sessions annually.
2 In order to be eligible, a member must attend a minimum of eight
department meetings annually.
3 House duty is required of each member twice a month annually.
4 In order to be eligible, a member must accumulate a minimum of 30
points in connection with the annual carnival fund-raiser and 10 points
for the pancake breakfast fund-raiser.
5 Includes officer meetings, committee meetings and drills.
§ 32-4. Estimated cost.
The estimated cost of the program for regular annual services has been
calculated to be $66,700 per year.
§ 32-5. When effective.
This chapter shall not take effect unless it is approved by voters as a public
question at the next general election.21
21.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2000-17 was approved at the general election held
11-7-2000.
§ 32-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32-5
1:77
Chapter 33
LIBRARY TRUSTEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Library — See Ch. 121.
§ 33-1. Membership; appointment.
The Board of Trustees shall hereafter consist of nine members, one of
whom shall be the Mayor, one of whom shall be the local Superintendent of
Schools and seven citizens to be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of
the governing body, at least four of whom shall be residents of the Borough.
§ 33-2. Reconfirmation of present members.
The terms of the five citizen members presently serving on the Library
Board of Trustees are hereby reconfirmed.
§ 33-3. Appointment of additional members.
The Mayor, with the consent of the governing body, shall appoint two
additional members of the Board.
§ 33-4. Terms of additional members.
The term of each of the members appointed in accordance with § 33-3 shall
run from the date of appointment to December 31, 1992. Thereafter, their
terms will be five years.
Chapter 37
PERSONNEL POLICIES
§ 32-5 KENILWORTH CODE § 33-4
1:78
Part 1
[AdopteGde3n-e2r5a-l2 P0e0r9soBnynOelr dP.r Nacot.i c2e0s09-0322]
ARTICLE I
Procedures to Adopt Personnel Practices
§ 37-1. Titles and salary ranges.
The governing body of the Borough of Kenilworth shall by ordinance
establish titles for public employment by the Borough and salary ranges for
Borough employees.
§ 37-2. Adoption and amendment of policies; applicability.
The governing body shall by resolution adopt and amend from time to
time personnel policies and procedures, including rules concerning the
hiring and termination of employees, terms and conditions of employment,
and regulations required to comply with applicable federal and state
employment-related law. The personnel policies and procedures adopted
pursuant to said resolution(s) shall be applicable to all officials, appointees,
employees, prospective employees, volunteers and independent contractors
of the Borough.
§ 37-3. Implementation and enforcement; conflict with other
provisions.
The Borough Clerk shall be responsible to implement and enforce the
personnel practices adopted by ordinance or resolution authorized pursuant
to this article. If there is a conflict between said personnel practices and
any duly adopted and lawful collective bargaining agreement, personnel
services contract or federal or state law, the terms and conditions of that
contract or law shall prevail.
22.Editor's Note: This Ordinance Also Repealed Former Ch. 37, Personnel Policies, Adopted
5-8-1996 By Ord. No. 96-9, As Amended.
§ 37-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37-3
1:79

Part 2
Po[lAicdioepst Aednd3 -P2r5o-c2e0d0u9r]es
ARTICLE II
General Provisions
§ 37-4. General policy.
A. It is the policy of the Borough of Kenilworth to treat employees and
prospective employees in a manner consistent with all applicable
employment laws and regulations. The personnel policies and
procedures of the Borough shall apply to all employees, volunteers,
elected or appointed officials and independent contractors. In the event
there is a conflict between these rules and any collective bargaining
agreement, personnel services contract, or federal or state law,
including the Attorney General's guidelines with respect to Police
Department personnel matters, the terms and conditions of that
contract or law shall prevail. In all other cases, these policies and
procedures shall prevail.
B. All employees, officers and department heads shall be appointed and
promoted by the governing body. No person shall be employed or
promoted unless there exists a position created by an ordinance
adopted by the governing body as well as the necessary budget
appropriation and salary ordinance.
C. The Borough Clerk and all managerial/supervisory personnel are
authorized and responsible for personnel policies and procedures. The
governing body has appointed the Borough's Chief Financial Officer to
assist the Borough Clerk to implement personnel practices. The
Borough Clerk and the Borough Chief Financial Officer shall also have
access to the Borough's Labor Counsel appointed by the governing
body from time to time for guidance in personnel matters. [Amended
at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II)]
D. As a general principle, the Borough has a "no tolerance" policy towards
workplace wrongdoing. Borough officials, employees and independent
contractors are to report anything perceived to be improper. The
Borough believes strongly in an open door policy and encourages
employees to talk with their supervisor, department head, Clerk and/or
Chief Financial Officer concerning any problem. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
E. The Personnel Policies and Procedures Manual adopted by the
governing body is intended to provide guidelines covering public
service by Borough employees and is not a contract. This manual
contains many, but not necessarily all, of the rules, regulations, and
conditions of employment for Borough personnel. The provisions of this
manual may be amended and supplemented from time to time without
notice and at the sole discretion of the Borough.
§ 37-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37-4
1:81

ARTICLE III
Employee Rights and Obligations Policies
§ 37-5. Antidiscrimination.
The Borough is committed to the principle of equal employment opportunity
pursuant to Title VII of the 1964 Civil Rights Act as amended by the
Equal Opportunity Act of 1972. Under no circumstances will the Borough
discriminate on the basis of sex, race, creed, color, religion, national origin,
ancestry, age, marital or political status, disability, or sexual orientation.
Decisions regarding hiring, promotion, transfer, demotion or termination
are based solely on the qualifications and performance of the employee or
prospective employee. If any employees or prospective employees feel they
have been treated unfairly, they have the right to address their concern with
their supervisor, or, if they prefer, their department head, Borough Clerk, or
the Personnel Committee of the governing body.
§ 37-6. Americans with Disabilities Act.
§ 37-7. Contagious or life-threatening illnesses.
A. In compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act and the New
Jersey Law Against Discrimination,23 the Borough does not discriminate
based on disability. The Borough will endeavor to make every work
environment handicap accessible, and all future construction and
renovation of facilities will be in accordance with applicable barrierfree
federal and state regulations and the Americans with Disabilities
Act Accessibility Guidelines.
B. The Borough Clerk shall initiate an interactive dialogue with disabled
employees and prospective employees to identify reasonable
accommodations that do not create a hardship. Accommodations
include modifications to facilities, equipment and work procedures,
auxiliary aides, services and permanent reassignment to vacant
positions. Employees who are reassigned to a different position shall
receive the salary of their new position. Accommodations shall not be
unduly expensive, extensive and disruptive or fundamentally alter the
nature of the operation. The Act does not require the Borough to offer
permanent "light duty," relocate essential functions or provide
personal-use items such as eyeglasses, hearing aids, wheelchairs, etc.
To be eligible for accommodations, individuals must 1) be able to
perform the essential function of the position, 2) not create a real safety
hazard to themselves, co-employees or the public, and 3) be otherwise
qualified for the position in that they possess the prerequisites,
including education, experience, training, skills, licenses or certificates
and other job-related requirements. All decisions with respect to
accommodations shall be made by the Borough Clerk or the governing
body as appropriate.
23.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:5-1 et seq.
§ 37-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37-7
1:83
§ 37-8. Safety.
§ 37-9. Temporary reassignment of duties. [Amended 12-8-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-18]
A. The Borough of Kenilworth encourages employees with contagious
diseases or life-threatening illnesses such as cancer, heart disease,
Hepatitis C and HIV/AIDS to continue their normal pursuits, including
work, to the extent allowed by their condition. As in the case of other
disabilities, the Borough shall make reasonable accommodations in
accordance with legal requirements to allow qualified employees with
contagious or life-threatening illnesses to perform the essential
functions of their jobs as long as they are able to meet acceptable
performance standards.
B. Medical information shall be treated confidentially. The Borough will
take reasonable precautions to protect such information from
inappropriate disclosure. Managers and other employees have a
responsibility to maintain the confidentially of employee medical
information. Anyone inappropriately disclosing such information shall
be subject to disciplinary action.
C. Employees with questions or concerns about contagious or lifethreatening
illnesses are encouraged to contact the Borough Clerk.
A. The Borough will provide a safe and healthy work environment and
shall comply with the Public Employees Occupational Safety and Health
Act (PEOSHA). The Borough is equally concerned about the safety of
the public. Consistent with this policy, employees will receive periodic
safety training and will be provided with appropriate safety equipment.
Employees are responsible for observing safety rules and using
available safety devices, including personal protective equipment.
Failure to do so constitutes grounds for disciplinary action. Any
occupational or public unsafe condition, practice, procedure or act
must be immediately reported to the supervisor or department head.
Any on-the-job accident or accident involving Borough facilities,
equipment or motor vehicles must also be immediately reported.
B. The Borough has appointed a Safety Committee that meets on a regular
basis to discuss and recommend solutions to safety problems.
Employees are encouraged to discuss safety concerns with their Safety
Committee representative.
A. Background.
(1) Workers' compensation laws provide lost wages and medical
expenses to employees who are injured as a result of an on-the-job
accident, injury, or occupational disease. Workers' compensation is
designed to protect employees and their dependents against
hardships from injury or death arising from the work environment.
All permanent and temporary employees of the Borough of
§ 37-7 KENILWORTH CODE § 37-9
1:84
Kenilworth ("Borough") are covered by workers' compensation
insurance.
(2) In an effort to continue to provide innovative and quality service to
its employees, the Borough is pleased to provide a Temporary
Reassignment of Duties Program ("program"). The program is
designed to assign duties and responsibilities to employees covered
by the workers' compensation laws which are consistent with
specific medical restrictions, which will provide the Borough with
increased efficiency from its work force, as well as provide higher
self-esteem for affected workers.
(3) The program is intended for those employees who have been
injured on the job, and who, under medical authorization, may
return to work in a limited capacity.
(4) Issues arising under the Family Medical Leave Act (FMLA), the
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) or the New Jersey Law
against Discrimination (LAD) are not covered by this policy. Those
issues shall be handled in accordance with law.
B. Description of the program. The program is designated to provide
temporary modified or alternate work assignments, where available, to
employees who are deemed temporarily unable to perform their regular
work duties or assignment due to a work-related illness or injury. This
procedure will allow employees who are not fully capable of resuming
their job responsibilities to return to a work assignment that is tailored
to the individual's temporary limitations.
C. Objective of the program.
(1) To return employees to work who have been injured on the job.
These employees may temporarily perform duties to assist the
Borough in providing services to the general public. The job duties
must have requirements consistent with the employee's health
limitations as certified by a physician.
(2) To lower the absenteeism rate.
(3) To minimize the negative psychological impact due to being out of
work, and to provide a transition and adjustment for returning to
work.
(4) To create a safe work environment and sound safety practices.
(5) To reduce disruption of the work schedule.
(6) To assist employees in returning to their regular job duties at full
capacity.
(7) To increase the productivity of the Borough's work force. In order
to assist the Borough to continue to provide services to its citizens,
it is the Borough's policy to have these employees who are not
§ 37-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37-9
1:85
totally disabled come to work and perform those functions which
they are able to perform.
D. Benefits of the program.
(1) Increased morale. The program allows injured workers to feel
needed in their job. This increases morale.
(2) Productivity. The program allows employees who are temporarily
reassigned to perform tasks regardless of whether there are other
personnel available to do them.
(3) Self-esteem. The program keeps employees motivated and mobile,
makes them feel productive and facilitates the healing process.
E. Administration of the program.
(1) The program shall be administered by the employee's department
head in conjunction with the Borough's Personnel Committee.
(2) Employees injured on the job are required to be examined by a
health care provider authorized to treat the workers' compensation
injury ("authorized physician"). Employees may be required to
report to the authorized physician with their job description to
enable the physician to ascertain what duties the employee is able
to perform until the employee has been medically cleared to return
to full duty. The Borough will not accept a nonauthorized
physician's recommendation, nor will the Borough reimburse an
employee under this policy for treatment by a nonauthorized
physician.
(3) The authorized physician's report(s) shall be reviewed to determine
appropriate reassignment. The final determination of the employee
for the alternate or modified assignments will be that of the
Personnel Committee.
(4) There shall be regular communication among the Personnel
Committee, the department head, the employee, the authorized
physician(s), and the workers' compensation carrier and
administrator throughout the course of treatment and recovery.
(5) The Borough shall maintain documentation regarding employee
status in the program.
(6) Within 10 working days after an employee commences a temporary
reassignment, and periodically thereafter, a review shall be
performed to determine the appropriateness of continuing the
temporary reassignment.
(7) All employees shall be given a copy of this policy. The policy shall
be maintained in the Borough's Policy Manual.
§ 37-9 KENILWORTH CODE § 37-9
1:86
(8) The Personnel Committee, in conjunction with the workers'
compensation carrier or administrator, must notify the authorized
physicians about the program.
(9) All reassignments under this policy are temporary. There are no
permanent modified or alternate work assignments.
(10) The Borough reserves the right to require an employee returning
from temporary reassignment under this policy to submit to a
fitness-for-duty examination.
F. Employee requirements.
(1) Employees are required to perform the job tasks they are assigned
pursuant to this program.
(2) Employees are required to cooperate with and follow their
supervisors' directions.
(3) Employees are required to attend all appointments with authorized
physicians.
(4) Employees must provide all authorized physicians' notes and
reports to their department head. The department head shall
provide a copy of all authorized physicians' notes to the Personnel
Committee.
(5) An employee who rejects temporary reassignment may become
ineligible for workers' compensation benefits. In addition, once an
employee's entitlement to leave pursuant to the FMLA has been
exhausted, the employee who rejects temporary reassignment will
be subject to disciplinary action, up to and including termination.
G. Assignment of job tasks.
(1) Temporary reassignment will be determined in conjunction with
the limitations set forth by authorized physician(s).
(2) Temporary reassignments will be handled on a case-by-case basis.
(3) There shall be regular communication between the Personnel
Committee and the employee's department head. The department
head shall notify and coordinate with the Personnel Committee
regarding the tasks that have been assigned to an employee.
(4) Upon request by the Personnel Committee, supervisors shall
provide a list of assignments that are in need of being done which
feasibly may be completed by an employee on modified duty.
(5) There is no restriction on the location or type of temporary
reassignment, provided it is consistent with the limitation detailed
by the Borough authorized physician and assists in continuing to
provide services to the Borough's citizens.
§ 37-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37-9
1:87
§ 37-10. Drugs and alcohol.
§ 37-11. Workplace violence.
H. Compliance with laws. The program shall be interpreted to be
consistent with the FMLA, ADA and the LAD, and all other laws. To the
extent any provision in the program conflicts with any federal or State
of New Jersey law, the law shall control, but the balance of the program
shall remain in effect.
A. The Borough recognizes that the use of unlawful drugs and the abuse of
alcohol pose a threat to the health and safety of all employees. Any
employee who is intoxicated or under the influence of alcohol or drugs
during working hours shall be immediately suspended and subject to
termination. The supervisor or department head will immediately
report any suspensions to the Borough Clerk.
B. Employees using prescription drugs that may affect job performance or
safety must notify their supervisor or department head, who is required
to maintain the confidentiality of any information regarding an
employee's medical condition. Borough personnel who hold a
commercial driver's license (CDL) are subject to the provisions of the
Commercial Driver's Licenses Drug and Alcohol Testing Policy.
A. The Borough will not tolerate workplace violence. Violent acts or
threats made by an employee against another person or property are
cause for immediate dismissal and will be fully prosecuted. This
includes any violence or threats made on Borough property, at Borough
events or under other circumstances that may negatively affect the
Borough's ability to conduct business.
B. Prohibited conduct includes:
(1) Causing physical injury to another person;
(2) Making threatening remarks;
(3) Aggressive or hostile behavior that creates a reasonable fear of
injury to another person or subjects another individual to emotional
distress;
(4) Intentionally damaging employer property or property of another
employee;
(5) Possession of a weapon while on Borough property or while on
Borough business, except with the authority of the Police Chief;
and
(6) Committing acts motivated by, or related to, sexual harassment or
domestic violence.
§ 37-9 KENILWORTH CODE § 37-11
1:88
§ 37-12. General anti-harassment.
The Borough will not tolerate harassment in the workplace, including
harassment motivated by sex, race, creed, color, religion, national origin,
ancestry, age, nationality, marital or political status, disability or sexual
orientation. Borough officials, appointees, managers, supervisors,
employees, volunteers and outside contractors alike must comply with this
policy and take appropriate measures to insure that such conduct does
not occur. Violations of this policy will result in disciplinary action up to
and including discharge or, in the event nonemployees are found to be at
fault, other appropriate action. Employees who feel they have been subject
to harassment must report the harassment to their supervisor, or, if they
prefer, to the department head, Borough Clerk or the Personnel Committee
of the governing body. See the employee Complaint Policy.24
§ 37-13. Anti-sexual harassment.
C. Any potentially dangerous situations must be immediately reported.
The Borough will actively intervene in any potentially hostile or violent
situation.
A. As a part of the Anti-Harassment Policy, the Borough also strictly
prohibits sexual harassment, including, but not limited to:
(1) Making unwelcome sexual advances or requests for sexual favors a
condition of employment;
(2) Making submission to or rejection of such conduct the basis for
employment decisions affecting the employee;
(3) Creating an intimidating, hostile or offensive working environment
by such conduct;
(4) Making unwelcome, offensive remarks or engaging in physical
contact with a subordinate or fellow employee that would not have
been made but for the employee's sex or which is sexually oriented
to the extent that it would not occur but for the fact of the
employee's gender; or
(5) Harassment based solely on gender, which creates a hostile and
offensive work environment.
B. Sexual harassment may take different forms. One specific form is a
demand for sexual favors. Other forms of harassment include, but are
not limited to:
(1) Sexual innuendoes, suggestive comments, jokes of a sexual nature,
sexual propositions or threats;
24.Editor's Note: See § 37-15.
§ 37-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37-13
1:89
§ 37-14. Whistle-blowers.
(2) Suggestive objects or pictures, graphic commentaries, e-mails,
suggestive or insulting sounds, leering, whistling, obscene
gestures;
(3) Unwanted physical contact, including touching, pinching, brushing
the body, pushing; or
(4) Nonsexual conduct such as intimidation and hostility based solely
upon gender.
C. Employees who feel they have been subject to sexual harassment must
report the harassment to their supervisor, or, if they prefer, to the
department head, Borough Clerk or the Personnel Committee of the
governing body. See the employee Complaint Policy. [Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
A. Employees have the right to complain of anything they perceive to be
improper. This right shall be communicated to all employees in a letter
outlining the specific employee complaint procedure. A written
acknowledgment that the employee received this letter will be included
in the employee's official personnel file. This right will also be
communicated in the employee handbook. All complaints will be taken
seriously and promptly investigated.
B. The Borough shall not take any retaliatory action or tolerate any
reprisal against an employee for any of the following:
(1) Disclosing or threatening to disclose to a supervisor, department
head, the Borough Clerk, other official or to a public body, as
defined in the Employment Protection Act (N.J.S.A. 34:19), an
activity, policy or practice that the employee reasonably believes is
in violation of law, a rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to
law;
(2) Providing information to or testifying before any public body
conducting an investigation, hearing, an inquiry into any violation
of law, or a rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to law; or
(3) Objecting to or refusing to participate in any activity, policy, or
practice that the employee reasonably believes is a violation of a
law, rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to law; is fraudulent
or criminal; or is incompatible with a clear public policy mandate
concerning the public health, safety, or welfare.
C. In accordance with the statute, the employee must bring the violation to
the attention of the Borough. However, disclosure is not required where
1) the employee is reasonably certain that the violation is known to one
or more officials; 2) where the employee reasonably fears physical
harm; or 3) the situation is emergency in nature. Employees are
encouraged to complain in writing using the employee complaint form
§ 37-13 KENILWORTH CODE § 37-14
1:90
§ 37-15. Employee complaints.
Employees who wish to complain of harassment or any other workplace
wrongdoing are requested to immediately report the matter to their
supervisor, or, if they prefer, to their department head, the Borough Clerk or
the Personnel Committee of the governing body. Employees are encouraged
to complain in writing using the employee complaint form but may make
a verbal complaint at their discretion. No retaliatory measures shall be
taken against any employee who complains of workplace wrongdoing. The
Borough will, to the maximum extent feasible, maintain the confidentiality
of such complaints on a need-to-know basis. However, investigation of such
complaints may require disclosure to the accused party and other witnesses
in order to gather pertinent facts.
§ 37-16. Grievances.
but may make a verbal complaint at their discretion. See the employee
Complaint Policy. Under the law, the employee must give the Borough
a reasonable opportunity to correct the activity, policy or practice.
The administration of whistle blower complaints is not subject to the
limitations in the Grievance Policy. In accordance with the statute, a
copy of this policy will be posted in all facilities.
A. A "grievance" is any formal dispute concerning the interpretation,
application and enforcement of any personnel policy or procedure of
the Borough. Grievances from union employees will be handled
pursuant to the terms of the applicable bargaining unit agreement. All
grievances from nonunion employees must be presented within five
working days after arising and failure to report a grievance within such
time shall be deemed as a waiver of the grievance. In the event of a
settlement or ruling that results in a determination of monetary liability,
such liability shall not exceed more than 30 working days prior to the
date the grievance was first presented in writing.
(1) Step 1. Any employee or group of employees with a grievance shall
verbally communicate the grievance to the supervisor or
department head. The supervisor or department head will
communicate the decision to the employee within two working
days.
(2) Step 2. If the employee is not satisfied with the decision, the
employee must submit a written grievance to the Borough Clerk
detailing the facts and the relief requested. The decision in Step 1
will be deemed final if the employee fails to submit a written
grievance within five working days of the Step 1 decision. Upon
receipt of such written grievance, the Borough Clerk shall schedule
a hearing before the governing body, or its designee, within 21 days
of receipt of the written grievance. The governing body, or its
designee, shall render a decision within 15 working days after such
meeting is held, which decision shall be in writing and either hand-
§ 37-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37-16
1:91
§ 37-17. Access to personnel files.
The official personnel file for each employee shall be maintained by the
Borough Clerk. Personnel files are confidential records that must be
secured in a locked cabinet and will only be available to authorized
managerial and supervisory personnel on a need-to-know basis. Records
relating to any medical condition will be maintained in a separate file.
Electronic personnel and medical records must be protected from
unauthorized access. Any employees may review their file in the presence
of the Borough Clerk upon reasonable request.
§ 37-18. Conflicts of interest.
delivered or mailed to the employee and the department head. The
decision of the governing body shall be final, subject, however, to
any other rights or remedies to which the employee may be entitled
under state and federal law. The governing body may appoint a
hearing officer for the purpose of hearing any grievance at Step 2.
B. These limitations do not apply to employee complaints made under the
General Anti-Harassment Policy, the Anti-Sexual Harassment Policy or
the Whistle-Blower Policy.25
A. Employees, including Borough officials, must conduct business
according to the highest ethical standards of public service. Employees
are expected to devote their best efforts to the interests of the Borough.
Violations of this policy will result in appropriate discipline, including
termination.
B. The Borough recognizes the right of employees to engage in outside
activities that are private in nature and unrelated to Borough business.
However, business dealings that appear to create a conflict between the
employee and the Borough's interests are unlawful under the New
Jersey Local Government Ethics Act.26 Under the Act, certain
employees and officials are required to annually file with the Borough
Clerk a state mandated disclosure form. The Borough Clerk will notify
employees and Borough officials subject to the filing requirements of
the Act.
C. A potential or actual conflict of interest occurs whenever an employee,
including a Borough official, is in a position to influence a Borough
decision that may result in a personal gain for the employee or an
immediate relative, including a spouse or significant other, child,
parent, stepchild, sibling, grandparents, daughter-in-law, son-in-law,
grandchildren, niece, nephew, uncle, aunt, or any person related by
blood or marriage residing in an employee's household. Employees are
required to disclose possible conflicts so that the Borough may assess
and prevent potential conflicts. If there are any questions whether an
25.Editor's Note: See §§ 37-12, 37-13 and 37-14.
26.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:9-22.1 et seq.
§ 37-16 KENILWORTH CODE § 37-18
1:92
§ 37-19. Political activity.
Employees have exactly the same right as any other citizen to join political
organizations and participate in political activities, as long as they maintain
a clear separation between their official responsibilities and their political
affiliations. Employees are prohibited from engaging in political activities
while performing their public duties and from using Borough time, supplies
or equipment in any political activity. Any violation of this policy must be
reported to the supervisor, department head, Borough Clerk or the Borough
Counsel.
§ 37-20. Employee evaluations.
The department head will complete a written evaluation and appraisal form
for every employee to measure progress and to encourage self-improvement
at least once a year. The evaluation will also record additional duties
performed, educational courses completed as well as a plan to correct
any weak points using the employee counseling form. After completing the
evaluation, the supervisor or department head will review the results with
the employee and return the form(s) with the signed acknowledgment to
the Borough Clerk. After review by the Borough Clerk, the form(s) are
to be included in the employee's official personnel file. As a part of the
evaluation, employees have the right to request a conference with the
Personnel Committee of the governing body.
§ 37-21. Employee discipline.
action or proposed course of conduct would create a conflict of interest,
immediately contact the Borough Clerk or the Borough Counsel to
obtain clarification.
D. Employees are allowed to hold outside employment as long as it does
not interfere with their Borough responsibilities. Employees are
prohibited from engaging in outside employment activities while on the
job or using Borough time, supplies or equipment in the outside
employment activities. The department head may request employees to
restrict outside employment if the quality of Borough work diminishes.
Any employee who holds an interest in, or is employed by, any business
doing business with the Borough must submit a written notice of these
outside interests to the Borough Clerk.
E. Employees may not accept donations, gratuities, contributions or gifts
that could be interpreted to affect their Borough duties. Under no
circumstances shall an employee accept donations, gratuities,
contributions or gifts from a vendor doing business with or seeking to
do business with the Borough or any person or firm seeking to influence
Borough decisions. Meals and other entertainment valued in excess of
$100 are also prohibited. Employees are required to report to the
Borough Clerk any offer of a donation, gratuity, contribution or gift,
including meals and entertainment, that is in violation of this policy.
§ 37-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37-21
1:93
§ 37-22. Employee termination policy.
A. An employee may be subject to discipline for all of the following
reasons:
(1) Incompetence, inefficiency or failure to perform duties;
(2) Conviction of a crime;
(3) Conduct unbecoming a public employee;
(4) Violation of Borough policies, procedures and regulations;
(5) Falsification of public records, including personnel records;
(6) Violation of federal, state or Borough regulations concerning drug
and alcohol use and possession;
(7) Chronic or excessive absenteeism or lateness;
(8) Misuse of public property, including motor vehicles; and
(9) Other sufficient cause.
B. Major disciplinary action includes termination, disciplinary demotion or
suspension or fine exceeding five working days. Minor discipline
includes a formal, written reprimand or a suspension or fine of five
working days or less. Employees who object to the terms or conditions
of the discipline are entitled to a hearing under the applicable
grievance procedure.
A. An employee may be terminated depending upon the circumstances for
any of the following:
(1) Incompetence, inefficiency or failure to perform duties;
(2) Conviction of a crime;
(3) Conduct unbecoming a public employee;
(4) Violation of Borough policies, procedures and regulations;
(5) Falsification of public records, including personnel records;
(6) Violation of federal, state or Borough regulations concerning drug
and alcohol use and possession;
(7) Chronic or excessive absenteeism or lateness;
(8) Misuse of public property, including motor vehicles; and
(9) Other sufficient cause.
B. All discharges will be in accordance with federal and state laws, as well
as applicable collective bargaining agreements.
§ 37-21 KENILWORTH CODE § 37-23
1:94
§ 37-23. Resignation.
An employee who intends to resign must notify the department head in
writing at least two weeks in advance. After giving notice of resignation,
employees are expected to assist their supervisor and co-employees by
providing information concerning their current projects and help in the
training of a replacement. During the last two weeks, the employee may not
use paid time off except paid holidays. The department head will prepare an
employee action form showing any pay or other money owed the employee.
The Borough Clerk will conduct a confidential exit interview to discuss
benefits, including COBRA options, appropriate retirement issues and pay
due. A COBRA notification letter will be sent to the employee's home
address. The exit interview will also include an open discussion with the
employee. On the last day of work, and prior to receiving the final paycheck,
the employee must return the employee identification card, all keys and
equipment. At this time, the employee will sign the termination memo
designating all money owed, and this memo will be retained in the official
personnel file.
§ 37-24. Work force reduction.
Pursuant to N.J.A.C. 4A:8-1.1, the Borough may institute layoff actions
for economic, efficiency or other related reasons, but will first consider
voluntary alternatives.
§ 37-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37-24
1:95

ARTICLE IV
Workplace Policies
§ 37-25. Job description.
A job description including qualifications shall be maintained for each
position. All job descriptions must be approved by the governing body. The
Borough Clerk will make copies available upon request.
§ 37-26. Attendance.
All employees are expected to be at work and ready to assume their duties
at the beginning of the scheduled workday. Lateness and absence will be
tolerated only in emergencies or when the supervisor gives prior approval.
All absences must be reported to the supervisor prior to the start of the
normal workday.
§ 37-27. Early closing and delayed opening.
In the event of unsafe conditions, the Borough Clerk may authorize
department heads to close operations earlier than the normal working
hours. If conditions exist prior to scheduled openings, the Borough Clerk
shall notify department heads of a delayed opening and a new opening
time. Each department will have a calling system in place. If the employee
chooses not to report to work, a full vacation day or compensating time will
be charged. Sick time will only be charged for a legitimate illness. If work
is called off for the day, no time will be charged for the day. This provision
does not apply to the Department of Public Works, Police, Fire, Sanitation,
Emergency Services or any personnel who may be required to assist in an
emergency.
§ 37-28. Breaks.
§ 37-29. Dress code.
Dress, grooming and personal hygiene must be appropriate for the position.
Uniforms are required for certain jobs and are to be worn in accordance
with applicable departmental standards. All other employees are required
to dress in a manner that is normally acceptable in similar business
establishments and consistent with applicable safety standards. Employees
shall not wear suggestive attire, athletic clothing, shorts, sandals, T-shirts,
novelty buttons, baseball hats and similar items of casual attire that do
A. Full-time administrative personnel are entitled to a one-hour lunch that
is to be arranged by the supervisor so that offices continue to function.
Administrative personnel must arrange breaks so that offices continue
to function. Breaks for other employees will be scheduled by the
supervisor.
B. Part-time hourly employees who work five or more hours per day are
entitled to a 1/2 hour lunch that is to be arranged by the supervisor.
§ 37-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37-29
1:97
not present a businesslike appearance. Hair, sideburns, moustaches and
beards must be clean, combed and neatly trimmed. Shaggy, unkempt hair
is not permissible regardless of length. Tattoos and body piercings, other
than earrings, may not be visible. The foregoing restriction on tattoos
and body piercings shall not be applied to any employee who, as of the
date of adoption, shall have such tattoos and/or body piercings, but shall
apply as to any additional tattoos and/or body piercings of such employee.
With the advance approval of the department head, the Borough will make
reasonable religious accommodations that do not violate safety standards.
Employees violating this policy shall be required to take corrective action
or will be sent home without pay.
§ 37-30. Smoking prohibited.
The New Jersey Legislature has declared that in all governmental buildings,
the rights of nonsmokers to breathe clean air supersedes the rights of
smokers. In accordance with state law, the Borough has adopted a smokefree
policy for all buildings. Borough facilities shall be smoke free, and
no employee or visitor will be permitted to smoke anywhere in Borough
buildings. Employees are permitted to smoke only outside Borough
buildings and such locations as not to allow the reentry of smoke into
building entrances. This policy shall be strictly enforced, and any employee
found in violation will be subject to disciplinary action.
§ 37-31. Use of vehicles.
§ 37-32. Telephone usage.
Borough telephones, including cell phones, are for official business, and
employees may make a personal call only to inform their family of
unexpected overtime. Charges for all other personal calls must be
reimbursed to the Borough. The use of hand-held cell phones while driving
Borough vehicles or while driving on Borough business is prohibited.
§ 37-33. E-mail, voice mail and Internet usage.
A. Borough-owned vehicles shall be used only on official business, and all
passengers must be on Borough business.
B. Vehicles may be taken home temporarily only with the advance
approval of the department head. When an employee takes home a
Borough vehicle, it is to be used only for official Borough business, and
any other use is not permitted. Any violation of this policy constitutes
cause for disciplinary action.
C. The foregoing provisions shall be inapplicable to the Chief of Police.
A. Borough e-mail, voice mail and the Internet are for official business,
and use for nonbusiness purposes is prohibited. All e-mail, voice mail
and Internet messages are official documents subject to the provisions
of the Access to Public Records Act.27
§ 37-29 KENILWORTH CODE § 37-33
1:98
§ 37-34. Bulletin board.
The bulletin boards located in the Borough administrative building and
other facilities are intended for official notices regarding policies,
procedures, meetings and special events. Only personnel authorized by the
Borough Clerk may post, remove, or alter any notice.
§ 37-35. Use and care of Borough equipment.
B. The Borough reserves the right to monitor, obtain, review and disclose
all e-mail, voice mail and Internet messages for lawful and legitimate
reasons. By using Borough e-mail, voice mail and the Internet, each
user agrees that the Borough has unrestricted access and the right to
disclose all information communicated or stored on the e-mail, voice
mail and the Internet for any security, health, employment or other
legitimate business reasons. Legitimate reasons also include systems
maintenance, message routing, retrieval of business information,
troubleshooting hardware and software problems, preventing system
misuse, protecting confidential proprietary information, insuring
compliance with software license policies and complying with legal and
regulatory requests for information.
A. All equipment provided to an employee shall be utilized solely for
Borough business. Employees shall keep all such equipment in good
order and shall immediately notify the department head in the event
repair to Borough equipment is required.
B. In the event an employee shall negligently misplace, lose or damage
any Borough-provided cell phone or radio-transmitting equipment, the
employee shall be responsible for the payment of the repair or
replacement thereof.
C. Upon termination of employment, all Borough equipment shall be
returned to the Borough.
27.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq. for the Open Public Records Act.
§ 37-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37-35
1:99

ARTICLE V
Paid and Unpaid Time Off Policies
§ 37-36. Scope.
These policies cover nonunion employees. They also cover union employees
to the extent that their collective bargaining agreements do not cover these
issues.
§ 37-37. Paid holidays.
§ 37-38. Vacation leave.
A. All full-time and part-time employees are entitled to the following paid
holidays after completing 180 days of service and provided that the
employee worked at least one day during the week in which the holiday
falls, unless an employee has received advance approval from his or her
department head to take the week in which the holiday falls as a
vacation:
(1) New Year's Day.
(2) Martin Luther King's Birthday.
(3) Presidents Day.
(4) Good Friday.
(5) Memorial Day.
(6) Independence Day.
(7) Labor Day.
(8) Columbus Day.
(9) Veterans Day.
(10) Election Day.
(11) Thanksgiving Day.
(12) Day after Thanksgiving.
(13) Christmas Day.
B. A holiday falling on a Saturday will be observed on the preceding
Friday, and a holiday falling on a Sunday will be observed on the
following Monday.
C. Holiday pay paid to part-time hourly employees shall be based on their
straight time hourly rate and shall be based on the average number of
hours worked by such employees during the immediately preceding 90
days.
§ 37-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37-38
1:101
§ 37-39. Personal leave.
A. Full-time employees.
(1) Vacation is an accrued benefit based on the following schedule:
(a) One through seven years of service: two weeks;
(b) After completion of seven years of service through 14 years:
three weeks;
(c) After the completion of 14 years of service through 19 years:
four weeks; and
(d) After the completion of 19 years: five weeks.
(2) Except as may be otherwise agreed by the department head, during
the months of July and August vacations must be taken in one-week
increments and with as far advance notice to the department head
as is practical and must be approved by the department head. In all
other events, employees must receive their department head's
approval at least two weeks in advance of the first vacation day.
(3) All employees who qualify for vacation and who quit or are released
by the Borough for reasons other than cause shall be entitled to
receive vacation pay due with the employee's final paycheck. The
amount payable shall be determined pro rata based on the number
of months worked. Employees dismissed for cause shall not be
entitled to vacation pay.
(4) Any vacation days not used at the end of a year shall be forfeited,
and the employee shall not be entitled to payment for any such day.
B. Part-time employees.
(1) All part-time hourly employees hired prior to January 1, 2009, shall
be entitled to vacation based on the same schedule as full-time
employees.
(2) All part-time hourly employees hired after December 31, 2008,
shall be entitled to five paid vacation days after the completion of
one year of service based on their straight-time hourly rate.
(3) Employees compensated on an hourly rate basis shall be entitled to
vacation pay based on their straight-time hourly rate. A vacation
week for an hourly employee shall be based on the average number
of hours worked by such employee during the immediately
preceding 90 days.
A. All full-time employees and all part-time hourly employees hired on or
before December 31, 2008, who are not subject to a collective
bargaining agreement are entitled to two personal days per year, and
any unused days are forfeited at the end of each calendar year.
§ 37-38 KENILWORTH CODE § 37-39
1:102
§ 37-40. Sick leave.
§ 37-41. Bereavement leave.
B. All part-time hourly employees hired on or after January 1, 2009, shall
not be entitled to personal days.
A. All full-time employees and all part-time hourly employees hired on or
before December 31, 2008, who have completed at least one year of
service are entitled to five working days of sick leave per calendar year.
All part-time hourly employees hired on or after January 1, 2009, who
have completed at least one year of service are entitled to two working
days of sick leave per calendar year. School crossing guards shall be
entitled to three sick days per year. Sick leave is to be used only in cases
where the employee is ill and unable to work or in cases of the serious
illness of a family member.
B. All employees absent on sick leave for three or more consecutive
working days must submit a doctor's verification of illness or injury. If
an employee is attending to an immediate family member, a doctor's
verification of that individual is required. After the 10th day of absence
on sick leave in one calendar year, a doctor's verification must be
submitted for all sick leave absences, regardless of duration. Prior to
the return to work, the Borough may require an employee to be
examined by a physician designated by the Borough to verify fitness to
return to normal duties. An employee will not be permitted to return to
work until the verification is received.
C. Any sick days not used during a calendar year may be added to the
vacation time allowed to an employee in the following calendar year
only and not thereafter.
D. Employees compensated on an hourly rate basis shall be entitled to sick
pay based on their straight-time hourly rate. A sick day for an hourly
employee shall be based on the average number of hours worked by
such employee per day during the immediately preceding 90 days.
A. Full-time employees are entitled to five consecutive calendar days leave
of absence for each death of an employee's immediate relative.
Bereavement leave shall not extend beyond seven consecutive calendar
days immediately following the death of a family member. "Immediate
relative" includes spouse or significant other, child, parent, stepchild,
sibling, grandparents, and/or grandchildren or any person related by
blood or marriage residing in an employee's household. For all other
individuals related to the employee by blood or marriage, the employee
shall be entitled to two days leave of absence.
B. Employees are paid for all working days during the bereavement leave.
§ 37-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37-42
1:103
§ 37-42. Jury duty.
A permanent employee required to render jury service shall be entitled to
be absent from work during that service and will be paid the difference
between any payment received for jury duty and the employee's regular
salary, up to a maximum of eight hours per day. Payment to an hourly
employee shall be based on the average number of hours worked in the
immediately preceding 90 days.
§ 37-43. Leave of absence.
§ 37-44. Family and Medical Leave Act.
A. Employees may be granted a personal leave of absence for up to six
months at the sole discretion of the governing body if the leave does not
cause undue operational disruption. The leave must include the use of
any accrued vacation and sick leave time, regardless of the length of
leave requested. The portion of the leave that runs beyond the
exhaustion of vacation and sick leave will be without pay or longevity
credit. In exceptional circumstances, the governing body may extend a
leave of absence for an additional six months, if such extension is
considered in the best interests of the Borough.
B. Personal leaves are not granted for the purpose of seeking or accepting
employment with another employer or for extended vacation time.
Employees on personal leave of absence for more than two weeks in any
month will not receive holiday pay and will not accrue personal leave,
sick leave or vacation time for that month. Health benefits may also be
impacted. Refer to the Borough Health Benefits Policy.28 A personal
leave is granted with the understanding that the employee intends to
return to work for the Borough. If the employee fails to return within
five business days after the expiration of the leave, the employee shall
be considered to have resigned.
A. Employees who have been employed for at least 12 continuous months
and have worked at least 1,000 base hours, excluding overtime, in the
preceding twelve-month period are eligible for family and medical leave
with no loss of position or pay rate. However, employees on such leave
will not continue to accrue vacation days, sick days, personal days or
longevity. Employees taking family or medical leave under this section
continue to be eligible for paid health insurance coverage under the
Borough policy.
B. Upon written notice, eligible employees are entitled to a family or
medical leave for up to 12 weeks to care for a newly born or adopted
child or a seriously ill immediate family member or for the employee's
own serious health condition that makes the employee unable to
perform the functions of the employee's position. Eligible employees
who take leave under this policy must use all accrued available vacation
28.Editor's Note: See § 37-49.
§ 37-42 KENILWORTH CODE § 37-44
1:104
§ 37-45. Military leave.
and personal days during the leave. The use of accrued time will not
extend the leave period. After exhausting accrued time, the employee
will no longer be paid for the remainder of the leave.
C. The period of leave must be supported by a physician's certificate. An
extension past 12 weeks can be requested, but medical verification of
the need must be submitted prior to the expiration of the leave. The
Borough reserves the right to deny any request for extended leave.
Additional information concerning the Family Leave Policy and
eligibility requirements is available from the Borough Clerk.
A. Any full-time employee who is a member of the National Guard, Naval
Militia, Air National Guard, or a reserve component of any United
States armed force who is required to engage in field training will be
granted a military leave of absence with pay for the training period as
authorized by law. The paid leave will not be counted against any
available vacation.
B. When an employee, after one year's service with the Borough, is called
to active duty or inducted into the United States military, the employee
shall automatically be granted an indefinite leave of absence for the
duration of military service. To be reinstated by the Borough without
loss of privileges or seniority, the employee must report for duty with
the Borough within 60 days following release from active duty under
honorable circumstances.
C. During the period of active military duty, the employee shall be paid the
difference between military salary and the employee's regular salary for
a period not to exceed 180 days. Employees on active service will also
continue to receive paid health insurance coverage during the onehundred-
and-eighty-day period plus an additional 30 days. After this
period has expired, employees may continue coverage for themselves or
their dependents under the Borough group plan by taking advantage of
the COBRA provision. Members of the state-administered retirement
systems (PERS and PFRS) will continue accruing service and salary
credit in the system during the one-hundred-and-eighty-day period.
§ 37-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37-45
1:105

ARTICLE VI
Compensation and Employee Benefits Policies
§ 37-46. Scope.
These policies cover nonunion employees. They also cover union employees
to the extent that their collective bargaining agreements do not cover these
issues.
§ 37-47. Payroll.
§ 37-48. Overtime compensation.
A. Salary ranges are established by ordinance, and the salary must fall
within the minimum and maximum ranges for the employee's title.
Employees are paid every week. Employees who are going on vacation
and would like their checks in advance must make a written request at
least two weeks in advance of the vacation.
B. The Borough will not accept responsibility for any employee's personal
finances. The Borough of Kenilworth will acknowledge judgments
against an employee's pay but will not act as a mediator between the
employee and creditors.
A. Department heads may authorize overtime, subject to the following:
(1) Total salary costs must be kept within the department's current
budget.
(2) Use of overtime is only for emergencies and for situations where
there are unusual and/or compelling circumstances.
B. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the governing body may, by resolution,
authorize the use of overtime at any time. For the purposes of this
provision, "emergency" is defined as a disaster, civil disturbance, severe
storm or other similar occurrence creating conditions which, if
unchecked, would endanger lives or property or interrupt essential
services.
C. Under the Federal Fair Labor Standards Act, certain employees in
managerial, supervisory, administrative or professional positions are
exempt from the provisions of the Act. The Borough Clerk shall notify
all exempt employees of their status under the Act. Exempt employees
are not eligible to receive overtime compensation and are required to
work the normal workweek and any additional hours needed to fulfill
their responsibilities. Time off consideration for large amounts of
additional hours may be provided with the governing body's prior
approval and at the sole discretion of the governing body.
D. All other employees are classified as nonexempt and are subject to the
provisions of the Act. Depending on work needs, nonexempt employees
may be required to work overtime. Nonexempt employees are not
§ 37-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37-48
1:107
§ 37-49. Health insurance.
permitted to work overtime unless the overtime is budgeted and
approved by the department head. Nonexempt employees working
overtime without prior approval will be subject to disciplinary action.
E. Nonexempt employees will receive overtime compensation for hours
worked in excess of 40 in a weekly period. Employees may choose
overtime compensation in the form of overtime pay at their regular
hourly salary or compensating time off. The maximum number of hours
that an employee may accrue for future compensating time off 80. Once
this maximum has been accumulated, all additional hours will be
compensated by overtime pay. Accrued and taken overtime
compensating hours must be noted on the employee's time sheet.
F. Nonexempt employees will receive 1 1/2 hours of overtime
compensation for each hour worked in excess of 40 hours in a weekly
period. For purposes of overtime compensation, hours worked are
computed to the nearest 1/2 hour per day. Previously scheduled
vacation time and holiday time are considered time worked for
purposes of determining overtime compensation, but sick time and
personal time are not.
G. Employees must make a request to their supervisor at least two days in
advance when they want to take compensating time off. The supervisor
will approve the request if the absence does not cause undue hardship
to the department.
A. Employees and their immediate family members are provided health
insurance in the same manner and to the same extent as provided
under the collective bargaining agreement between the Borough and
the union representing the Kenilworth Police Department.
B. The complete benefit plan is on file in the Borough Clerk's office, and a
summary plan description will be provided to all employees. Benefit
levels for nonunionized employees are subject to change at the
discretion of the Borough.
C. Health insurance coverage for employees on a leave of absence or who
cease Borough employment will terminate at the end of the month in
which the leave begins or employment is terminated, except coverage
will continue for up to 12 weeks for employees on leave pursuant to the
Family and Medical Leave Act and up to 30 weeks for employees on
military leave. Upon termination of coverage, employees may extend
health insurance coverage for themselves or their dependents by taking
advantage of the COBRA provision for a period of up to 18 months. For
more information, consult the Borough Clerk.
D. Health insurance upon retirement. [Amended 3-12-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-02]
§ 37-48 KENILWORTH CODE § 37-49
1:108
§ 37-50. Drug prescription benefit.
§ 37-51. Dental benefits.
§ 37-52. Prescription eyeglasses benefit.
(1) All employees of the Borough who are hired in a full-time capacity
after March 15, 2014, and who retire under the provisions of an
applicable retirement plan for the employees of the Borough with
25 years of continuous service credited under such retirement plan
and continued in full-time service at the Borough of Kenilworth for
15 or more years when they retire, may continue to receive paid
health insurance coverage. Employees receiving retiree health
benefits must notify the Borough Clerk in writing, with satisfactory
proof of enrollment and years in the plan, when they become
eligible for Medicare Parts A and B.
(2) Those full-time employees who were continuously employed by the
Borough prior to March 15, 2014, and who retire under the
provisions of the applicable retirement plan for the employees of
the Borough with 25 years of continuous service credited under
such retirement plan may continue to receive paid health insurance
coverage. Employees receiving retiree health benefits must notify
the Borough Clerk in writing, with proof of enrollment, when they
become eligible for Medicare Parts A and B. For more information,
consult the Borough Clerk.
A. Employees and their immediate family members are provided drug
prescription insurance in the same manner and to the same extent as
provided under the collective bargaining agreement between the
Borough and the union representing the Kenilworth Police Department.
B. The complete benefit plan is on file in the Borough Clerk's office, and a
summary plan description will be provided to all employees. Benefit
levels for nonunionized employees are subject to change at the
discretion of the Borough.
A. Employees and their immediate family members are provided dental
benefits in the same manner and to the same extent as provided under
the collective bargaining agreement between the Borough and the
union representing the Kenilworth Police Department.
B. The complete benefit plan is on file in the Borough Clerk's office, and a
summary plan description will be provided to all employees. Benefit
levels for nonunionized employees are subject to change at the
discretion of the Borough.
A. Employees and their immediate family members are provided
prescription eyeglasses benefits in the same manner and to the same
extent as provided under the collective bargaining agreement between
§ 37-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37-52
1:109
§ 37-53. Retirement.
Under state law, all employees must enroll in the New Jersey Public
Retirement System or the Police and Firefighters Retirement System as
applicable. The employee's contribution to the plan will be deducted from
the employee's pay. An employee who has completed the required number
of years and who has reached the required age under the Plan may retire
by notifying the department head in writing. The state retirement plans
request six months' advance notice to process the application. After giving
notice of retirement, employees are expected to assist their supervisor and
co-employees by providing information concerning their current projects
and help in the training of a replacement. The department head will prepare
an employee action form showing any pay or other money owed the
employee. The Borough Clerk will conduct a confidential exit interview to
discuss benefits, including COBRA options, appropriate retirement issues
and pay due. A COBRA notification letter will be sent to the employee's
home address. The exit interview will also include an open discussion with
the employee. On the last day of work, and prior to receiving the final
paycheck, the employee must return the employee identification card, all
keys and equipment. At this time, the employee will sign the termination
memo designating all money owed, and this memo will be retained in the
official personnel file.
§ 37-54. Workers' compensation.
Employees who suffer job-related injuries and illnesses may be entitled
to medical expenses, lost income and other compensation under the New
Jersey Workers' Compensation Act.29 The Borough covers workers'
compensation benefits through its membership in a joint insurance fund.
Any occupational injury or illness must be immediately reported to the
supervisor or department head. All required medical treatment must be
performed by a workers' compensation physician appointed by the joint
insurance fund, and payment for unauthorized medical treatment may not
be covered pursuant to the Act.
§ 37-55. Employee assistance.
the Borough and the union representing the Kenilworth Police
Department.
B. The complete benefit plan is on file in the Borough Clerk's office, and a
summary plan description will be provided to all employees. Benefit
levels for nonunionized employees are subject to change at the
discretion of the Borough.
A. Goal of policy. The goal of this policy is to balance the Borough's respect
for individuals with the need to maintain a safe, productive and alcohol/
drug-free environment. The intent of this policy is to offer a helping
29.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 34:15-1 et seq.
§ 37-52 KENILWORTH CODE § 37-55
1:110
§ 37-56. Educational assistance and training.
hand to those who need it, while sending a clear message that the
improper consumption of alcohol or illegal use of drugs is incompatible
with employment with the Borough.
B. Objective. The Borough recognizes the health implications of alcohol
abuse and drug use on its employees and considers it a treatable illness.
As with other illnesses, the Borough's primary objective is to assist in
the employee's rehabilitation. The Borough designed this policy to
encourage employees to voluntarily seek help for any alcohol or
substance abuse problem.
C. Rehabilitation program. An employee may voluntarily admit to the
Borough that he or she has an alcohol or substance abuse problem
without fear of discipline or discharge. Upon admission of an alcohol or
substance abuse problem, the employee shall immediately enroll
himself or herself in a rehabilitation program at the employee's sole
cost and expense. The Borough will not take disciplinary action against
an employee who voluntarily admits having an alcohol or substance
abuse problem unless that employee refuses to enroll in and complete a
rehabilitation program. Upon return to work after satisfactorily
completing a rehabilitation program, the employee must agree to
submit to the random follow-up testing. Employees who test positive in
a subsequent drug and/or alcohol test or who voluntarily enter
rehabilitation on more than one occasion shall be subject to disciplinary
action, up to and including discharge. Nothing in the foregoing shall
preclude the employee from obtaining coverage and/or reimbursement
for payments made for rehabilitation services from any applicable
insurance coverage.
D. Screening tests. The governing body shall be responsible for the
selection of a qualified laboratory to perform the appropriate drug and/
or alcohol screening tests and shall also be responsible for selecting
physicians to conduct physical examinations and drug and/or alcohol
screening tests where appropriate.
A. Subject to sufficient funds in the budget and upon approval of the
department head, employees may apply for reimbursement of tuition
expenses incurred for training or college courses directly related to the
employee's work. The Borough Clerk will be the sole judge of whether a
particular course or program is "directly related" to the employee's
work, and such course or program must be preapproved by the Borough
Clerk to qualify for reimbursement.
B. Employees may receive reimbursement for up to $500 per year towards
the tuition cost for training or college courses that they take on their
own initiative. The reimbursement must be repaid if the employee
leaves Borough employment within 24 months of receipt. When
enrollment for short training courses or seminars is requested by the
Borough, employees will receive full reimbursement.
§ 37-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37-57
1:111
§ 37-57. Conferences and seminars.
Requests to attend a conference or seminar must be approved by the
department head and the Borough Clerk. Requests shall be made
sufficiently in advance to take advantage of discounts for early registration
and must be submitted to the department head at least 30 days before
the event. Requests must be in writing, including the conference schedule,
registration information and estimated costs. The department head is
responsible to detail all training requests during the budget formulation
process. Approval of any conference or seminar request is conditioned upon
the availability of funds.
§ 37-58. Terminal leave.
§ 37-59. Longevity compensation.
A. All full-time permanent employees hired on or before December 31,
1995, who retire with less than 25 years of service with the Borough
and who qualify for a pension under state law by reason of length of
service or service-connected disability shall be entitled to terminal
leave in the amount of 1 1/2 days for every year of full time service.
B. All full-time permanent employees hired on or before December 31,
1995, who retire with 25 years of service or more with the Borough and
who qualify for a pension under state law by reason of length of service
or service-connected disability shall be entitled to terminal leave in the
amount of two days for every year of full-time service.
A. Eligibility. All full-time employees hired on or before December 31,
1995, shall be entitled to longevity compensation in accordance with
this section. Any employee hired on or after January 1, 1996, shall not
be eligible for longevity compensation. An employee must work an
average of at least 35 hours per week in any year of service to be
eligible.
B. Calculation of amount. In addition to the salaries payable, all eligible
employees shall receive a longevity payment calculated with reference
to the employee's base salary in effect on the December 31 of the
calendar year preceding the date of payment. The amount of the
longevity payment shall be calculated in accordance with the following
schedule:
Years of Service
Additional Compensation per
Annum
(percentage of salary)
5 2%
10 4%
15 6%
20 8%
§ 37-57 KENILWORTH CODE § 37-59
1:112
§ 37-60. Compensation of employee expenses.
Years of Service
Additional Compensation per
Annum
(percentage of salary)
25 10%
C. Calculating years of service. All periods of employment shall be
computed from January 1 of the year of taking office, appointment or
employment, unless said date was subsequent to June 30, in which case
the calculation shall be computed from January 1 of the year following.
Additional compensation of any nature, including overtime, shall not be
considered in computing longevity compensation. Eligible employees
shall be credited with all time served with the Borough, whether
consecutive or nonconsecutive, and whether served on a full-time or a
part-time basis, as defined above. Any interruption of service due to a
cause beyond the control of the employee, such as military service,
injury in the line of duty or illness, shall be considered as service for the
purpose of determining the length of service. Leaves of absence
granted at the request of the employee shall not be considered in
determining length of service.
A. All employees traveling on preapproved Borough business or using
personal assets for Borough purchases shall be compensated for
expenses according to the following schedule:
(1) Lodging and meals: all reasonable, preapproved expenses.
(2) Purchases: all verified, preapproved expenses.
(3) Automobile expenses: in accordance with the Internal Revenue
Service standard mileage rates for employees, self-employed
individuals, or other taxpayers to use in computing the deductible
costs of operating an automobile for business, charitable, medical,
or moving expense purposes.
B. All travel expenses must be itemized and accompanied with receipts.
The appropriate department head must approve the expenses prior to
reimbursement, except that any expense or expenses in excess of $150
must be approved by the governing body.
§ 37-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37-60
1:113

ARTICLE VII
Managerial and Supervisory Procedures
§ 37-61. Employment procedure.
A. Recruitment. The Borough Clerk will coordinate the employment
recruitment process for all vacancies to ensure compliance with
contractual, legal and equal opportunity requirements. When a vacancy
occurs, it is the responsibility of the department head to notify the
Borough Clerk, who will distribute notification of the vacancy to all
departments. The Borough Clerk will undertake to recruit qualified
applicants in accordance with applicable federal and state law. Where
positions are advertised, the media or other periodical utilized must
have as wide circulation as possible to encourage applications from
candidates from diverse backgrounds and must prominently state that
the Borough is an equal opportunity employer.
B. Applications. All candidates must fully complete an application form. A
resume will not be considered as a substitute for this form. The
application is a confidential document and will not be available to
anyone who is not directly involved in the hiring process.
C. Interviews. The Borough Clerk or department head will coordinate the
interview process, including the scheduling of applicants, development
of interview questions and standards to measure candidate responses.
All questions must be in accordance with the New Jersey Division on
Civil Rights Guidelines for Pre-Employment Inquiries. Reasonable
accommodations must be made for disabled applicants.
D. Physical examinations. The Borough Clerk may require applicants,
prior to employment, to successfully pass a physical examination
consistent with the Americans with Disabilities Act to assure that the
work required by the position will not cause injury to the employee or
co-employees and that the person is fit to meet the requirements of the
position. The Borough Clerk may require periodic physical
examinations to determine the employee's continued ability to perform
the duties of the position. All physical examinations must be performed
by a physician chosen by the Borough at the expense of the Borough. All
medical records of employees and prospective employees are
confidential and are to be maintained by the Borough Clerk separate
from the employee's official personnel file.
E. Job offers. The final decision will be made by the governing body after
all references and other information have been verified. Every effort
shall be made to offer reasonable accommodations pursuant to the
Americans with Disabilities Act. The employment offer must be made in
a letter to the candidate outlining all terms and conditions of the offer.
The letter will also establish a deadline for acceptance.
F. Acceptances and rejections. If the first offer is rejected, the governing
body will decide to hire another candidate or reopen the position. Once
§ 37-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37-61
1:115
§ 37-62. Veteran's preference.
a candidate accepts the employment offer, all other candidates will be
notified in writing that they were not accepted for the position.
G. Record retention. All applications, notes made during interviews and
reference checks, job offers and other documents created during hiring
process must be returned to the Borough Clerk. Documents related to
the successful candidate will be placed in the employee's official
personnel file, except medical records, including physical examinations,
must be maintained in a separate file. All records documents related to
other candidates must be retained for at least one year. Records and
documents created during the hiring process are confidential and must
be retained in a locked cabinet.
A. A veteran's preference is hereby established in the Borough for
veterans and their widows and orphans. Such preference shall apply for
hiring purposes only, and only in Borough government or service, or any
subdivision or agency thereof, for which the salary is paid for from local
tax revenues and for which a test, examination or other means of
evaluation, be it oral or written, is used in determining which applicant
shall be hired or appointed, as the case may be.
B. The following system of preference points shall be used in determining
which applicant shall be hired or appointed, provided that such
applicant is otherwise qualified for the position:
(1) For a veteran residing in the Borough of Kenilworth: five points or
first consideration where no test is given;
(2) For a veteran residing in the Borough of Kenilworth with a serviceconnected
disability and who is capable of meeting the job
qualifications: 10 points for first consideration if a tie exists or first
consideration where no test is given;
(3) For a veteran residing in the Borough of Kenilworth with a nonservice-
connected disability and who is capable of meeting the job
qualifications: seven points or first consideration where no test is
given;
(4) For widows and orphans of veterans residing in the Borough of
Kenilworth, should no veteran apply and/or qualify: five points or
first consideration if no test is given;
(5) Veterans residing in the Borough of Kenilworth shall receive first
consideration over veterans from other communities.
C. Any veteran or veteran's widow or orphan residing in the Borough of
Kenilworth and applying for a job or position within the Borough, for
whom the foregoing provisions shall apply, must declare on the initial
application his or her intention to exercise his or her right to
preference.
§ 37-61 KENILWORTH CODE § 37-63
1:116
§ 37-63. Open Public Meetings Act procedure concerning personnel
matters.30
Discussions by the governing body or any body of the Borough concerning
appointment, termination, terms and conditions of employment,
performance evaluation, promotion or discipline of any current or
prospective officer or employee shall be in closed session unless the
individual requests in writing that the discussion be held in open session.
Such request must be granted. Prior to the discussion by the governing
body or any body of the Borough concerning such matters, the Clerk shall
notify the affected person(s) of the meeting date, time and place, the
matters to be discussed and the person's right to request that the discussion
occur in open session. In the event more than one person is affected by
the discussion and one of the affected persons does not request that the
discussion be in open session, then the discussion shall be in closed session.
If the individual(s) does not request that the discussion be held in open
session, the governing body or other body of the Borough may at its sole
discretion invite the affected individual(s) to attend the applicable portion
of the closed session.
§ 37-64. Processing and orientation of new employees.
All new regular full-time and regular part-time employees will be scheduled
to meet with the Borough Clerk and department head on their first day
for a general orientation. Copies of all forms and acknowledgments must
be returned to the Borough Clerk for inclusion in the employee's official
personnel file. The orientation will include:
§ 37-65. Initial employment period.
Except where state requirements direct otherwise, new employees (or
present employees transferring to new positions) will be hired subject to
A. A tour of the appropriate facilities to acquaint the new employee with
overall operations as they relate to the specific position;
B. The completion of all pertinent personnel, payroll, insurance and
pension forms;
C. A review of the employee handbook and acknowledgment of receipt;
D. A review of the Personnel Policies and Procedures Manual if the
employee is a manager or supervisor and acknowledgment of receipt;
E. The employee Complaint Policy letter and acknowledgment;
F. A safety orientation and acknowledgment; and
G. Arrangements for the new employee to complete required PEOSHA
safety training.
30.Editor's Note: For the Open Public Meetings Act, see N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
§ 37-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37-65
1:117
an initial employment period of not less than six months or more than
12 months, as determined by the governing body. During this initial
employment period, the new employee or transferee will be provided with
training and guidance from the supervisor. At the end of the initial
employment period, the supervisor will conduct an employee evaluation:
see the Performance Evaluation Procedure.31 New employees may be
discharged at any time during this period if the department head, in
consultation with the Borough Clerk, concludes that the employee is not
progressing or performing satisfactorily. Under appropriate circumstances,
the governing body may extend the initial employment period.
§ 37-66. Employee handbook.
The Borough Clerk, with the assistance of Labor Counsel, shall draft an
employee handbook for the approval of the governing body. A separate
version of the handbook will be drafted for part-time and seasonal
employees as well as for major bargaining groups if appropriate. Once
approved, copies will be distributed, and employees will be required to sign
an acknowledgment of receipt that will be placed in the official personnel
file. The handbook will be revised and redistributed whenever there is a
significant change in personnel practice or every two years.
§ 37-67. Performance evaluation.
A. Periodic evaluations are critical to create a formal record of an
employee's performance over time and establish a foundation for
personnel actions such as promotion and termination. In addition to
day-to-day feedback to the employee, a performance evaluation must be
conducted for all employees at least annually and no later than April 30
of each year. The completed appraisal becomes part of an employee's
permanent record. This is a legal document that is discoverable in
lawsuits.
B. Performance discussions must also provide employees with guidance
regarding their ability to meet job standards. Extraordinary skills or
abilities should be recognized in addition to areas for improvement.
Supervisors or department heads should review future training needs
and career planning. The reviewer should also encourage the employee
to make suggestions about how the department can improve. The
reviewer should ask employees for feedback regarding the employee's
skills as they relate to communication, team building, delegation, and
sensitivity to needs of subordinates. Open communication is the key to
improvement.
(1) Setting the stage. The reviewer must create a productive climate
for the discussion. In preparing the evaluation form, prior
evaluations should be reviewed to identify trends. Employees must
be notified in advance of the meeting and should be given a copy of
31.Editor's Note: See § 37-67.
§ 37-65 KENILWORTH CODE § 37-67
1:118
the blank evaluation form. The meeting should be private, without
interruptions, in a comfortable environment.
(2) Confirm expectations. The reviewer should start the discussion of
each performance area by reviewing expectations. Ask the
employee to confirm the employee's understanding of job
requirements. Refer to the job description as appropriate.
(3) Rating. Continue the discussion by giving the employee's rating in
each performance area. The supervisor should be prepared to refer
to documentation. Employees should be evaluated based on set
standards, not as they compare to other employees. It is rare that
any person's rating in all areas is either high or low. The evaluation
should consider performance during the entire period, not just the
recent past. Care should be taken to avoid allowing one aspect of a
person's performance to overshadow all other performance factors,
be it positive or negative. Ideally, each performance area should be
evaluated individually based on specific behaviors exhibited.
(4) Discussing future plans. This is where the reviewer should turn to
the discussion to the future performance and development of the
employee. A counseling action plan form must be completed if any
item is rated "needs improvement" or "does not meet minimum
standards." Specific performance goals must be established for the
next review period, along with plans for achieving those goals.
(5) Closing the discussion. When all performance areas have been
discussed, close the discussion by summarizing all of ratings in an
overall rating for the review period.
(a) "Outstanding" means exceptional performance in all areas of
responsibility. Planned objectives were achieved well above the
established standards, and accomplishments were made in
unexpected areas.
(b) "Exceeds expectations" means consistently exceeds
established standards in most areas of responsibility. All
requirements must be met and objectives achieved above the
established standards.
(c) "Meets job requirements" means all job requirements were
met and planned objectives accomplished within established
standards. There were no critical areas where
accomplishments were less than planned.
(d) "Needs improvement" means performance in one or more
critical areas does not meet expectations. Not all planned
objectives were accomplished within the established
standards, and some responsibilities were not completely met.
§ 37-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37-67
1:119
§ 37-68. Disciplinary action.
(e) "Does not meet minimum standards" means performance is
unacceptable and important objectives have not been
accomplished. Needs immediate improvement.
C. After completing the evaluation, the reviewer will return the form(s)
with the signed acknowledgment to the Borough Clerk for inclusion in
the employee's official personnel file.
A. All employees are expected to meet the Borough's work performance
standards. The intent of the Disciplinary Action Procedure is to formally
document problems and provide the employee with a reasonable time
to improve performance. The process should encourage development
by providing employees with guidance in areas that need improvement
such as poor work performance, attendance problems, personal
conduct, general compliance with the Borough's policies and
procedures and other disciplinary problems.
B. Should a supervisor believe that an employee is not conforming to the
Borough's policies and rules or to specific instructions or has acted
improperly, the supervisor will first privately discuss the matter with
the employee to obtain the employee's view. If the supervisor
determines that the employee has acted improperly, the supervisor
shall take one of the following actions depending upon the gravity and
the employee's past record:
(1) Verbal reprimand. Depending on the circumstances, the supervisor
may verbally notify the employee that the employee's actions have
been improper and warn the employee against further occurrences.
The supervisor will prepare a record of the verbal reprimand,
including the date, time and what was discussed with the
employee. This record must be forwarded to the Borough Clerk for
the employee's official personnel file.
(2) Written reprimand. When a supervisor determines that a written
reprimand is appropriate, the reprimand should clearly identify the
problem and outline a course of corrective action within a specific
time frame. The employee should clearly understand both the
corrective action and the consequence (i.e., termination) if the
problem is not corrected or reoccurs. The employee should
acknowledge receipt of the warning and may include additional
comments. A copy of the written reprimand with the signed
acknowledgment and comments must be forwarded to the Borough
Clerk for the employee's official personnel file.
(3) Suspension. Whenever an employee is recommended for
suspension, the governing body's liaison to the appropriate
Borough department must approve the decision. Suspended
employees may request a hearing under the applicable grievance
procedure.
§ 37-67 KENILWORTH CODE § 37-68
1:120
§ 37-69. Personnel file.
(4) Dismissal. Whenever an employee is recommended for dismissal,
the governing body will make the decision only after seeking the
advice of the Borough's Labor Counsel. There must be a complete
review of the employee's personnel file and all other facts to
determine if there is sufficient cause for the dismissal. Terminated
employees may request a hearing under the applicable grievance
procedure.
A. The official personnel files shall be maintained by the Borough Clerk,
and employee medical information will be maintained in a separate file.
At least annually, the Borough Clerk will review files to make sure they
are up-to-date and will follow up with the department heads as
necessary.
B. The official file shall include at least the following:
(1) The original application signed by the employee;
(2) Notes from any pre-employment interview and reference check;
(3) The original letter detailing an offer of employment and any
additional correspondence concerning the employee's hiring;
(4) A signed acknowledgment that the employee received a copy of the
employee Complaint Policy letter;
(5) A signed acknowledgment that the employee has received the
employee handbook;
(6) A signed acknowledgment that the employee received the safety
orientation;
(7) Annual written performance evaluations, including documentation
that the evaluation was reviewed with the employee;
(8) Counseling action plans;
(9) Records relating to on-the-job accidents;
(10) Disciplinary actions, including an acknowledgment that the
employee was notified of the proposed disciplinary action and was
given an opportunity to respond;
(11) Records relating to any other employment actions, including
promotions, demotions, transfers, resignations, leaves, etc.;
(12) Educational transcripts; and
(13) Any other pertinent information.
§ 37-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37-70
1:121
§ 37-70. Employee complaint investigation.
Employees have the right to formally or informally report any statement,
act, or behavior by a co-employee, supervisor, elected official or visitor that
they believe to be improper.
A. Reporting. Employees should be asked to report complaints in writing
utilizing the employee complaint form, but are not compelled to do so.
B. Identification/screening. The employee shall present the complaint to
his or her supervisor/department head, who must report all written or
verbal complaints to the Borough Clerk, unless the complaint is against
the Borough Clerk, in which event such complaint shall be reported to
the Chief Financial Officer. Upon receipt of the complaint, the
supervisor/department head will determine if the complaint was made
pursuant to the General Anti-Harassment Policy,32 the Anti-Sexual
Harassment Policy,33 the Whistle-Blower Policy,34 a grievance procedure
or is another form of complaint. A file will be established, including the
written complaint, the investigation procedure followed and the
response action plan. As soon as possible but no later than 10 days after
receiving the complaint, the supervisor/department head will interview
the employee. If the employee is reluctant to sign a written complaint,
the investigator will prepare written notes of the date, time and place of
the complaint and the specific allegations. These notes will be read
back to the employee who will be asked to affirm, preferably in writing
the information's accuracy. In the event a complaint is against the
employee's supervisor/department head, the complaint shall be filed
with the Borough Clerk, who shall refer the complaint to the governing
body's Personnel Committee for investigation and resolution in
accordance with this policy. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
C. Investigation. The investigating person/entity will seek the advice of the
Borough Labor Counsel when planning the investigation. The
investigation should establish the frequency and nature of the alleged
conduct and whether the complaint coincides with other employment
events such as a poor performance evaluation. The investigation should
also determine if other employees were subjected to similar
misconduct. It is important to protect the rights of both the person
making the complaint and the alleged wrongdoer.
D. Response plan: no corrective action required. The investigating person/
entity will discuss the conclusions with the Borough Labor Counsel and
render a decision within 14 days after the investigation is complete. If
the validity of a complaint cannot be determined or the complaint is
groundless, the complaining employee should be notified in writing.
Care should be taken to avoid being too specific, confrontational or
32.Editor's Note: See § 37-12.
33.Editor's Note: See § 37-13.
34.Editor's Note: See § 37-14.
§ 37-70 KENILWORTH CODE § 37-70
1:122
§ 37-71. Requests for employment verification and references.
§ 37-72. Continuing education.
accusatory and to avoid any language that might be construed as
defamatory. A general statement is usually more appropriate that the
claim was thoroughly investigated but could not be sufficiently
documented or confirmed to justify taking formal action. The employee
should be assured that future complaints will be investigated and that
the Borough is committed to eliminating wrongful employment
practices when they are found to exist. If the investigation reveals
that the complainant intentionally and maliciously levied false charges
against the alleged wrongdoer, the complainant must be notified of the
seriousness of filing a false complaint and the appropriate disciplinary
penalty under the circumstances, up to and including termination.
E. Response plan: corrective action required. If the investigation reveals
that the complaint is justified and substantiated, the investigating
person/entity shall refer the matter to the governing body, which will
formulate a corrective action plan as well as possible disciplinary
action, with the advice of Borough Labor Counsel. The complaining
employee will be notified, in writing, that it appears that the complaint
was justified and an appropriate response plan has been formulated. A
copy of the response plan should be attached to the letter. The response
plan should provide for appropriate remedial action to prevent a
recurrence of the wrongful act or behavior.
A. Inquiries and written requests for references or employment
verification regarding a current or former employee must be referred to
the Borough Clerk. No employee may issue a reference letter without
the permission of the Borough Clerk. Under no circumstances should
any information be released over the phone.
B. In response to a request for information, the Borough Clerk will only
verify an employee's name, dates of employment, job title, department
and final salary. No other data or information will be furnished unless:
(1) The Borough is required to release the information by law; or
(2) The employee or former employee authorizes the Borough in
writing to furnish this information and releases the Borough from
liability.
A. The Borough will arrange for employment practices seminars at least
annually to train all managerial/supervisory personnel. The Borough
will also offer nonmandatory training to all other employees, with
special emphasis on employee rights and protections under various
federal and state laws as well as Borough employment practices.
Records will be maintained in the official personnel files of all
employees trained under this procedure.
§ 37-70 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37-72
1:123
B. Managerial and supervisory personnel will also update employees
periodically by department meetings and memos that should address
specific problems and concerns that may arise. Every effort will be
made to encourage employee suggestions about ways to avoid
employer-employee disputes and violations of employment rights.
§ 37-72 KENILWORTH CODE § 37-72
1:124
Chapter 39
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Personnel policies — See Ch. 37.
§ 39-1. Establishment of Police Department.
The Borough of Kenilworth, within the County of Union, State of New
Jersey, created, pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118 et seq.,
a Police Department which by this chapter is ratified as to its existence
and operation. The Police Department shall consist of personnel under the
immediate supervision of a Chief of Police. The structure of the command
and the maximum number of ranked police officers within the Police
Department shall be limited to the positions as depicted in the Table of
Organization in Chapter 15, § 15-2 of the Borough Code.
§ 39-2. Designation of appropriate authority.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118, the Mayor is hereby designated as the
appropriate authority to update, adopt, and promulgate rules and
regulations for the government of the Police Department and the discipline
of its members. Said rules and regulations shall govern the conduct of
and be binding upon the entire membership of sworn officers and civilian
employees of the Police Department. Said rules and regulations shall be
maintained in a manual form and be maintained by the Chief of the
Department and the Borough Clerk.
§ 39-3. Establishment of Police Safety Committee; Commissioner.
The Council shall appoint from its own membership annually a Police Safety
Committee consisting of three members and shall appoint one of the
members of the Police Safety Committee as its Chairperson for the year.
The Chairperson of the Police Safety Committee shall be and is hereby
designated the Police Commissioner. The Police Commissioner shall have
general cognizance and coordination with the Police Department and
thereby report to the Police Safety Committee and the Borough Council.
The Police Safety Committee and the Police Commissioner shall serve at
the pleasure of the Council and shall be subject to removal by the Council
without cause.
§ 39-4. Ranking of members.
A. Chief of Police.
B. Police officers shall rank as follows:
§ 37-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-4
1:125
§ 39-5. Probationary period for patrol officers.
§ 39-6. Age and physical requirements.
To be appointed as a member of the Police Department, an individual must:
§ 39-7. General requirements.
(1) Captain.
(2) Lieutenant.
(3) Sergeant.
(4) Patrol officer.
C. Dispatchers, police matrons and other civilian employees of the Police
Department shall not be ranked and shall not be members of the Police
Department but shall be governed by the provisions of this chapter,
state statutes in effect and the Borough's Personnel Manual.35
A. Each person newly appointed to the Department shall first be appointed
as a probationary police officer for one year from the date of the
appointment unless said person has served in another Police
Department successfully within the State of New Jersey for a period of
no less than one year and has already been certified as a PTC officer.
The probationary period for officers with experience may be reduced by
resolution for a period of no less than six months. At the termination of
said probationary period, the officer shall upon affirmative vote of the
Council become a permanent police officer, which shall require a formal
resolution by the Borough Council.
B. Any officer at the termination of the probation period who fails to obtain
an affirmative vote by the Council and an affirmative recommendation
of the Chief of Police shall be terminated.
A. Be between the age of 18 (unless provided by statute that the individual
must be at least 21) and not more than 35 years of age.
B. Have passed a physical fitness examination.
C. Have passed a psychological examination.
A. All police officers and the Police Chief hereafter appointed shall be
citizens of the United States, shall have earned a high school diploma or
its equivalent, shall be in sound mind and body and in good health, able
to intelligently read, write and speak the English language, be of good
moral character and have not been convicted of any criminal offense
involving moral turpitude.
35.Editor's Note: See Ch. 37, Personnel Policies.
§ 39-4 KENILWORTH CODE § 39-7
1:126
§ 39-8. Selection of Chief.
§ 39-9. Appointment and promotion of officers.
B. Upon appointment, the officer shall promptly become a resident of the
State of New Jersey. During the officer's entire tenure with the
Department, he or she shall maintain his or her New Jersey residence.
C. Except as provided by law or collective bargaining contract, any
permanent member of the Police Department who shall be absent from
duty without just cause or leave of absence for a continuous period of
five days shall, at the Borough's sole discretion, cease to be a member
of the Department.
A. The Mayor is solely responsible for recommending candidates for the
position of Police Chief. The selected individual shall be appointed with
the advice and consent of the Council. Recommendations for the
position of Chief of the Kenilworth Police Department are limited to the
current members of the Department who shall have served as a
sergeant for at least one year or be of a superior rank.
B. To be considered for the position, candidates for Police Chief must
express an interest, in writing, to the Mayor and Borough Clerk within
10 days after the posting by the Borough Clerk on the bulletin board at
the entrance to the Municipal Building and on the web page of the
intent to interview individuals for the position of Chief of Police. Each of
those individuals shall be offered the opportunity to be interviewed by
the Mayor.
A. The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Council, shall nominate
all new police officers to be hired by the Borough.
B. The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Council, shall nominate
permanent police officers for promotion. The Mayor may make the
nomination within a reasonable time when a position becomes available
and the Borough Treasurer/CFO has determined that sufficient funds
exist within the budget. A reasonable period for the Mayor and Borough
Treasurer/CFO to make such recommendation and determination shall
be within 60 days after a vacancy has been reported to the Council.
C. If the Borough Treasurer/CFO determines the availability of sufficient
funds, and the Mayor fails to nominate an individual within 30 days
after the affirmative determination has been made by the Borough
Treasurer/CFO, then the Council may nominate an individual for
promotion, and upon a majority vote with no fewer than four affirmative
votes of the Council, an officer may be promoted.
D. In the event of a promotion to a higher position, the lower rank of the
person promoted shall not be considered vacant until such officer so
promoted shall express, in writing to the Chief and the appropriate
authority, acceptance of the promotion.
§ 39-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-9
1:127
E. All promotions to a superior position shall be made from within the
membership of the Kenilworth Police Department as constituted at the
time of such promotion and shall be made based upon the results of the
following promotion procedures:
(1) Eligibility.
(a) Except for the promotion to sergeant, to be eligible for
promotion, the officer shall be in the current rank for no less
than one year within the Department;
(b) Promotion to the rank of sergeant requires five or more years
of service within the Department; and
(c) In the event that no one who meets the foregoing eligibility
requirements is found to be satisfactory to the Borough
Council for the promotion, then the next lower ranking officer
may also be considered eligible for the promotion.
(2) Notice of vacancy. [Amended 11-8-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-13]
(a) When the Chief of Police is aware of a vacancy or a pending
vacancy of a superior officer (other than the Chief) as
determined by the Table of Organization as set forth in § 15-2,
the Chief shall report to the Police Commissioner that expected
date of vacancy;
(b) Selection of candidates; interviews.
[1] Upon receipt of the notice of an intended vacancy, the
Chief of Police shall post a notice to all personnel
describing the position that may open within the
Department and requesting interested parties to contact
his office, in writing, within 20 days of the posting and
include a resume. The Police Commissioner shall then,
within 40 days after the posting, convene a meeting of the
Department of Public Safety with the Chief of Police. At the
meeting, the Chief will present the names of all officers
that have expressed an interest and are eligible for the
anticipated vacancy.
[2] The Committee, with the Chief, shall examine each of the
applicants' knowledge and understanding of any topics
enumerated in § 39-9E(2)(c). The Committee, with the
Chief or designee of Council if a member of the Committee
is unavailable, after interviewing and questioning the
candidates, will provide the names of the three top choices
by consensus in the order of their preference to the
Borough Clerk for the dissemination to the entire Council
along with their resumes. The entire Council may elect to
interview the candidates or proceed as it sees fit to
promote based upon the Public Safety Committee's and
§ 39-9 KENILWORTH CODE § 39-9
1:128
the Chief's recommendation and thus avoid any formal
testing as provided for in this chapter.
(c) The Chief of Police with the appropriate authority or his/her
designee shall prepare a one-hundred-question test which may
be true or false and/or multiple-choice questions consisting of
the following topics:
[1] Kenilworth Police Department rules and regulations;
[2] Kenilworth Police Department standard operating
procedures;
[3] Ordinances for the Borough of Kenilworth;
[4] Criminal Code of the State of New Jersey (Title 2C);
[5] Motor vehicle laws of the State of New Jersey (Title 39);
[6] Attorney General Guidelines for Law Enforcement;
[7] Domestic violence laws and procedures;
[8] Megan's Law;
[9] Duties and responsibilities of the position; and
[10] Knowledge of cultural diversity and people skills.
(d) All tests shall be graded together by the Police Chief and
Borough Clerk within 14 days after the administration of the
test and the results made available to the individuals
participating and the Police Safety Committee for their review.
(3) Candidate review and selection.
(a) All candidates who have scored 75% or greater shall be
considered eligible for promotion.
(b) If the test has been administered within two years prior to the
posting for the same level position, then only those candidates
who had successfully completed the test shall initially be
considered, and no further test will be administered. Upon
recommendation of the Police Chief, the two-year period may
be extended for up to one additional year by a resolution of the
Borough Council.
(c) The Chief of Police shall review the officers' prior performance,
credentials, seniority, and demonstrated ability to work well
with the community.
(d) The Chief of Police shall meet with the Public Safety
Committee to review and discuss recommendations for
promotion. Along with his/her recommendations, at said
meeting, he/she shall make available personnel, disciplinary
§ 39-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-9
1:129
§ 39-10. (Reserved)36
§ 39-11. (Reserved)37
§ 39-12. Duties of captains, lieutenants and sergeants.
The minimum duties of the captains, lieutenants and sergeants shall be to:
and reprimand files for all the officers who have scored 75% or
greater.
(e) The Chief of Police, after meeting with the Public Safety
Committee, shall thereafter at a regularly scheduled Council
meeting make a recommendation to the Borough Council
within 45 days after the completion of the review with the
Public Safety Committee.
(f) The Council is not bound by the Police Chief's recommendation
for the promotion, but if the Council elects not to promote the
person(s) recommended, the Council may discuss with the
Police Chief the reasons for the rejection or reservations
associated with the candidate for promotion.
(g) The Council may then promote the applicant so nominated by
the Chief of Police, by majority vote, or proceed to consider
other officers.
(h) In the event that the person selected by the Chief of Police is
not accepted by the majority of the Council, the Chief of Police
shall select another individual for promotion consideration and
advise the Public Safety Committee within 30 days.
(i) Notwithstanding the appointment or promotion procedures set
forth herein, the governing body may, in its sole discretion,
make promotions to fill vacancies, as the circumstances may
warrant, from any other member of the Police Department.
A. Have immediate charge of patrol officers.
B. Ensure that they are properly instructed and on alert in performance of
duty; that they are clean, neat and properly uniformed; and that they
are relieved properly in accordance with the approved schedule.
C. Ensure that all Department premises and properties are safe, clean and
in working order.
D. Make reports to the member immediately preceding him/her in rank or,
in his/her absence, to the next superior officer or the Chief.
36.Editor's Note: Former § 39-10, Appeals of test results, was repealed 11-8-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-13.
37.Editor's Note: Former § 39-11, Duties and responsibilities of Chief, was repealed
11-8-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-13.
§ 39-9 KENILWORTH CODE § 39-13
1:130
§ 39-13. Minimum duties of regular members.
The minimum duties of every regular member of the Department shall
include and be limited to the following:
A. Preserve the public peace; protect life and property; detect, arrest and
prosecute offenders of the laws of New Jersey and the ordinances of the
Borough of Kenilworth; direct and control traffic; provide attendance
and protection during emergencies; provide appearances in court;
cooperate with all other law enforcement agencies; and provide
training for the efficiency of its members and officers.38
B. Carry out the policies and orders of the Chief of Police and as specified
in the rules and regulations as promulgated.
C. Devote his/her whole time and attention to the service of the
Department, being expressly prohibited from following any other
calling or being engaged in any other businesses, unless he/she
receives the consent of the Chief of Police, and before such consent
shall be given, the Chief of Police shall be satisfied that the employment
shifts or routine schedule of duties shall not be disrupted, and unless
the work is of such a nature that it does not in any degree impair the
physical ability or mental alertness of the particular person from
properly performing his/her duties as a member of the Police
Department. Although certain hours are allocated to regular tours of
duty, police officers are considered to be at all times on duty and must
respond promptly and any time their services are required. Nothing in
this subsection shall be considered to prohibit any member of the
Kenilworth Police Department from serving on the Kenilworth
Volunteer Fire Department and Rescue Squad, provided that any such
Kenilworth police officer shall only be engaged in Kenilworth Volunteer
Fire Department activities while the police officer is not on a regular
tour of duty for the Kenilworth Police Department.
D. Remain on duty until properly relieved.
E. Watch all persons passing, especially strangers, and, if possible, fix in
mind such impressions as will enable him/her to recognize persons
accused of crime.
F. Take notice of all automobiles, trucks, and other vehicles, especially at
night, and if anything suspicious is observed to stop the same and
satisfy himself/herself that they are engaged in legitimate pursuits.
G. Report daily any accidents or unusual incidents to headquarters, in
writing.
H. Duly report all streetlights and traffic control devices that are unlit or in
any way out of order.
38.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:14-152.
§ 39-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-13
1:131
§ 39-14. Special law enforcement officers and auxiliary police.
[Amended 9-12-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-12]
The title of "Special Law Enforcement Officer" is established in Article I,
§ 39-14.
I. Report all matters affecting streets, such as openings, obstructions,
etc., and see that permits accompany the work and that the proper
protection thereof is provided.
J. Examine all activities to be licensed and report lack of proper licenses
or failure to conform therewith.
K. To the utmost of his/her power, prevent the commission of assaults and
breaches of the peace and, by his/her vigilance, render it extremely
difficult for anyone to commit a crime.
L. If on patrol duty, call headquarters on relieving and being relieved.
M. Have his/her shield and weapon at hand at all times and be always
ready to perform such duties as may be required of him/her.
N. When off duty, keep headquarters advised as to where and how he/she
may be communicated with.
O. Keep his/her uniforms cleaned and pressed and his/her equipment
clean and in order at all times.
P. Testifying for the defendant. Any employee subpoenaed to testify for the
defense or against the municipality or Department in any hearing or
trial shall notify the appropriate supervisor immediately upon receipt of
the subpoena.
Q. Truthfulness. Employees are required to be truthful at all times,
whether under oath or not.
R. Civil actions; subpoenas. Employees shall not volunteer to testify in civil
actions arising out of Department employment and shall not testify
unless subpoenaed. If the subpoena arises out of Department
employment or if employees are informed that they are a party to a civil
action arising out of Department employment, they shall immediately
notify the appropriate supervisor.
S. Civil depositions and affidavits. Employees shall confer with the
appropriate supervisor before giving a deposition or affidavit on a civil
case relating to their police employment.
T. Civil actions; expert witnesses. Employees shall not volunteer or agree
to testify as expert witnesses in civil actions without the prior written
approval of the County Prosecutor.
A. Borough of Kenilworth authorizes the use of special law enforcement
officers to assist the regular Police Department in the performance of
§ 39-13 KENILWORTH CODE § 39-14
1:132
its duties and responsibilities subject to the eligibility criteria and
limitations set forth in the Special Law Enforcement Officers Act,
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.10 et seq. No special law enforcement officers shall
be appointed to any term exceeding one year.
(1) No special law enforcement officer, by virtue of his/her
appointment as such, shall be or become a regular member of the
Police Department.
(2) Special law enforcement officers are considered at-will part-time
employees and can be terminated for cause after adequate hearing,
unless the appointment is for four months or less, in which event
the appointment may be revoked without cause or hearing (N.J.S.A.
40A:14-146.14).
(3) Every special law enforcement officer, while on duty, shall abide by
all the rules and regulations of the Police Department and those
policies, general order or standard operating procedures
established by the Chief of Police.
B. Qualifications. No person shall be appointed as a special law
enforcement officer unless the person:
(1) Is legally permitted to work in the United States;
(2) Is a resident of the State of New Jersey during his/her term of
appointment;
(3) Is able to read, write and speak the English language well and
intelligently and has a high school diploma or its equivalent;
(4) Is of sound body and of good health;
(5) Is of good moral character;
(6) Has not been convicted of any offense involving dishonesty or that
which would make him/her unfit to serve as a special law
enforcement officer.
C. Duties; classification of special law enforcement officers. There shall be
the following class of special police officers pursuant to law:
(1) Class 3. Officers of this class must be a retired law enforcement
officer under the age of 65, who had retired from his/her agency in
good standing and possess a valid New Jersey Police Training
Commission basic police officer certification. Such Class 3 officers
must be physically capable of performing the functions of the
position in accordance with New Jersey Police Training
Commission guidelines. Such Class 3 officers are authorized to
exercise powers and duties commensurate with those of a regular
police officer. The use of a firearm by such officer may only be
authorized upon successful completion of training and instruction
as required by law. The Chief of Police may authorize the use of
§ 39-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-14
1:133
§ 39-15. Conduct of members.
In addition to standard operating procedure requirements, members of the
Police Department shall not:
mechanical force weapons, but such special law enforcement
officers must train and demonstrate proficiency with such
mechanical force weapons with the same frequency as regular
police officers.
D. Appointment.
(1) Class 3 special law enforcement officers shall be nominated by the
Chief of Police and approved by the Borough Council for one-year
terms commencing on September 1 of each year and running until
August 31 of the year.
(2) Precertification standards shall be established by the Chief of
Police and provided to each applicant.
A. Leave their post, either without good and sufficient reason or without
reporting such action to headquarters at the first opportunity.
B. Converse with citizens or with each other for a period of time exceeding
five minutes, unless upon police business.
C. Lounge or slouch or have coats or shirts unbuttoned when on duty, and
their shoes shall always be shined.
D. Smoke when on duty in uniform.
E. Release any prisoner without due authority or permit any prisoner to
escape.
F. Willfully or through neglect suffer any property of the Department to be
lost, spoiled, or damaged or wrongfully disposed of.
G. Enter a public place where intoxicating liquors are sold while in
uniform or on duty except in the proper performance of duty.
H. Consume any intoxicating liquor or intoxicating beverage while in
uniform or on duty except in the performance of their duties.
I. Report to duty while being intoxicated or under the influence of a
controlled substance so as to interfere with the performance of the
duties of a police officer.
J. Exercise the authority vested in their position that would be
inconsistent with the obligations imposed upon them by their accepting
a position as a member of the Kenilworth Police Department.
K. Commit excessive or unexcused absenteeism from their duties as a
police officer.
§ 39-14 KENILWORTH CODE § 39-15
1:134
§ 39-16. Reasons for discipline.
Members of the Police Department shall be subject to disciplinary measures
as may be reasonably necessary. Reasons for discipline include, but are not
limited to, any of the following offenses:
L. Be candidates for or hold office in an elective public position or political
organization within or inclusive of the jurisdiction in which they are
employed unless authorized to do so in writing by the County
Prosecutor.
M. Engage in political activity while on duty or in uniform or so as to
impact the operation of the Department.
N. Engage in polling duties except in the performance of their official
duties.
O. Display or distribute political material on any government property or
in their uniform or while exposing their shield or gun.
P. Distribute political material as to the municipality of Kenilworth or the
County of Union or the State of New Jersey wherein one represents
oneself as a member of the Police Department.
Q. Abuse the authority or trust delegated to them so as to diminish the
public trust in the Police Department.
A. Intoxication while on duty or in uniform.
B. Willful disobedience of orders.
C. Indecent or profane or harsh language, immorality or lewdness.
D. Disrespect to the superior officer in rank or to any member of the
Borough Council.
E. Unnecessary violence towards prisoners.
F. Leaving his/her post without just cause.
G. Absence without leave.
H. Sleeping on duty or neglect of duty.
I. Incompetency, lack of energy, or incapacity, mental or physical.
J. Committing an offense punishable under the laws or statutes of the
United States, the State of New Jersey or any other state, or municipal
ordinances within the State of New Jersey.
K. Disclosing to persons outside the Department any confidentially
proposed action of the Department or any confidential orders of the
Chief, Commissioner, Police Safety Committee or Borough Council.
§ 39-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-16
1:135
§ 39-17. Punishment upon disobedience.
Any members of the Police Department who shall willfully disobey any
provisions of this chapter or any rule or regulations duly issued under
authority of this chapter shall be subject to summary suspension by the
Chief and, after hearing, if demanded, shall be subject to reprimand, loss
of vacation days, loss of pay, reduction of rank, suspension without pay,
dismissal or restoration to duty, as the Borough Council may, by resolution,
determine.
§ 39-18. Membership in certain organizations prohibited.
No members of the Police Department shall be or become a member of
any subversive organization or any organization affiliated with another
organization which holds, claims or exercises the right to demand of any
of its membership obedience to an order to strike or cease work for any
cause or to disrupt the government of the United States by violence. Upon
satisfactory proof to the Borough Council that any member of the
Department has violated the provisions of this rule, it shall be the duty
of the Borough Council to immediately discharge such member from the
L. Conduct unbecoming a police officer or conduct subversive to good
order and discipline of the Department.
M. Absence from his/her post.
N. Publicly commenting disrespectfully on the official actions of superior
officers, members of the Borough Council or other Borough officials.
O. Not properly patrolling his/her post.
P. Failure to make reports.
Q. Untruthfulness, oral or written, with regard to his/her duties as an
officer or as a member of the public.
R. Recklessly creating a condition without just cause so as to harm an
individual or oneself.
S. Failure to uniformly apply the laws and regulations of the state without
showing favoritism or disrespect to a group or individual based upon
race, creed, religion or sexual orientation.
T. Soliciting or accepting goods or services from individuals or businesses
for less than the same amount paid by the general public because of his/
her position as a police officer.
U. Violation or disregard of Department rules and procedures.
V. Repeated violations. Repeated violations of the rules of conduct shall be
indicative of employees' disregard for their duty and may be cause for
dismissal. This shall apply regardless of the type or severity of the
offenses.
§ 39-16 KENILWORTH CODE § 39-18
1:136
Department, pending further investigation if challenged within 10 days
after the discharge.
§ 39-19. Police training course required.
No person shall hereafter be given or accept a permanent appointment
as a police officer in the Borough of Kenilworth unless such person has
successfully completed a police training course at a police academy
approved and authorized by the Police Training Commission in the
Department of Law and Public Safety of the State of New Jersey pursuant
to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 52:17B-66 et seq., as may be amended.
§ 39-20. Temporary appointments.
This chapter shall not prohibit the giving or accepting of a probationary or
temporary appointment as a police officer for a period not to exceed one
year, provided the person has completed the police training course.
§ 39-21. Prerequisite to training course; leave of absence.
No person shall be permitted to take a police training course unless he/she
holds a probationary or temporary appointment as a police officer in the
Borough of Kenilworth, and such appointees shall be entitled to a leave of
absence with pay during the period of the police training course.
§ 39-22. Effect on prior provisions.
All articles, sections, subsections, paragraphs and other provisions of
Chapter 39 not specifically affected by the above amendment and
modification shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 39-23. Severability.
If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, sentence, phrase or provision
of this chapter is declared unconstitutional or invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions
of this chapter.
§ 39-24. Repealer.
All Borough ordinances and parts of ordinances that are inconsistent with
this chapter are hereby repealed.
§ 39-25. When effective.
This chapter shall become effective after final passage, adoption and
publication as required by law.
§ 39-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-25
1:137
Chapter 41
RECREATION, DEPARTMENT OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Entertainment and amusement places — See
Ch. 87.
Fees for recreation programs — See Ch. 91,
Art. III.
Use of municipal buildings — See Ch. 131.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 141.
Tennis courts — See Ch. 181.
§ 39-25 KENILWORTH CODE § 39-25
1:138
ARTICLE I
Establishment; Operation
§ 41-1. Establishment.
There is hereby established a Department of Recreation within the Borough
of Kenilworth.
§ 41-2. Recreation Committee; membership; appointment by Mayor;
terms; vacancies.
§ 41-3. Recreation Director; term; responsibilities.
A. The Recreation Committee shall oversee the Department of Recreation
and shall consist of 15 voting members, all of whom shall be residents of
the Borough of Kenilworth, and a nonvoting member of the governing
body who shall preferably be the current Chairperson of the Fire and
Recreation Committee. [Amended 4-13-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-04;
amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
B. The Mayor shall appoint the members of the Committee from among
the residents of the Borough of Kenilworth. All mayoral appointments
shall be with the consent of the governing body. The governing body
shall appoint from its members a Councilperson to chair the Fire and
Recreation Committee who shall sit on the Recreation Committee, ex
officio, and be a nonvoting member of the Committee. [Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
C. Terms. The terms of the Committee members shall be for three years,
beginning January 1 and ending December 31. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
D. (Reserved)39
E. Vacancies shall be for the unexpired term of the member and shall be
filled by appointment of the Mayor with the consent of the governing
body. [Added 2-13-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-1; amended 4-13-2011
by Ord. No. 2011-04]
A. There shall be a Recreation Director appointed by the Mayor with the
consent of the governing body.
B. The term of the Director shall be for one year, beginning January 1 and
ending December 31. Vacancies in the position of Recreation Director
shall be filled by the Mayor with the consent of the governing body and
shall be for the unexpired term. If the position has not been filled by
January 1, the Director shall continue to serve until a new appointment
is made. [Amended 3-10-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-2]
39.Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, concerning the appointment of two alternate
members by the Mayor, as amended, was repealed 4-13-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-04.
§ 41-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 41-3
1:139
§ 41-4. Bylaws. [Amended 4-13-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-04]
C. Responsibilities. The Recreation Director shall be responsible for the
day-to-day operation of the Recreation Department and shall have the
following responsibilities. The Recreation Director shall:
(1) Establish, coordinate and run all Borough-sponsored recreation
programs.
(2) Prepare and submit to the governing body the Department's annual
itemized budget recommendations, which shall include cost
estimates for current and future programs.
(3) Manage all public relations and communication of the Department.
(4) Establish, with the advice and consent of the Committee and
approval by resolution of the governing body, rules, regulations and
procedures to be followed by all Recreation Department employees
and personnel in carrying out their individual duties and
responsibilities.
(5) Approve of and coordinate the use of all Borough-owned
recreational facilities which shall include, but not be limited to, the
Recreation Center, parks and ball fields.
(6) Attend regular and special meetings of the Recreation Committee
and establish the agenda for such meetings.
(7) Present, in person, quarterly reports to the Mayor and Council on
the state of the Department.
(8) Meet and confer, in the Director's discretion, with recreation
directors of other communities to discuss new ideas and programs.
(9) Prepare an annual report to the Mayor and Council which shall
include, but not be limited to, recommendations for future
improvements and programs for the Department and facilities.
A. The Recreation Committee shall prepare bylaws to govern the conduct
of its members, establish officers and positions and govern the
operation of the Recreation Department. The Committee may adopt the
bylaws by a two-thirds majority vote of the full authorized membership.
The bylaws shall not become effective until approved by resolution of
the Mayor and Council. Any amendments to the bylaws, once adopted
and approved by the Mayor and Council, may only be by affirmative
vote of 2/3 of the full authorized membership and must be approved by
resolution of the Mayor and Council.
B. In the event of any inconsistency or conflict between the bylaws of the
Recreation Committee and this article, the provisions of this article
shall prevail.
§ 41-3 KENILWORTH CODE § 41-5
1:140
§ 41-5. Rules of protocol. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
Robert's Rules of Order, newly revised, shall be observed and followed in
conducting all meetings of the Recreation Committee.
§ 41-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 41-5
1:141

ARTICLE II
Use of Recreational Facilities and Buildings
[Added 2-25-1998 by Ord. No. 98-3]
§ 41-6. Authorization required.
A. Any nonprofit organization, association, league or club located within
the Borough of Kenilworth seeking to reserve the use of the Recreation
Center solely and exclusively for the use of its members and/or guests
may do so by submitting a written request to the Director not less than
seven calendar days preceding the day requested to be reserved. Any
such written request shall be submitted on application forms that may
be obtained from the Director and shall contain the following
information: [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
(1) Name, address and telephone number of the person or
organization.
(2) Name, address and telephone number of a responsible person(s)
(must be a real person).
(3) Date, time and approximate number of hours of use requested.
(4) Description of the event for which the facility is being requested.
(5) If the intended use is in the nature of a youth dance, party or
similar event, the applicant shall provide the names, addresses and
telephone numbers of the adult chaperons who will be in
attendance.
(6) Time of day the applicant may pick up the key to the facility.
B. The Director shall review the application for completeness and, if found
to be in order, authorize the use of the Recreation Center as requested
by signing and dating the application. The Director or his/her designee
shall, not more than 24 hours prior to the authorized use of the facility,
inspect the premises with the applicant and note on the application any
existing damage or defects to the building, fixtures or personal property
requested for use. The Director shall then give the signed authorization
to the applicant and retain a copy for Department files. [Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
C. At the time designated on the authorization, the applicant or his/her
designee shall present the authorization to the officer on duty at the
front desk of the Police Department. The police officer on duty shall
review the authorization and, if found to be in order and signed by the
Director, shall release the key to the applicant, note on the application
the time the key was released and retain the authorization form at the
desk.
§ 41-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 41-7
1:143
§ 41-7. Inspection of facility prior to use; return of key; report of
damages; willful damage.
A. Once the applicant has obtained the key to the facility, the applicant
shall make an initial inspection of the premises, fixtures and personal
property to determine if they are in the same condition as noted on the
authorization form. If the applicant discovers a condition not noted on
the authorization form, the applicant shall notify the police officer on
the desk immediately, who in turn shall prepare the necessary incident
report. After use of the facility, the applicant shall clean the premises,
restore all fixtures and personal property to its proper location, secure
and lock the facility and return the key to the police desk. The officer at
the desk shall note on the authorization the time the key is returned and
deliver the authorization to the Borough Clerk at the beginning of the
next regular workday. The Clerk shall maintain a record of all such
forms.
B. Any damage caused to the premises, fixtures or personal property shall
be reported to the Police Department immediately. The applicant shall
provide the Department with a description of the damage, how it
occurred and the name(s) of the person(s) responsible. The Police
Department shall prepare the appropriate incident report and provide
the Recreation Director with a copy of the report. The Director shall
report the incident to Council liaison who in turn shall report the matter
to the governing body. The governing body shall then determine what
action, if any, is appropriate under the circumstances.
C. The Director shall inspect the premises, fixtures and personal property
within 24 hours after the key is returned by the applicant unless the
premises is authorized for the use of another before the expiration of
such twenty-four-hour period, in which case the inspection shall take
place not less than one hour prior to the next authorized use. Any
damage to the premises beyond that noted in the initial authorization or
subsequently reported by the applicant pursuant to Subsection B of this
section shall be documented by the Director, and the applicant shall be
notified accordingly. The applicant shall assist the Director in
determining the cause of the damage and the persons involved.
D. Any person who willfully damages or defaces Borough property may be
prosecuted in the Municipal Court and, if convicted, shall be subject to
the penalties provided for in Chapter 1, Article I, General Penalty, of the
Borough of Kenilworth Code. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
E. Nothing herein contained shall prohibit, limit or prevent the
prosecution of violators of this section under any other ordinance of the
Borough or law of this state.
§ 41-7 KENILWORTH CODE § 41-8
1:144
§ 41-8. Prohibited use of recreational facilities and buildings.
The use of any recreational facility or building for any type of political
or political party function or activity is hereby prohibited. Any person,
organization, association, league or club which violates this section shall
thereafter be barred from any further use of Borough-owned buildings or
facilities.
§ 41-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 41-8
1:145
Chapter 43
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
[The salaries and compensation of the various officers and
employees of the Borough of Kenilworth are set by the Borough
Council by ordinance. The current Salary Ordinance, as amended, is
on file in the office of the Borough Clerk, available for inspection
during regular office hours.]
Chapter 45
SEWERAGE AUTHORITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 158.
§ 41-8 KENILWORTH CODE § 41-8
1:146
ARTICLE I
Authorization
[Adopted 5-22-1951 by Ord. No. 274]
§ 45-1. Authorization to enter into agreement.
This Borough shall, and is hereby authorized to, enter into an agreement
with the Boroughs of Garwood and Roselle Park, the City of Rahway, the
Town of Westfield and the Townships of Cranford, Clark, Springfield and
Woodbridge, municipal corporations of the State of New Jersey all situate
in the County of Union except the Township of Woodbridge which is situate
in the County of Middlesex, superseding the present contracts therewith
providing for the maintenance and operation of the Rahway Valley Joint
Meeting trunk sewer and sewage treatment plant and providing, among
other things, for the formation of a sewerage authority pursuant to the
Sewerage Authorities Law of the State of New Jersey and, on certain terms,
the conveyance and transfer to said sewerage authority, when formed, of
the right, title and interest of this Borough in and to certain real and
personal property now under the control of said Rahway Valley Joint
Meeting.
§ 45-2. Mayor authorized to act on behalf of Borough.
Said agreement shall be substantially in the form thereof on file in the
office of the Borough Clerk and hereby approved, and the Mayor be and
hereby is authorized and directed to execute on behalf of the Borough said
agreement under the Corporate Seal of the Borough, which shall be affixed
and attested by the Borough Clerk, and to deliver the same for and on behalf
of the Borough.
§ 45-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 45-2
1:147

ARTICLE II
Creation of Rahway Valley Sewerage Authority
[Adopted 5-22-1951 by Ord. No. 273]
§ 45-3. Formation of Authority.
This Borough, acting in concert with and upon the consideration of the
adoption of parallel ordinances in the Boroughs of Garwood and Roselle
Park, the City of Rahway, the Town of Westfield and the Townships of
Cranford, Clark, Springfield and Woodbridge, municipal corporations of the
State of New Jersey all situate in the County of Union except the Township
of Woodbridge which is situate in the County of Middlesex, shall join with
said municipal corporations in the formation of a sewerage authority.
§ 45-4. Statutory authority.
Pursuant to the provisions of the Sewerage Authorities Law (P.L. 1946, c.
138) of the State of New Jersey,40 there is hereby created a public body
corporate and politic under the name and style of the "Rahway Valley
Sewerage Authority," the district of which, as defined in said Sewerage
Authorities Law, shall consist of the area within the territorial boundaries
of this Borough and the other municipal corporations named above. The
Rahway Valley Sewerage Authority hereby created is a sewerage authority
as contemplated and provided for by said Sewerage Authorities Law and
shall have and exercise all of the powers and perform all of the duties
provided for by said Sewerage Authorities Law and any other statutes
heretofore or hereafter enacted and applicable thereto.
§ 45-5. Membership.
The Rahway Valley Sewerage Authority shall consist of nine members, of
whom one shall be appointed by the governing body of this Borough and one
by the governing body of each of the other municipal corporations named
above, to serve for terms as in said statute provided.
§ 45-6. Compensation. [Amended 1-22-1980 by Ord. No. 80-2;
4-22-1998 by Ord. No. 98-1141]
No member shall receive greater compensation than at the rate of $100
per meeting for his or her attendance at regular or special meetings of the
Sewerage Authority, or committees thereof, and not more than $1,500 in
any calendar year, except that the Chairman/Chairwoman shall receive such
compensation as the Sewerage Authority shall fix, not to exceed $2,000
during his or her one-year term of office.
40.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:14A-1 et seq.
41.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that the compensation provided for herein
shall be retroactive to 1-1-1998.
§ 45-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 45-6
1:149
Chapter 46
(RESERVED)
Chapter 48
TRAFFIC BUREAU
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 39. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 190.
§ 48-1. Establishment.
There is hereby established a bureau to be known as the "Traffic Bureau" in
the Police Department of the Borough of Kenilworth.
§ 48-2. Membership.
Said Traffic Bureau shall consist of a superior officer and such other
members of the Police Department as may be deemed necessary.
§ 48-3. Supervisor.
The superior officer shall be in charge of the Bureau and he shall be
designated as the Supervisor of the Traffic Bureau.
§ 48-4. Duties.
Such Traffic Bureau shall perform the following duties:
A. It shall investigate any complaints concerning traffic and safety and
shall make recommendations from time to time to the Police
Commissioner of the Borough of Kenilworth through the Chief of Police.
B. It shall make a study of traffic conditions and make recommendations
concerning such traffic conditions.
C. It shall be the duty of the Supervisor to see that all members of the
Police Department are fully informed of all traffic regulations and
changes relating to all state laws and rules and regulations pertaining
to traffic.
D. The Supervisor shall see that all streets are properly marked and all
necessary or recommended signs are placed for proper traffic control,
in cooperation with the Public Works Chairperson.
E. The Supervisor shall see that all traffic laws and motor vehicle laws are
enforced at all times.
§ 45-6 KENILWORTH CODE § 48-4
1:150
§ 48-5. Designation of members and Supervisor.
The Supervisor and the members of the Traffic Bureau shall be designated
by the Chief of Police. The Chief of Police is authorized to make any change
of his designations of such Supervisor and members of said Bureau and
he shall report to the Police Commissioner and Police Safety Committee,
for their approval, the names of the persons so designated by him or any
changes in such designations.
§ 48-6. Employees subject to additional rules and regulations.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
All employees of the Traffic Bureau, in addition to the above-mentioned
duties, shall be subject to the rules and regulations of a police officer as
defined in Chapter 39, Police Department, of the Code of the Borough of
Kenilworth.
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 55
ALARM DEVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 39.
§ 55-1. Use of central alarm panel; order to connect; penalty.
F. The Supervisor shall present a report to the Chief of Police on the first
day of each month.
G. It shall be the duty of the Supervisor to keep a record as to the date of
the installation of all traffic markers, signs, equipment and major
repairs to all markers, signs and traffic equipment, all in cooperation
with the Public Works Chairperson.
H. All complaints concerning traffic shall be made to such Supervisor, and
he shall record such complaints and shall make an investigation of such
complaints and, where necessary, present the same to the Police
Committee for its recommendations or decisions.
I. At the request of the Chief of Police or on its own initiative, the Traffic
Bureau shall have power to examine any matter relating to traffic or the
regulations thereof and to make recommendations thereon to the
Mayor and Council of the Borough of Kenilworth through the Chief of
Police.
§ 48-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-1
1:151
§ 55-2. Connection to consolidated panel.
In lieu of purchasing any such central consolidated panel or unit, any party
desiring to make use thereof shall arrange with the person owning such
equipment for the connection thereof and for the charge for the use of said
connection and the continued use of the same.
§ 55-3. Service fee. [Amended 9-11-1979 by Ord. No. 79-19]
A. No person shall install any burglar alarm equipment or fire alarm
equipment in police headquarters or fire headquarters for the purpose
of transmitting any signals or alarms to the attention of the Police
Department from a location in the Borough of Kenilworth outside police
headquarters for the purpose of obtaining Police or Fire Department
response thereto unless the same shall be connected to and used in one
central consolidated alarm panel or console provided for by the
Borough of Kenilworth.
B. Whenever any burglar alarm equipment maintained within the Borough
of Kenilworth shall emit more than two unwarranted or false alarms in
any one calendar month, the Chief of Police shall issue a written order
directing the person, firm or corporation owning or controlling said
equipment to connect the same to the central consolidated panel or
console provided by the Borough of Kenilworth and pay the charges
therefor as specified in this chapter, both within 30 days after receipt of
such order. Any person, firm or corporation failing to obey such order
shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500. [Added 10-24-1978
by Ord. No. 78-32]
A. Each person, firm or corporation that has the use of said equipment or
any such similar equipment, either directly or indirectly through the
line or connection of any person, firm or corporation supplying fire or
burglary or holdup or other similar service, shall each pay to the
Borough of Kenilworth an annual charge as set forth in Chapter 91,
Fees, for a period from January 1 through December 31 of each year,
and in the event of an installation or commencement of service for the
benefit of any person, firm or corporation during the year, said sum
shall be paid for the balance of said calendar year for which the service
shall have been added.
B. Said fee shall be paid prior to January 10 of each year for all persons,
firms or corporations who or which continue to receive such service
annually, and the fee shall be paid for any person, firm or corporation
commencing service within the calendar year prior to the initiation of
such service for any new person, firm or corporation commencing to
receive the service. The fee to be paid hereunder shall not be construed
to mean a fee for the person, firm or corporation that supplies or
furnishes fire or burglary or holdup systems or services, but the fee
shall apply to and be paid for each and every person, firm or
corporation that subscribes or pays for any service to or through such
§ 55-1 KENILWORTH CODE § 55-3
1:152
§ 55-4. Penalty for false alarms. [Added 10-24-1978 by Ord. No.
78-32]
A person, firm or corporation shall pay an additional fee of $25 for a
third false or unwarranted alarm originating from its location during one
calendar month and a fee of $25 for each additional false or unwarranted
alarm originating at its location during the same calendar month.
§ 55-5. Request to discontinue.
Whenever sufficient cause appears, the Borough of Kenilworth shall have
the right to request any person or persons, firm or corporation using said
equipment to discontinue the use of the same upon refunding the unused
proportionate share of the annual charge.
Chapter 57
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees and licenses — See Ch. 91, Art. I.
servicing person, firm or corporation or that may subscribe and receive
such service directly.
§ 55-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-5
1:153

ARTICLE I
Licenses and Regulations
§ 57-1. Purpose. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
This chapter is for the purpose of fixing license fees and regulating the
sale of alcoholic beverages in the Borough of Kenilworth, County of Union
and State of New Jersey, in accordance with the provisions of an act of
the Legislature now embodied and known as "Chapter 1 of Title 33 of the
Revised Statutes of 1937," and in accordance with the rules and regulations
promulgated or to be promulgated by the Director of the Division of
Alcoholic Beverage Control applicable hereto and in accordance with the
rules and regulations existing herein or hereafter adopted by competent
municipal authority not inconsistent with said Act or said rules and
regulations of said State Director.
§ 57-2. General restriction.
It shall be unlawful to sell or distribute alcoholic beverages otherwise than
as provided in this article and/or said Act.
§ 57-3. Licensing authority.
The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Kenilworth, County of Union,
being the governing body of said municipality, shall constitute the authority
for the distribution or issuance of licenses hereunder.
§ 57-4. Fees.
§ 57-5. Hours of sale.
A. The license fees to be paid for the licenses enumerated hereunder shall
be as provided in Chapter 91, Fees and Licenses.
(1) Plenary retail consumption license.
(2) Plenary retail distribution license.
(3) Club license.
B. All license fees shall be paid in cash or by certified check to the order of
the Borough of Kenilworth, New Jersey, and all such receipts shall be
turned over by the Borough Clerk when and as received to the
Treasurer. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
C. The Borough Clerk is hereby designated as the proper person to sign all
licenses on behalf of the Borough Council.
A. No licensee shall sell, serve or deliver or allow, permit or suffer the sale,
service or delivery of any alcoholic beverage or allow the consumption
§ 57-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 57-5
1:155
§ 57-6. Display of license.
Every license shall be exposed to public view in a conspicuous place in the
place licensed, and any failure to do so shall be presumptive evidence that
the place where alcoholic beverages are being sold is unlicensed.
§ 57-7. Limit of licenses; exception.
§ 57-8. Renewals and transfers.
Renewals or transfers of licenses shall not be granted as a matter of course
or right. Prior improper conduct on the part of any licensee or the prior
violation of the provisions of this article shall be justifiable cause for refusal
to grant the renewal or transfer of any license to any person or place of ill
repute or questionable character.
of any alcoholic beverage on licensed premises on New Year's Day when
it is a Sunday between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon; on New
Year's Day when it is a weekday between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and
7:00 a.m.; and on other weekdays between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and
7:00 a.m. and on any other Sunday between 2:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon.
B. During the hours when sales of alcoholic beverages are prohibited, the
entire licensed premises shall also be closed, but this closing-ofpremises
requirement shall not apply to clubs [as set forth in N.J.S.A.
33:1-12(5) and State Regulation No. 7], restaurants and hotels, motels
and motor inns. The hours aforesaid shall be considered to indicate
prevailing time within the Borough of Kenilworth. [Amended at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
C. No patron shall remain on the licensed premises during the hours when
the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages is prohibited as defined
by Subsection A of this section. Any patron violating this section of the
chapter shall be subject to arrest and/or, upon conviction thereof,
subject to a fine or imprisonment, or both, as provided for in § 57-20 of
this chapter.
A. No more than 11 plenary retail consumption licenses and no more than
two plenary retail distribution licenses shall be in effect in this
municipality at any time.
B. Nothing in this article shall prevent the issuance in the Borough of
Kenilworth of a new plenary retail consumption license to a person or
corporation who or which operates a hotel, motel or motor inn
containing at least 50 sleeping rooms.
A. Each application for a license renewal and for a transfer of an existing
license shall furnish any and all requested information on a form
prepared by the Kenilworth Police Department and approved by the
Mayor and Council of the Borough of Kenilworth.
§ 57-5 KENILWORTH CODE § 57-8
1:156
§ 57-9. Identification.
Every employee of the licensee shall be photographed and fingerprinted by
the Kenilworth Police Department and shall receive an identification card,
and every employee shall wear, in a prominent and readily visible place,
said photograph identification card at all times while engaged with or in
the business of the licensee. No application for renewal or transfer shall be
acted upon until this provision is complied with. All new employees of the
licensee shall comply with this provision prior to commencing to work at
the licensee's premises. Each employee shall be rephotographed every five
years.
§ 57-10. Parking areas.
All parking areas owned or maintained by any licensee adjacent to the
licensed premises shall, during business hours, be sufficiently illuminated
so that persons occupying parked motor vehicles on said premises may be
readily visible. Every licensee shall maintain good order in said parking
areas and shall permit no disorderly conduct of any kind.
§ 57-11. Certain persons prohibited from premises.
No licensee shall allow, permit or suffer in or upon the licensed premises
any known criminals, gamblers, prostitutes, female impersonators or other
persons of ill repute, nor shall any licensee allow, permit or suffer the
licensed premises or the licensed business to be used in the furtherance or
aid of or in connection with any illegal activity or enterprise.
§ 57-12. Prohibited conduct.
No licensee shall allow, permit or suffer in or upon the licensed premises
any disturbances, lewdness, immoral activities, brawls or unnecessary
noises, or allow, permit or suffer the licensed place of business to be
conducted in such a manner as to become a nuisance.
§ 57-13. Gambling.
No licensee shall engage in or allow, permit or suffer any pool selling,
bookmaking or any playing for money, any card game, game of chance or
wagering on sporting events, pinball machine, pool, darts or any electronic
or mechanical device used on the licensed premises.
B. The Kenilworth Police Department shall promptly investigate and verify
all information on said form and shall furnish the results of its
investigation and any recommendations to the Mayor and Council of the
Borough of Kenilworth.
§ 57-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 57-14
1:157
§ 57-14. Music restrictions.
All jukeboxes, radios, televisions, coin-operated mechanical or electric
devices, bands and orchestras shall not be permitted by the licensee to play
or be played too loudly so as to constitute a nuisance.
§ 57-15. Inspections.
The Borough of Kenilworth Police Department's right to inspect licensed
premises and to enter the same at all times without a search warrant as
provided for by the laws of the State of New Jersey is hereby specifically
reserved.
§ 57-16. Open view of licensed premises.
No licensee shall sell, serve or deliver or allow, permit or suffer the sale,
service or delivery of any alcoholic beverage in any premises not open to
full view from the public thoroughfare or from adjacent rooms to which the
public is freely admitted, other than in premises for which club licenses
have been issued and in guest rooms and private dining rooms of hotels or
restaurants. All such premises shall be lighted sufficiently so that a full view
of the interior may be had at all hours from the public thoroughfare or from
adjacent rooms to which the public is freely admitted. Said area of viewing
shall not be less than 12 inches by 12 inches.
§ 57-17. Proximity to school or church restricted.
No licensed premises shall be located within 200 feet of any church, public
school or private school conducted not for profit pursuant to the terms,
definitions and restrictions as set forth in N.J.S.A. 33:1-76. The distance
separating the church or school shall be measured in the normal way a
pedestrian would lawfully walk from the nearest entrance to the nearest
entrance of the proposed licensed premises.
§ 57-18. Proximity to other licensed premises restricted.
No licensed premises shall be located within 200 feet of another licensed
premises. The distance separating the licensed premises is measured in the
normal way a pedestrian would lawfully walk from the nearest entrance of
one licensed premises to the nearest entrance of the premises sought to be
licensed. This section shall not apply to any presently licensed premises,
their renewals or transfers to a new ownership, but it shall apply to all
newly proposed licensed premises.
§ 57-19. Inactive license.
An inactive license shall be defined as a license not in substantial full-time
operation in connection with a licensed premises for the two immediately
preceding licensed terms. No inactive license shall be renewed except
pursuant to the terms and conditions of N.J.S.A. 33:1-12.39.
§ 57-14 KENILWORTH CODE § 57-20
1:158
§ 57-20. Violations and penalties. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
A. Any person who shall sell or distribute any alcoholic beverage in
violation of any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to the general penalty set forth in Chapter 1, Article
I, General Penalty, of the Borough of Kenilworth Code.
B. Any license issued pursuant to this article may be suspended or revoked
for violation of any of the provisions of this article or for violation of any
of the provisions of said Act or any of the rules or regulations
promulgated by the Director of the Division of Alcoholic Beverage
Control.
§ 57-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 57-20
1:159

ARTICLE II
Consumption by Minors
§ 57-21. Public properties and facilities. [Amended 6-13-2001 by
Ord. No. 2001-9]
It shall be unlawful for any person under the legal age to have, possess,
carry, distribute, transport or consume any alcoholic beverage on any public
street, highway, avenue, road or alley, in a public building or in any other
public place in the Borough of Kenilworth.
§ 57-22. Private property and facilities; exception; exemption.
[Amended 6-13-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-9]
§ 57-22.1. Exemption from prosecution. [Added at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person under the legal age to possess or
consume an alcoholic beverage on private property or within or on a
private facility unless that possession or consumption is in connection
with a religious observance, ceremony or rite or the underage person
possesses or consumes that beverage in the presence of and with the
permission of a parent, guardian or relative who is of legal age.
B. The possession or delivery of alcoholic beverages by an underage
person who is employed by an alcoholic beverage licensee and who, at
the time of possession or delivery of such alcoholic beverage, was
carrying out the duties of his or her employment shall be exempt from
the provisions of this section.
A. An underage person and one or two other persons acting in concert
with the underage person shall be immune from prosecution under
§ 57-22 if:
(1) One of the underage persons called 9-1-1 and reported that another
underage person was in need of medical assistance due to alcohol
consumption;
(2) The underage person who called 9-1-1 and, if applicable, one or two
other persons acting in concert with the underage person who
called 9-1-1 provided each of their names to the 9-1-1 operator;
(3) The underage person was the first person to make the 9-1-1 report;
and
(4) The underage person and, if applicable, one or two other persons
acting in concert with the underage person who made the 9-1-1 call
remained on the scene with the person under the legal age in need
of medical assistance until assistance arrived and cooperated with
medical assistance and law enforcement personnel on the scene.
§ 57-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 57-22.1
1:161
§ 57-23. Purchase for minors prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to purchase any alcoholic beverages
for the purpose of consumption of the same on any public street, highway,
avenue, road or alley, in or about any building or in any other public place
in the Borough of Kenilworth on behalf of any person under the legal age to
purchase alcoholic beverages.
§ 57-24. Purchase by minors prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for:
§ 57-25. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-13-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-9]
B. The underage person who received medical assistance as provided in
Subsection A also shall be immune from prosecution under § 57-22.
A. A person under the legal age for purchasing alcoholic beverages to
enter any premises licensed for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages for
the purpose of purchasing or having served or delivered to him or her
any alcoholic beverage.
B. A person under the legal age for purchasing alcoholic beverages to
consume any alcoholic beverage on premises licensed for the retail sale
of alcoholic beverages or to purchase, attempt to purchase or have
another purchase for him or her any alcoholic beverage.
C. Any person to misrepresent or misstate his or her age or the age of any
other person for the purpose of inducing any licensee or any employee
of any licensee to sell, serve or deliver any alcoholic beverage to a
person under the legal age for purchasing alcoholic beverages.
D. Any person to enter any premises licensed for the retail sale of alcoholic
beverages for the purpose of purchasing, or to purchase, alcoholic
beverages for another person who does not because of his age have the
right to purchase and consume alcoholic beverages.
A. Any person violating the provisions of § 57-21 of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to the general penalty set forth in
Chapter 1, Article I, General Penalty, of the Borough of Kenilworth
Code. This is in addition to any and all penalties as prescribed by and
set forth in N.J.S.A. 33:1-81. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
B. Any person violating the provisions of § 57-22 of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of $250 for a first offense and a
fine of $350 for any subsequent offense. In addition to a monetary
penalty, the court, in its discretion, may suspend the driving privileges
of a violator for a period of six months or, in the case of a violator under
the age of 17, increase the age at which time he or she may be eligible
§ 57-22.1 KENILWORTH CODE § 57-25
1:162
for a New Jersey driver's license from 17 years to 17 years and six
months.
§ 57-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 57-25
1:163

ARTICLE III
Consumption in Public
§ 57-26. General prohibition. [Amended 7-13-1993 by Ord. No.
93-20]
No person shall consume any alcoholic beverages on any public street,
highway, avenue, road or alley, at any public building, in the parking area
adjacent to any licensed premises for the sale of alcoholic beverages or in
any parked or moving motor vehicle, in any public park or in any other
public place in the Borough of Kenilworth except as otherwise provided in
§ 57-30 herein.
§ 57-27. Possession of open containers.
Any person in possession of any alcoholic beverage in any open container
or in any container whose original top or cover has been unscrewed or
removed shall be presumed to have consumed said alcoholic beverage at
the place of possession.
§ 57-28. Consumption in unlicensed premises or public place.
No person owning or operating any restaurant, dining room or other public
place where food or liquid refreshments are sold or served to the general
public and for which premises a license or permit authorizing the sale of
alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption has not been issued:
§ 57-29. Temporary permits.
A. Shall permit or allow the consumption of alcoholic beverages, other
than wine or a malt alcoholic beverage, in a portion of the premises
which is open to the public.
B. Shall charge any admission fee or cover, corkage or service charge or
advertise inside or outside of such premises that patrons may bring and
consume their own wine or malt alcoholic beverages in a portion of the
premises which is open to the public.
C. Shall permit or allow the consumption of wine and malt alcoholic
beverages at times or by persons to whom the service or consumption
of alcoholic beverages on licensed premises is prohibited by state or
municipal law or regulation, N.J.S.A. 2C:33-27. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
A. None of the foregoing provisions shall preclude the Division of Alcoholic
Beverage Control and/or the Mayor and Council from issuing a
temporary permit, not to exceed one day, authorizing the sale of
alcoholic beverages for consumption on a designated premises by civic,
religious or educational organizations or by any other organization
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 33:1-74. The fee for a one-day permit authorizing
the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption by civic, religious or
§ 57-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 57-29
1:165
§ 57-30. Sidewalk cafes. [Added 7-13-1993 by Ord. No. 93-20;
amended 5-24-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-14]
educational organizations shall be as set forth in Chapter 91, Fees
and Licenses, and the fee for a one-day permit authorizing such sale
by other organizations shall be as set forth in Chapter 91, Fees and
Licenses.
B. No temporary permit, which requires the approval of the Mayor and
Council, shall be issued unless the applicant has submitted the
appropriate application form and paid the appropriate fee at least 15
days prior to the next regularly scheduled public meeting of the Mayor
and Council preceding the effective date of the temporary permit. The
Kenilworth Police Department shall promptly investigate and verify all
information on said application form. The applicant shall comply with
all other requirements of this chapter, including § 57-5.
A. Any eating and drinking establishment, including a licensed
establishment pursuant to this chapter which is located in the BD
Boulevard Downtown District, may, upon application for and issuance of
a permit pursuant to this section, utilize part of the sidewalk in front of
its place of business for a sidewalk cafe. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
B. Operation of any sidewalk cafe shall be in accordance with this section
and shall be subject to supervision and enforcement by the officers of
the Borough Board of Health and Police Department.
C. Application for such permit shall be made to and such permits shall be
granted by the Borough Clerk. The application shall be accompanied by
a schematic diagram, showing the following:
(1) A description of the proposed design, seating capacity and location
of the sidewalk cafe, its dimensions and all temporary structures,
equipment, and apparatus to be used in connection with its
operation, including tables, temporary fences and barriers,
planters, serving carts, chairs, awnings, umbrellas, lighting,
electrical outlets, if any, and fire hydrant connections; and
(2) A diagram demonstrating that pedestrian traffic along the sidewalk
on which the sidewalk cafe is proposed to be located will in no way
be impeded. The diagram shall be referred to the Construction
Official, who shall thereupon recommend approval, disapproval or
modification of the diagram within 10 business days following the
submission.
D. A permit shall be granted only if the proposed sidewalk cafe conforms
to the following:
(1) The schematic diagram shall be approved by the Construction
Official.
§ 57-29 KENILWORTH CODE § 57-30
1:166
(2) The cafe shall be confined to the area directly in front of the
existing eating and drinking establishment. Tables may not be
placed between a sidewalk and the curb.
(3) Any cafe shall not interfere with access to the building entrance or
exit, any basement entrance or any fire hydrant, bus stop or public
alleyway or other public facility.
(4) A minimum of six paved feet of pedestrian usable unobstructed
sidewalk must remain open for pedestrian traffic.
(5) Applicants shall be required to submit proof of liability insurance
for the proposed sidewalk cafe, naming the Borough of Kenilworth
and Kenilworth Board of Health as an additional insured, with
minimum limits of liability of not less than $1,000,000 for all claims
for bodily injury or death of any person as a direct or indirect result
of the operation of the sidewalk cafe, or for injury to any person
occurring on the premises occupied by such cafe, and further
providing for the payment of not less than $50,000 to satisfy claims
for property damage as a direct or indirect result of the operation
of such cafe.
(6) No permit shall be issued unless the permittee shall have first
executed and filed with the Borough Clerk an indemnification
agreement, in the form prepared or approved by the Borough
Attorney, in which the permittee shall agree, in further
consideration of the issuance of the permit, to forever defend,
protect, indemnify and save harmless the Borough of Kenilworth,
its boards, officers, agents and employees, from and against any
and all claims, causes of action, injuries, losses, damages,
expenses, attorneys' fees, fees and costs arising out of or which
may arise out of, or be alleged to arise out of, the permittee's
operation of the sidewalk cafe, including without limitation repair
or reimbursement of any and all cost and expense arising from
damage to the sidewalk caused by operation of said cafe.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
E. All dishes, utensils, containers, tablecloths, napkins, cutlery and other
items used in the operation or decoration of the sidewalk cafe shall be
made of nondisposable and reusable materials. The furniture to be used
in the operation of the sidewalk cafe shall be of durable material, such
as sturdy vinyl/plastic, wrought iron or wood. The sidewalk area utilized
by the cafe shall be kept clean and free of litter. Sidewalks shall be
washed daily. If required by the Board of Health, trash receptacles shall
be provided as specified by said Board.
F. The sidewalk cafe may operate no later than 12:00 midnight on any day,
and only during operating hours of the eating and drinking
establishment. No furniture or other items of the sidewalk cafe shall
remain outside of the eating and drinking establishment for more than
§ 57-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 57-30
1:167
15 minutes after 12:00 midnight or after the close of operating hours of
the eating and drinking establishment, whichever is earlier.
G. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to amend any
provision of Article I or II of this chapter (Alcoholic Beverages) or to
amend or change any provision of any alcoholic beverage control
license. No alcoholic beverages of any kind may be possessed, served or
consumed within the area of the permitted sidewalk cafe area.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
H. The sidewalk cafe permit shall be an annual permit. The annual permit
fee shall be $100. Use of the premises for sidewalk cafes shall be
permitted during the months of May through September, inclusive.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
I. The Borough Board of Health may establish rules and regulations
pursuant to this section, which rules and regulations shall be filed with
the Borough Clerk and shall be available for public inspection.
J. Any sidewalk cafe permit may be suspended or revoked by the Borough
Board of Health or Borough Clerk upon a violation of any provision of
this section or a determination by the Health Officer or Police
Department that continued operation of the sidewalk cafe is inimical to
the public health and welfare. Such suspension or revocation shall be in
writing and delivered personally or mailed by certified mail to the
permit holder at the address set forth in the application. Any
suspension or revocation issued by an officer of the Borough Board of
Health may be appealed to the Mayor and Council within 15 days of the
mailing of such notice.
K. The granting of a permit under this section shall not be construed to
permit any activity otherwise prohibited by these ordinances or by any
other law.
L. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to limit the Mayor
and Council or State Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control from
regulating and enforcing the laws pertaining to the sale and/or
consumption of alcoholic beverages within the Borough of Kenilworth
and providing penalties for the violation thereof. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 57-30 KENILWORTH CODE § 57-30
1:168
Chapter 59
AMUSEMENTS, COIN-CONTROLLED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Entertainment and amusement places — See
Ch. 87.
Fees — See Ch. 91.
§ 59-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COIN-CONTROLLED AMUSEMENT DEVICE —
DISTRIBUTOR — Any person, firm or corporation in which title is vested
and/or which makes available to a proprietor any of the devices herein
described on any rental or commission basis. This license shall permit a
distributor to make available said devices and machines within the Borough
of Kenilworth. This license shall carry with it the designation "AGDP."
DISTRIBUTOR-PROPRIETOR — Any person, firm or corporation in whose
premises said device is to be installed and who owns the device in his
premises or any other premises in the Borough of Kenilworth. This license
shall permit a distributor-proprietor to make available said device and
Any machine, device or instrument the principal purpose of which is to
play music upon the insertion of a coin, slug or other consideration.
A.
Any machine, device or contrivance which is permitted to function or
operate by the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, disc or other
consideration and which is operated for amusement. Such term shall
specifically include but shall not be limited to any device in or on which
the operator or other person may ride, stand, sit or be carried.
B.
Any machine, device or contrivance which, upon the insertion of a coin,
slug or other consideration, may be operated for use as a game or
contest of any description and which may or may not contain any form
of payoff device for the return of slugs, money, coins, checks, tokens,
merchandise or other form of prize or merchandise, and shall include
pinball machines and other coin-controlled devices in which marbles,
balls or pellets are projected or propelled by a spring or plunger or
any other means whereby such marbles, balls or pellets fall into slots,
tracks, grooves or any other position or whereby said marbles, balls or
pellets strike pins or objects.
C.
Any machine, device or contrivance which upon the insertion of a coin,
slug or other consideration displays any form of film, picture or movingpicture
films.
D.
§ 57-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 59-1
1:169
machine within the Borough of Kenilworth. This license shall carry with it
the designation "AGD."
§ 59-2. Purpose.
§ 59-3. Application for license.
Applications for licenses shall be made to the Chief of Police, in writing, on
forms to be supplied by the Borough. In order to enable the Chief of Police
to determine the suitability of the premises and its location and the fitness
of the applicant to maintain or use the devices applied for, said application
shall contain the following information:
A. The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the licensing and use of coincontrolled
amusement devices to preserve and protect the public good,
welfare and morals.
B. All fees specified in and required by this chapter are imposed to defray
the cost of regulation and for revenue where such is permitted by state
law.
A. The type of ownership of the business, i.e., whether individual,
partnership, corporation or otherwise.
B. The name, style and designation of the business maintaining the
devices.
C. The address of and all telephone numbers at the location where the
device or devices will be utilized.
D. The name and residence address of the manager and/or other person
principally in charge of the operation of the business premises.
E. The following personal information concerning the applicant, if an
individual; and concerning each stockholder holding 10% or more of the
stock of the corporation, each officer and each director, if the applicant
is a corporation; and concerning the partners, including limited
partners, if the applicant is a partnership; and concerning the manager
or other person principally in charge of the business premises:
(1) Name, complete residence address and residence telephone
numbers.
(2) The two previous addresses immediately prior to the present
address of the applicant, or officer thereof, submitting the
application.
(3) Written proof of age.
(4) Height, weight, sex and color of hair and eyes.
(5) Two front-face portrait photographs taken within 30 days of the
date of the application and at least two by two inches in size.
§ 59-1 KENILWORTH CODE § 59-3
1:170
§ 59-4. License required; number of devices limited.
(6) Whether or not the applicant has been previously licensed by any
public or governmental authority to maintain coin-controlled
amusement devices for use by the public or has previously applied
for such a license, and whether or not such a license has been
denied, revoked or suspended and the reason therefor.
(7) All criminal convictions, fully disclosing the offense for which
convicted and the circumstances thereof.
(8) A complete set of fingerprints, taken and to be retained on file by
the Police Chief or his authorized representative.
(9) Such other information as may be required by the Police Chief to
discover the truth of the matters hereinbefore required to be set
forth in the application.
(10) Authorization for the Borough, its agents or its employees to seek
information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the
statements set forth in the application.
(11) The names and address of three adult residents of the County of
Union who will serve as character references.
(12)Written declaration by the applicant, under penalty of perjury, that
the foregoing information contained in the application is true and
correct, said declaration being duly made before an individual
authorized to administer oaths within the State of New Jersey,
which individual shall affix his signature or seal thereto.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
F. Number of licenses desired.
G. Category of device, as provided in the definition of "coin-controlled
amusement device" in § 59-1. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
H. Address where device is to be located.
I. Description of the device or devices, including the name of the
manufacturer and serial number.
A. No person shall place or maintain or permit to be placed, operated,
used or maintained in any public or quasi-public place or in any
building, store or other place wherein the public is invited or may enter
any coin-controlled amusement device without first having obtained a
license for each such device from the Chief of Police.
B. It shall be unlawful in the Borough of Kenilworth to place, maintain,
control, conduct or operate more than four of the aforesaid devices in
any one business establishment.
§ 59-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 59-5
1:171
§ 59-5. Fee; expiration of license.
A fee as provided in Chapter 91, Fees and Licenses, shall be submitted with
each application for a license or licenses and is nonrefundable. The license,
if issued, shall expire on December 31 of the year in which issued.
§ 59-6. Requirements to be met prior to issuance of license.
No license shall be issued unless the application and license fee
requirements have been met and an investigation into the fitness of the
applicant conducted.
§ 59-7. Investigation of applicant.
Upon receiving the application and fee, the Police Chief shall conduct
an investigation into the applicant's moral character and personal and
criminal history. He may, in his discretion, require a personal interview
of the applicant and such further information as shall bear on the
investigation.
§ 59-8. Issuance of license; reasons for denial.
The Police Chief shall issue a license within 45 days of receipt of the
application, unless he finds that:
A. The correct license fee has not been tendered with the application.
B. The maintenance or use of such device or devices would not comply
with all applicable laws, including but not limited to building, zoning
and health regulations.
C. The applicant, if an individual; or any of the stockholders holding 10%
or more of the stock of the corporation; any of the officers or directors,
if the applicant is a corporation; or any of the partners, including
limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership; and the manager or
other person principally in charge of the operation of the business have
been convicted of any crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit or moral
turpitude, unless such conviction occurred at least five years prior to
the date of the application.
D. The applicant has made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement
of fact in the license application or in any document required by the
Borough in conjunction therewith. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
E. The applicant has had a similar license denied, revoked or suspended
within five years prior to the date of the application.
F. The applicant, if an individual; or any of the officers or directors, if the
applicant is a corporation; or any of the partners, including limited
partners, if the applicant is a partnership; or the manager or other
§ 59-5 KENILWORTH CODE § 59-8
1:172
§ 59-9. Content of license.
Every license issued hereunder shall be numbered and shall disclose on its
face the name and post office address of the licensee to whom it is issued
and the address wherein the device shall be located.
§ 59-10. Separate licenses required.
A separate license shall be obtained for each coin-controlled amusement
device and shall be affixed thereto by the licensee.
§ 59-11. Unlicensed devices.
No coin-controlled amusement device shall be placed, operated, maintained
or used or permitted to be placed, operated, maintained or used in the
Borough until the license required hereunder shall be affixed thereto in a
conspicuous place so that the same may be easily identified. Any such coincontrolled
amusement device which shall not have a license as required
herein affixed thereto shall be deemed to be an unlicensed device. The Chief
of Police may take possession and retain custody of any device which is or
appears to be unlicensed.
§ 59-12. Licenses nontransferable.
A license for a coin-controlled amusement device shall not be transferred.
§ 59-13. Terms and conditions of application.
Each license hereunder shall be bound by the terms, conditions and
statements set forth in the license application, and the issuance of any
license hereunder shall be on said basis.
§ 59-14. Conditions of issuance.
person principally in charge of the premises on which the devices are
located is not over the age of 18 years.
A. All licenses issued under this chapter shall be deemed to be granted
upon the express condition that, in addition to any other sanction or
penalty, the issuing, licensing or approval authority may:
(1) After due notice by personal service or registered or certified mail
and after due hearing, suspend or revoke the license of any person
for violating any provision of this chapter or for other good cause.
(2) Suspend temporarily, pending a hearing or notice thereof, any such
license when such is deemed by the issuing licensing authority to
be immediately necessary to prevent emergent danger to the public
welfare, good or morals. Any such temporary suspension without
notice shall be for a period not longer than 10 days.
§ 59-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 59-14
1:173
§ 59-15. Licenses subject to related legislation.
All licenses under this chapter shall be issued subject to state law, this
chapter and other applicable ordinances and police regulations of the
Borough.
§ 59-16. Games of chance and gambling prohibited.
No licensed device shall be operated or be permitted to be operated as a
game of chance or gambling device.
§ 59-17. Use for showing obscene pictures prohibited.
No licensed device shall be used, operated or permitted to be used or
operated to display any form of film, picture or moving-picture film which
is obscene, whether or not the observer is or is intended to be a consenting
adult. A film, picture or moving-picture film is obscene if it portrays or
depicts human sexual intercourse, homosexual acts, sadistic sexual acts,
human sexual acts other than sexual intercourse, sexual acts between
man and beast or human sexual organs, and the average person, applying
contemporary community standards, finds that the film, moving-picture film
or picture, taken as a whole, appeals to the prurient interests in sex, and the
film or moving picture depicts or portrays such human sexual intercourse,
sexual acts between man and beast or human sexual organs in a patently
offensive manner, and the picture, film or moving-picture film, taken as
a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, educational, political or scientific
value.
§ 59-18. Procedure for review of questionable pictures.
Any person desiring to utilize a coin-operated amusement device for the
display of a film, picture or moving-picture film which he has reason to
believe may be obscene shall act as follows:
B. The provisions of Subsection A shall be deemed supplementary to and
not in lieu of any provision in any other section of this chapter for
revocation or suspension of licenses.
A. Submission to Review Committee or Chief of Police.
(1) If the person has any such picture, film or moving-picture film on
hand or in stock which he intends to display within the month
following the next monthly meeting of the Review Committee, he
shall submit all of same to the Review Committee for inspection.
The Review Committee shall consist of the Mayor, a consenting
elected officer of the Borough of Kenilworth and a consenting
resident of the Borough who is registered to vote therein. The
Review Committee shall be constituted forthwith and the appointed
members shall be forthwith appointed by and serve at the pleasure
of the Mayor without compensation, which Review Committee shall
act by a majority of the members thereof.
§ 59-14 KENILWORTH CODE § 59-18
1:174
§ 59-19. Notice of decision.
§ 59-20. Police inspection of premises.
The Kenilworth Police Department shall examine the premises where such
devices are located, on a regular basis, to ensure compliance with the terms
of this chapter.
(2) If, in the interim of the monthly meetings of the Review Committee,
the person intends to display any such film which was not
submitted at the prior monthly meeting, on an occasion before the
next public meeting of said Committee, he shall submit said film,
picture or moving-picture film to the Chief of Police of the Borough
of Kenilworth for investigation.
B. The person shall, 24 hours prior to submittal to the Review Committee
or Chief of Police, notify it or him, in writing, of the intended submittal
and the nature thereof. Within 24 hours, Saturdays, Sundays and
holidays excepted, of receipt of said notice, the Committee, in the case
of a Committee submittal or referral, or the Chief of Police, whichever is
applicable, shall inspect the film, picture or moving-picture film, and
the applicant shall reasonably be notified, either by telephone or
written notice left at the location of the device, of the time and place
appointed for such inspection. The failure of the applicant to cooperate
in any way in arranging a time for inspection within said 24 hours shall
not relieve said applicant of the duty to submit the film, picture or
moving-picture film for inspection.
A. In the case of a submittal to the Chief of Police, he shall, within 24
hours, Saturdays, Sundays and holidays excepted, of the termination of
said inspection, either inform the applicant, in writing, that the item
submitted is not obscene and may, therefore, be displayed without fear
of prosecution under this chapter or inform the applicant that he has
referred it to the Review Committee for inspection.
B. Within 72 hours of any submittal or referral to the Review Committee,
the applicant shall either be informed, in writing, that the film, picture
or moving-picture film is not obscene and, therefore, may be displayed
without fear of prosecution under this chapter or so inform the
applicant that the Borough of Kenilworth has brought suit seeking to
have the display of the film, picture or moving-picture film enjoined
because of its obscene character. It shall be a violation of this chapter to
display same during the time period of investigation. Nothing herein
shall prevent the applicant from displaying said film, picture or movingpicture
film after the end of the time periods specified for investigation,
subject, however, to any judicial restraints imposed. If for any reason
the Chief of Police is unavailable to perform his function under this
chapter, he may appoint another person in his stead.
§ 59-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 59-21
1:175
§ 59-21. Violations and penalties.
A licensee or anyone having violated the terms of this chapter shall:
Chapter 63
(RESERVED)
Chapter 66
BICYCLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees and licenses — See Ch. 91, Art. I.
§ 66-1. License required; definitions. [Amended 5-11-1976 by Ord.
No. 76-11]
§ 66-2. Issuance, term, replacement and scope of license.
All bicycle licenses shall be issued by the Police Department. The licensing
period shall be for a period of two years commencing on January 1 of
every even-numbered year and expiring at the end of every odd-numbered
year. Renewal licenses may be applied for at any time during the month of
January of every even-numbered year. New licenses shall only be issued to
expire at the end of the existing current licensed term. The license shall be
replaced when lost, stolen or mutilated or when it becomes necessary to
issue a new registration. Licenses when issued shall entitle the licensee to
operate such bicycle for the term for which such licenses have been issued
A. Forfeit all licenses issued pursuant to the terms of this chapter on all
devices.
B. Be subject to the general penalty set forth in Chapter 1, Article I,
General Penalty, of the Borough of Kenilworth Code. [Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
A. License required. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or use a
bicycle upon any streets, alleys or public highways of the Borough of
Kenilworth without first obtaining from the Police Department a license
therefor.
B. Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
BICYCLE — Includes a pedal bicycle having a helper motor
characterized in that the maximum piston displacement is less than
50 cubic centimeters rated no more than 1.5 brake horsepower and
capable of a maximum speed of no more than 25 miles per hour.
§ 59-21 KENILWORTH CODE § 66-2
1:176
upon the streets, alleys and public highways in the Borough of Kenilworth,
exclusive of the sidewalks thereof.
§ 66-3. License plate or decal.
The Borough of Kenilworth shall provide a license plate or a license in the
form of a decal, together with a registration card. Said license plate or
license decal, as the case may be, shall bear a number stamped or printed
thereon, and each such license shall be a number of licenses numbered in
numerical order. Such license plate or license decal shall be suitable for
attachment upon the mudguard or frame of the bicycle so as to be visible
from the rear of the bicycle. The Police Department shall keep a record of
the date of issue of each license, to whom issued, the number thereof and
the fee paid.
§ 66-4. Procedure upon sale or transfer of ownership.
It shall be the duty of every person, firm or corporation who or which sells
or transfers ownership of any bicycle to report such sale or transfer by
returning to the Police Department the registration card issued to such
person as licensee thereof, or proof that the license decal can no longer
be used, together with the name and address of the person to whom said
bicycle was sold or transferred, and such report shall be made within five
days of the date of said sale or transfer. It shall be the duty of the purchaser
or transferee of such bicycle to apply for a new license and registration
therefor within five days of said sale or transfer.
§ 66-5. Prohibitions.
It shall be unlawful for any person willfully or maliciously to remove,
destroy, mutilate or alter the number of any bicycle frame license pursuant
to this chapter. It shall also be unlawful for any person to remove, destroy,
mutilate or alter any license plate or license number decal, seal or
registration card during the time in which such license, seal or registration
card is operative; provided, however, that nothing in this chapter shall
prohibit the Police Department from stamping numbers on the frames of
bicycles on which no serial number can be found or on which said number is
illegible or insufficient for identification purposes. The substitution of plates
or license decals not in conformity with this chapter is prohibited.42
§ 66-6. Inspections; impoundment and confiscation. [Amended
9-11-1979 by Ord. No. 79-19]
The police officers of the Borough of Kenilworth may inspect any bicycle
on any public highway or public place at any time to ascertain whether or
not it has a registration tag or registration decal properly displayed on it
or whether the bicycle is in proper mechanical condition to be operated
safely. In the event that a bicycle is being used or operated without the
42.Editor's Note: Original § 6, which immediately followed this section and dealt with
additional prohibitions, was repealed 5-11-1976 by Ord. No. 76-11.
§ 66-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66-6
1:177
aforesaid tag or license decal or is in such condition as to be unfit for safe
operation, the Police Department may impound and confiscate the bicycle
until such time as the person or persons owning it have procured the
necessary registration tag or have rendered the bicycle safe for use and
have also paid the fee as set in Chapter 91, Fees, for the release of the
bicycle.
§ 66-7. Fees; transferal of registration.
§ 66-8. Payment of moneys collected.
All moneys collected under the provisions of this chapter shall be paid to
the Treasurer of the Borough of Kenilworth.43
§ 66-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-11-1976 by Ord. No.
76-11; 9-11-1979 by Ord. No. 79-19; at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate any of the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to the general
penalty set forth in Chapter 1, Article I, General Penalty, of the Borough of
Kenilworth Code.
Chapter 71
BUILDINGS, UNFIT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 150.
A. The license fee to be paid for each bicycle shall be as set in Chapter 91,
Fees, when the licensed period has more than one year before the
expiration date, and when the remaining licensed period shall be less
than one year before the expiration date, the license fee shall be as set
in Chapter 91, Fees. [Amended 9-11-1979 by Ord. No. 79-19]
B. Where the owner of a bicycle shall transfer or dispose of a licensed
bicycle, he may transfer the registration to another bicycle without
charge. Licenses shall not be transferred when the ownership of the
bicycle is transferred. In the event of a transfer of the license from one
bicycle to another owned by the same owner, a new license tag or decal
may be issued without charge if the old tag or decal is or will be too
mutilated to make a physical transfer.
C. A person owning one or more bicycles shall have a license for each
bicycle.
43.Editor's Note: Original § 10, which immediately followed this section and dealt with Police
Department regulations for operation of bicycles, was repealed 5-11-1976 by Ord. No.
76-11.
§ 66-6 KENILWORTH CODE § 66-9
1:178
§ 71-1. Complaint procedure; hearing. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
Whenever a petition is filed with the Building Inspector by a public authority
or by at least five residents of the Borough of Kenilworth or by the Mayor
and Council of the Borough of Kenilworth charging that any building is
unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use, or whenever it appears to
the Building Inspector (on his own motion) that any building is unfit for
human habitation or use, the Building Inspector shall, if his preliminary
investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause to be
served upon the owner of and parties in interest in such building a
complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing a notice that a
hearing will be held before such Building Inspector at a place therein fixed
not less than seven days nor more than 30 days after the serving of said
complaint, that the owner and parties in interest shall be given the right
to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise,
and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint and that the
rules of evidence prevailing in the courts shall not be controlling in hearings
before the Building Inspector.
§ 71-2. Order for repair, vacation or removal.
If, after such notice and hearing, the Building Inspector determines that
the building under consideration is unfit for human habitation or occupancy
or use, he shall state in writing his findings of fact in support of such
determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner
thereof and parties in interest an order requiring the repair, alteration or
improvement of said building to be made by the owner within a reasonable
time, which time shall be set forth in the order, or, at the option of the
owner, to vacate or have said building vacated and closed within the times
set forth in the order. If the building is in such a condition as to make
it dangerous to the health and safety of persons on or near the premises
and if the owner fails to repair, alter or improve said building within the
time specified in the order, then the owner shall be required to remove or
demolish said building within a reasonable time as specified in the order of
removal.
§ 71-3. Placarding of unfit buildings.
If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or improve or,
at the option of the owner, to vacate and close the building, the Building
Inspector may cause such building to be repaired, altered or improved, or
to be vacated and closed, and the Building Inspector may cause to be posted
on the main entrance of any building so closed a placard with the following
words: "This building is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use; the
use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful."
§ 66-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71-4
1:179
§ 71-4. Removal or demolition by Borough.
If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the
building, the public officer may cause such building to be removed or
demolished or may contract for the removal or demolition thereof after
advertisement for and receipt of bids therefor.
§ 71-5. Costs of repair or removal. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 71-6. Conditions rendering building unfit. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
The Building Inspector may determine that a building is unfit for human
habitation or use if he finds that conditions exist which are dangerous or
injurious to the health or safety of the occupants of such building, the
A. The amount of the cost of the filing of legal papers, expert witnesses'
fees, search fees and advertising charges incurred in the course of any
proceeding taken under this chapter determined in favor of the
Borough and the cost of such repairs, alterations or improvements, or
vacating and closing, or removal or demolition, if any, or the amount of
the balance thereof remaining after deduction of the sum, if any,
realized from the sale of materials derived from such building or from
any contract for removal or demolition thereof, including the clearance
and, if necessary, leveling of the site, shall be a municipal lien against
the real property upon which such cost was incurred. If the building is
removed or demolished by the Building Inspector, he shall sell the
materials of such building. There shall be credited against the cost of
the removal or demolition thereof the proceeds of any sale of such
materials or any sum derived from any contract for the removal or
demolition of the building. If there are no such credits or if the sum
total of such costs exceeds the total of such credits, a detailed
statement of the aforesaid costs and the amount so due shall be filed
with the Municipal Tax Assessor, and a copy thereof shall be forthwith
forwarded to the owner by registered mail. If the total of the credits
exceeds such costs, the balance remaining shall be deposited in the
Superior Court by the Building Inspector, shall be secured in such
manner as may be directed by the Court and shall be disbursed
according to the order or judgment of the Court to the persons found to
be entitled thereto by final order or judgment of such Court; provided,
however, that nothing in this section shall be construed to impair or
limit in any way the power of the Borough of Kenilworth to define and
declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary
proceedings or otherwise.
B. Any owner or party in interest may, within 30 days from the date of the
filing of the lien certificate, proceed in a summary manner in the
Superior Court to contest the reasonableness of the amount or the
accuracy of the costs set forth in the municipal lien certificate.
§ 71-4 KENILWORTH CODE § 71-6
1:180
occupants of neighboring buildings or other residents or the Borough of
Kenilworth. Such conditions may include the following without limiting
the generality of the foregoing: defects therein increasing the hazards of
fire, accident or other calamities; lack of adequate ventilation, light or
sanitary facilities; dilapidation; disrepair; structural defects; uncleanliness;
and failure to comply with the requirements of the building code or
certificate of occupancy.
§ 71-7. Service of complaints and orders. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
Complaints or orders issued by the Building Inspector pursuant to this
chapter shall be served upon persons either personally or by registered
mail, but if the whereabouts of such persons are unknown and same cannot
be ascertained by the Building Inspector in the exercise of reasonable
diligence and the Building Inspector shall make an affidavit to that effect,
then the serving of such complaint or order upon such persons may be
made by publishing the same once in a newspaper printed and published
in the Borough of Kenilworth or, in the absence of such newspaper, in
one printed and published in the County of Union and circulating in the
Borough of Kenilworth. A copy of such complaint or order shall be posted in
a conspicuous place on premises affected by the complaint or order. A copy
of such complaint or order shall be duly recorded or lodged for record with
the Register of Deeds for Union County.
§ 71-8. Powers of Building Inspector. [Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
A. The Building Inspector is authorized to exercise such powers as may be
necessary and convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and
provisions of Chapter 112 of the Laws of the State of New Jersey of
1942 44and of this chapter, including the following powers in addition to
others herein granted:
(1) To investigate the building conditions in the municipality in order
to determine which buildings therein are unfit for human habitation
or occupancy or use;
(2) To administer oaths, affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence;
(3) To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations;
provided, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to
cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in
possession;
(4) To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees
as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of the ordinances;
and
44.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.5.
§ 71-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71-8
1:181
§ 71-9. Rights of owner not affected. [Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
No action taken by the Building Inspector in carrying out the provisions of
this chapter and no action taken by any owner in compliance with any order
issued by such Building Inspector shall be deemed to affect the rights of
the owner under Chapter 120, Land Use, Part 3, Zoning, of the Code of the
Borough of Kenilworth.
§ 71-10. Damaged buildings; inimical to welfare of residents; repair
or demolition by Borough. [Added at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
Any building or buildings, or parts thereof, which have been damaged to
such an extent that nothing remains but the walls, or parts of the walls
and other supports, shall, regardless of the safety and sturdiness of those
remaining walls or parts thereof, be deemed inimical to the welfare of the
residents of the Borough, and the Borough may exercise its police powers
to repair, demolish, or cause the repairing or demolishing of the building
or buildings, or parts thereof, pursuant to the procedures set forth in this
chapter.
§ 71-11. Remedies. [Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
Any person aggrieved by an order issued by the Building Inspector under
this chapter may, within 30 days after the posting and service of such order,
bring an action for injunctive relief to restrain the Building Inspector from
carrying out the provisions of the order and for any other appropriate relief.
The court may proceed in the action in a summary manner or otherwise.
The remedy herein provided shall be exclusive, and no person affected by an
order of the Building Inspector shall be entitled to recover any damages for
action taken pursuant thereto, or because of noncompliance by any person
with any order of the Building Inspector.
(5) To delegate any of his functions and powers under the ordinance to
such officers and agents as he may designate.
B. Any action taken using revenues derived from the local property tax
shall be taken only after advertisement for, and receipt of, bids therefor,
pursuant to the provisions of the "Local Public Contracts Law," P.L.
1971, c. 198 (N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.), unless the action is necessary to
prevent imminent danger to life, limb or property.
§ 71-8 KENILWORTH CODE § 71-11
1:182
Chapter 73
BUSINESS OPERATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Entertainment and amusement places — See
Ch. 87.
Food-handling establishments — See Ch. 100.
§ 71-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71-11
1:183

ARTICLE I
Supervision
[Adopted 6-25-1991 by Ord. No. 91-12]
§ 73-1. Employee attendance required.
Any business, commercial or industrial enterprise within the Borough of
Kenilworth must have an employee in attendance on the enterprise
premises at all times that the same is open to the public to conduct
business.
§ 73-2. Enforcement; violations and penalties. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
Members of the Kenilworth Police Department and the Zoning Officer are
hereby authorized to enforce this article and issue a summons for any
violation. Any title owner, managing officer/agent or tenant of an enterprise
premises found in violation of this article shall be subject to the general
penalty set forth in Chapter 1, Article I, General Penalty, of the Borough of
Kenilworth Code.
§ 73-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 73-2
1:185
Chapter 75
CATS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dogs — See Ch. 83. Fees and licenses — See Ch. 91.
§ 75-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANIMAL — Dog or cat.
ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY — Any person or agency designated or
certified by the State of New Jersey to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
CAT — Any member of the domestic feline species, male, female or altered.
CAT OF LICENSING AGE — Any cat which has attained the age of seven
months, or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
CATTERY — Any room or group of rooms, cage or exhibition pen not part of
a kennel, wherein cats for sale are kept or displayed.
LICENSING AUTHORITY — The agency or department of the Borough
of Kenilworth or any designated representative thereof charged with
administering the issuance and/or revocation of permits and licenses under
the provisions of this chapter.
NEUTERED — Rendered permanently incapable of reproduction as certified
by a licensed veterinarian.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a cat, includes every
person having a right of property or custody in such cat and every person
who has such cat in his/her keeping or who harbors or maintains a cat or
knowingly permits a cat to remain on or about any premises occupied by
that person.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, partnership, organization or
institution commonly recognized by law as a unit.
§ 75-2. Vaccination required; certificate; exemptions.
A. Vaccination and license requirements. No person shall own, keep,
harbor or maintain any cat over seven months of age within the
Borough of Kenilworth unless such cat is vaccinated and licensed. The
provisions of this section do not apply to cats held in a cattery or those
held by a state or federal licensed research facility or a veterinary
establishment where cats are received or kept for diagnostic, medical,
surgical or other treatments or licensed animal shelters, pounds,
kennels or pet shops.
§ 73-2 KENILWORTH CODE § 75-2
1:186
§ 75-3. Display of license number required.
Any person who shall own, keep or harbor a cat of licensing age shall
annually apply for and procure from the Clerk of the municipality, or other
official designated by the governing body thereof to license cats in the
municipality in which he/she resides, a license and official registration tag
with license number or a registration sleeve for each cat so owned, kept or
harbored, and shall place upon such cat a collar or other device with the
license number securely fastened or displayed thereto. Acceptable methods
of displaying license number shall include, but are not limited to, breakaway
or elastic collars. License tags or sleeves are transferable.
§ 75-4. Time for applying for license.
The owner of any newly acquired cat of licensing age or of any cat which
attains licensing age shall make application for a license tag or sleeve
for such cat within 10 days after such acquisition or age attainment. This
requirement will not apply to a nonresident keeping a cat within the
Borough of Kenilworth for no longer than 90 days.
§ 75-5. Cats brought into jurisdiction.
B. Vaccination. All cats shall be vaccinated against rabies by a licensed
veterinarian in accordance with the latest Compendium of Animal
Rabies Vaccines and Recommendations for Immunization, published by
the National Association of State Public Health Veterinarians, except as
provided for in Subsection D.
C. Vaccination certificate. A certificate of vaccination shall be issued to the
owner of each animal vaccinated on a form recommended by the state.
D. Exemptions. Any cat may be exempted from the requirements of such
vaccination for a specified period of time by the local Board of Health,
upon presentation of a veterinarian's certificate stating that because of
an infirmity or other physical condition or regimen of therapy, the
inoculation of such cat shall be deemed inadvisable.
A. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the Borough of
Kenilworth any cat licensed in another state for the current year and
bearing a registration tag or sleeve and shall keep the same or permit
the same to be kept within the Borough of Kenilworth for a period of
more than 90 days shall immediately apply for a license and registration
tag or sleeve for each such cat.
B. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into this Borough
any unlicensed cat and shall keep the same or permit the same to be
kept within the Borough of Kenilworth for a period of more than 10 days
shall immediately apply for a license and registration tag or sleeve for
each such cat.
§ 75-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-6
1:187
§ 75-6. Contents of application; preservation of information.
The application shall state the breed, sex, age, color and markings of the
cat for which license and registration are sought and whether it is of a longor
short-haired variety; also the name, street and post office address of the
owner and the person who shall keep or harbor such cat. The information
on said application and the registration number issued for the cat shall be
preserved for a period of three years by the Clerk or other local official
designated to license cats in the municipality.
§ 75-7. License forms and tags.
License forms and official tags or sleeves shall be furnished by the
municipality and shall be numbered serially and shall bear the year of
issuance and the name of the municipality.
§ 75-8. Rabies inoculation required. [Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
No Municipal Clerk or other official designated by the governing body of
any municipality to license cats therein shall grant any such license and
official registration tag or sleeve for any cat unless the owner thereof
provides evidence that the cat to be licensed and registered has been
inoculated with a rabies vaccine of a type approved by and administered
in accordance with the recommendation of the United States Department
of Agriculture and the United States Department of Health and Human
Services or has been certified exempt as provided in § 75-2 of this chapter.
The rabies inoculation shall be administered by a duly licensed veterinarian
or by such other veterinarian permitted by law to do the same.
§ 75-9. License fees; delinquent fee. [Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
A license shall be issued after payment of a fee as set forth in Chapter 91,
Fees and Licenses, Article I, for each unneutered cat and for each neutered
cat. Persons who fail to obtain a license as required within the time period
specified in this chapter will be subject to a delinquent fee as set forth in
Chapter 91, Fees and Licenses, Article I.
§ 75-10. Payment of fee required; renewals; expiration date;
substitutions.
The person applying for the license and registration tag and/or sleeve
shall pay the fee fixed or authorized. The fee for the renewal of a license
and registration tag or sleeve shall be the same as for the original. Said
license, registration tag or sleeve shall expire on December 31 of the year of
issuance. Only one license and registration tag or sleeve shall be required
in the licensing year for any cat in the Borough of Kenilworth. Any valid
New Jersey license tag or sleeve issued by a New Jersey municipality shall
be accepted by this municipality as evidence of compliance.
§ 75-6 KENILWORTH CODE § 75-11
1:188
§ 75-11. Issuance of duplicate license.
If a license tag or sleeve has been misplaced or lost, the Borough Clerk may
issue a duplicate license and/or registration sleeve for that particular cat.
§ 75-12. Proof of licensing.
Proof of licensing shall be produced by any person owning, keeping,
maintaining or harboring a cat, upon the request of any health official,
police officer, animal control officer or other authorized person.
§ 75-13. Interference with authorized personnel.
No person shall hinder, molest or interfere with anyone authorized or
empowered to perform any duty under this chapter.
§ 75-14. Disposition of fees.
License fees and other moneys collected or received under the provisions
of this chapter shall be forwarded to the Treasurer of the municipality
and shall be placed in a special account separate from any of the other
accounts of the municipality and shall be used for the following purposes
only: collecting, keeping and disposing of cats liable to seizure, for local
prevention and control of rabies, providing antirabies treatment under the
direction of the local Board of Health for any person known or suspected
to have been exposed to rabies, and for administering the provisions of this
chapter. Any unexpected balance remaining in such special account shall be
retained until the end of the third fiscal year following, and may be used
for any of the purposes set forth in this section. At the end of said third
fiscal year following and at the end of each fiscal year thereafter, there
shall be transferred from such special account to the general funds of the
municipality any amount then in such account which is in excess of the total
amount paid into the special account during the last two fiscal years next
preceding.
§ 75-15. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-9-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-24]
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any person who violates or
fails or refuses to comply with this chapter shall be liable to the penalties
referenced in § 83-22 of the Borough Code.
Chapter 78
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unfit buildings — See Ch. 71.
Fees and licenses — See Ch. 91.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 94.
Land use — See Ch. 120.
§ 75-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-15
1:189
§ 78-1. Establishment of enforcing agency; composition; office
location.
§ 78-2. Fees. [Amended 11-9-1977 by Ord. No. 77-29]
A. There is hereby established in the Borough of Kenilworth a State
Uniform Construction Code enforcing agency known as the "Building
Department of the Borough of Kenilworth," consisting of a Building
Inspector, a Building Subcode Official, Plumbing Subcode Official,
Electrical Subcode Official, Fire Protection Subcode Official and such
other subdued officials for such other subedits as the Commissioner of
the Department of Community Affairs, State of New Jersey, shall
hereafter adopt as part of the State Uniform Construction Code. The
Building Inspector shall be the chief administrator of the enforcing
agency.
B. Each official position created in Subsection A hereof shall be filled by a
person qualified for such position pursuant to PL. 1975, c. 217, as
amended,45 and N.J.A.C. 5:23, provided that, in lieu of any particular
subdued official, an on-site inspection agency may be retained by
contract pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23. More than one such official position
may be held by the same person, provided that such person is qualified
pursuant to PL. 1975, c. 217, and N.J.A.C. 5:23 to hold each such
position.
C. The public shall have the right to do business with the enforcing agency
at one office location except for emergencies and unforeseen or
unavoidable circumstances.
A. Building Department fees for plan review, permits, certificates and any
other service provided by the Department, including fees for witnessing
acceptance tests and performing inspections on new and altered
elevator devices, shall be those allowed pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.20
and 5:23-12.6, as may be amended from time to time. [Amended
2-28-1978 by Ord. No. 78-4; 9-11-1979 by Ord. No. 79-19;
4-24-1996 by Ord. No. 96-8; 4-14-1999 by Ord. No. 99-4]
B. The Building Inspector shall, with the advice of the subcode officials,
prepare and submit to the governing body of the Borough of
Kenilworth, through the Planning, Zoning and Ordinance Committee
thereof, biannually a report recommending a fee schedule based on the
operating expenses of the Building Department and any other expenses
of the Borough of Kenilworth fairly attributed to the enforcement of the
State Uniform Construction Code. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
C. (Reserved)46
45.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
§ 75-15 KENILWORTH CODE § 78-3
1:190
§ 78-3. Fire limits. [Added 3-14-1978 by Ord. No. 78-8]
The following fire limits are established in accordance with the provisions of
Article 37 of the regulations for the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code:
§ 78-4. Expedited inspections; fee; applicability. [Added 4-22-1998
by Ord. No. 98-8; amended 7-8-1998 by Ord. No. 98-20]
A. All the area located within the Industrial A, Industrial B, Industrial C,
Business A, Business B and Business C zone districts as laid down and
delineated on a map entitled "Building Zone Map, Borough of
Kenilworth, Union County, New Jersey," dated July 1963, and revised by
Frank P. Koczur, Borough Engineer, January, 1975. This map is annexed
hereto and made a part hereof.47
B. All other areas not included in the aforesaid fire limits shall be
designated as outside fire limits.
A. Any person or entity may apply for an inspection of a particular project
or site on a day and time convenient to that person or entity. Any such
application shall be made, in writing, to the Kenilworth Building
Department on a form to be provided by the Department. The
Construction Official shall make the necessary arrangements with
licensed subdued officials to make the inspection on the day and time
requested. If the Construction Official is unable to arrange for the
inspection as requested, he shall notify the applicant requesting the
inspection as soon as possible after the request is made.
B. Any person or entity applying for an inspection pursuant to Subsection
A above shall, in addition to any other fees payable pursuant to § 78-2 of
this chapter, pay to the Building Department a fee equal to $40 for the
first hour or portion thereof that the inspector is on site making such
inspection on a weekday and $60 for the first hour or portion thereof for
a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. For each additional hour, or portion
thereof, after the first hour, regardless of day of week, the applicant
shall pay a fee of $25. The applicant shall deposit with the Building
Department at the time the application is made a sum equal to the first
hour for each inspection requested. If an inspection exceeds one hour,
the applicant shall be billed for the additional time. Any such bill shall
be due and payable immediately upon receipt.
C. The provisions of this section shall not apply, nor shall the applicant be
charged a fee as provided for herein, where an inspection is performed
by a code official regularly employed by the Borough of Kenilworth in a
full- or part-time salaried position, except that, where such convenience
inspection is requested for a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, the
applicant shall pay the applicable fee.
46.Editor's Note: Former § 78-2C, Surcharge fee, amended 9-11-1979 by Ord. No. 79-19, was
repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
47.Editor's Note: This map is on file in the office of the Borough Clerk.
§ 78-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 78-5
1:191
§ 78-5. (Reserved)48
§ 78-6. Severability. [Amended 3-9-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-01]
Each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of this chapter is
declared to be an independent section, subsection, sentence, clause and
phrase, and the finding or holding of any such portion of this chapter to
be unconstitutional, void, or ineffective for any cause, or reason, shall not
affect any other portion of this chapter.
§ 78-7. Supersession. [Amended 3-9-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-01]
In the event of any conflict pertaining to fees, the schedule of fees set forth
in this chapter49 shall supersede and remain controlling.
§ 78-8. Repealer. [Amended 3-9-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-01]
All Borough ordinances and parts of ordinances that are inconsistent with
this chapter are hereby repealed.
Chapter 80
(RESERVED)
Chapter 83
DOGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cats — See Ch. 75. Fees — See Ch. 91.
§ 83-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AT LARGE — Refers to a dog off the premises of the person owning or
keeping or harboring it and not securely fastened to a tether, leash, cord
or chain or the like, not to exceed six feet in length, held by its owner or
other person who is reasonably calculated to have the strength and agility
to exercise control over the dog's activities.
DOG — Any male or female dog, bitch or spayed bitch.
48.Editor's Note: Former § 78-5, Fee schedule, as amended, has been relocated to Ch. 91,
Fees and Licenses, Art. I, § 91-1.3, Uniform Construction Code fees.
49.Editor's Note: The Uniform Construction Code fees are now located in § 91-1.3.
§ 78-5 KENILWORTH CODE § 83-1
1:192
DOG OF LICENSING AGE — Any dog which has attained the age of seven
months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
DOG WARDEN — The Union County Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to
Animals, its agents, or employees.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a dog shall include every
person having a right of property in such dog and every person who harbors
or has such dog in his keeping.
§ 83-2. License and registration tag required.
Any person who shall own, keep or harbor a dog of licensing age in the
Borough shall, in the month of January in each year, apply for and procure
from the Borough Clerk a license and official metal registration tag for each
such dog so owned, kept or harbored and shall place upon each such dog a
collar or harness with the registration tag securely fastened thereto.
§ 83-3. Requirements for newly acquired dogs or dogs attaining
licensing age.
The owner of any newly acquired dog of licensing age or of a dog which
attains licensing age shall apply for a license and registration tag for such
dog within 10 days after such acquisition or licensing age attainment.
§ 83-4. Dogs brought into Borough.
§ 83-5. Exemption from licensing and tag requirements.
Only one license and registration tag shall be required in any licensing year
for any dog owned in New Jersey, and a license and tag issued by any other
municipality of this state shall be accepted by the Borough as evidence of
compliance with this chapter.
§ 83-6. Fees.
A. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the Borough any
dog licensed in another state for the current year and bearing a
registration tag and who shall keep the same or permit the same to be
kept within the Borough for a period of more than 90 days shall
immediately apply for a license and registration tag for each such dog.
B. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the Borough any
unlicensed dog of licensing age and shall cause the same or permit the
same to be kept within the Borough for a period of more than 10 days
shall immediately apply for a license and registration tag for each such
dog.
A. The person applying for a license and registration tag shall pay to the
Borough Clerk a fee as provided in Chapter 91, Fees, for the licensing of
each dog and the additional sum fixed by state law for the registration
tag of each dog; and for each annual renewal, the fee for the license and
§ 83-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-6
1:193
§ 83-7. Removal of tag or attaching to another dog.
No person, except an officer in the performance of his duties, shall remove a
registration tag from the collar of any dog without the consent of the owner,
nor shall any person attach a registration tag to a dog for which it was not
issued.
§ 83-8. Running at large prohibited.
No person owning, keeping, harboring or in control of any licensed or
unlicensed dog shall suffer or permit such dog to run at large upon any
public street, public park, public building or other public place within the
Borough or on private property of another without the permission of the
owner of said property.
§ 83-9. Harboring certain number of dogs prohibited; exceptions.
[Added 11-9-1977 by Ord. No. 77-26]
Except for licensed kennels, pet shops, pounds and shelters, no person shall
harbor more than three dogs within any one household; provided, however,
that this prohibition shall not apply to a newborn litter until members of
the litter attain six months of age. A person who is the head of a household
within which a dog is harbored shall be presumed to be a person harboring
a dog.
§ 83-10. Trespass on private property prohibited.
No person shall permit any dog in his care or under his control, whether or
not on a tether, leash, cord or chain or the like, to go upon the lawn, yard or
entrance walk or driveway of any private residence without the permission
of the owner or tenant thereof.
§ 83-11. Control over dog required.
No person owning, keeping or harboring any dog shall suffer or permit it to
be upon the public streets or in any public place of the Borough unless such
dog is accompanied by a person reasonably calculated to have the strength
and agility to exercise control over the dog's activities and is securely
confined and controlled by an adequate leash not more than six feet long.
for the registration tag shall be the same as for the original license and
tag. Said license, registration tags and renewals thereof shall expire on
the last day of January in each year. [Amended 9-11-1979 by Ord.
No. 79-19]
B. Dogs used as guides for blind persons and commonly known as "Seeing
Eye dogs" shall be licensed and registered as other dogs as hereinabove
provided for, except that the owner or keeper of such dog shall not be
required to pay any fee therefor.
§ 83-6 KENILWORTH CODE § 83-12
1:194
§ 83-12. Interference prohibited.
No person shall hinder, molest or interfere with anyone authorized or
empowered to perform any duty under this chapter.
§ 83-13. Disturbance of peace and quiet prohibited.
No person shall keep, harbor or maintain any dog which habitually barks,
howls, whines or cries between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. or
which, by frequent barking, howling, whining or crying, disturbs the peace,
comfort or quiet of the neighborhood, thereby creating or maintaining a
nuisance.
§ 83-14. Injury to property prohibited.
No person owning, keeping or harboring a dog shall permit or suffer it to do
any injury or to do any damage to any lawn, shrubbery, flowers, grounds or
property of another.
§ 83-15. Pet waste. [Amended 11-9-1977 by Ord. No. 77-26;
5-24-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-11]
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish requirements for the
proper disposal of pet solid waste in the Borough of Kenilworth so as to
protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for
failure to comply.
B. Definitions and word usage. For the purpose of this section, the
following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the
meanings stated herein unless their use in the text of this section
clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not inconsistent with
the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words
used in the plural number include the singular number, and words used
in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is
always mandatory and not merely directory.
IMMEDIATE — The pet solid waste is removed at once, without delay.
OWNER/KEEPER — Any person who shall possess, maintain, house or
harbor any pet or otherwise have custody of any pet, whether or not the
owner of such pet.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PET — A domesticated animal (other than a disability assistance
animal) kept for amusement or companionship.
PET SOLID WASTE — Waste matter expelled from the bowels of the
pet; excrement.
PROPER DISPOSAL — Placement in a designated waste receptacle, or
other suitable container, and discarded in a refuse container which is
§ 83-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-15
1:195
§ 83-16. Vicious dogs.
§ 83-17. Seizure of dogs; entry upon premises.
Any officer or agent authorized or empowered to perform any duty under
this chapter is hereby authorized to go upon any premises to seize for
regularly emptied by the municipality or some other refuse collector; or
disposal into a system designed to convey domestic sewage for proper
treatment and disposal.
C. Requirement for disposal. All pet owners and keepers are required to
immediately and properly dispose of their pet's solid waste deposited
on any property, public or private, not owned or possessed by that
person.
D. Exemptions. Any owner or keeper who requires the use of a disability
assistance animal shall be exempt from the provisions of this section
while such animal is being used for that purpose.
E. Enforcement. The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the
Police Department, Board of Health and code enforcement officers of
the Borough of Kenilworth.
F. Violations and penalties. Any person violating this section shall be
subject to a fine of up to $500.
A. Any dog which has attacked or bitten any human being or which
habitually attacks other dogs or domestic animals is hereby defined to
be a vicious dog for the purposes of this section.
B. It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police or Acting Chief to receive and
to cause to be investigated complaints against dogs. When any dog
complained against shall be deemed by the Chief of Police or Acting
Chief to be a vicious dog as herein defined, he shall report the facts to
the Municipal Judge, who shall thereupon cause the owner or person
harboring such dog to be notified in writing of the complaint against
such dog and to appear before said Judge at a stated time and place.
The Judge, at the time set for such hearing, shall inquire into the facts
and give all interested persons an opportunity to be heard, under oath,
and to be represented by counsel.
C. If the Judge shall decide, in accordance with the evidence before him,
that such dog complained of is a vicious dog as defined by this section,
notice of such decision shall be given to the owner or person harboring
such dog. Thereafter, no such dog, determined as aforesaid to be a
vicious dog, shall be permitted to run at large or be upon any street or
public place in the Borough except while securely muzzled and under a
leash, as provided in § 83-11 hereof. The owner or person harboring any
such vicious dog who shall suffer or permit such dog to run at large or
be upon any street or public place in the Borough while not securely
muzzled and under leash shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter.
§ 83-15 KENILWORTH CODE § 83-17
1:196
impounding any dog or dogs which he may lawfully seize and impound when
such officer is in immediate pursuit of such dog or dogs, except upon the
premises of the owner of the dog if said owner is present and forbids the
same.
§ 83-18. Enforcement official.
The Dog Warden, if appointed, or Chief of Police, pursuant to ordinance,
shall have the duty of enforcing the provisions of this chapter and the
statutory provisions of N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.1 et seq.
§ 83-19. Annual canvass. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
The Chief of Police, with the cooperation, aid and assistance of the Dog
Warden, if any, or such other personnel as may be appointed for the purpose
by the Council, shall make the annual canvass of all dogs in the Borough
and make reports thereof.
§ 83-20. Seizure and impounding.
It shall be the duty of the Dog Warden or Chief of Police to take into custody
and impound, or cause to be taken into custody and impounded, and taken
to suitable places determined by the Borough the following:
§ 83-21. Destruction or other disposal; notice requirements.
A. Any dog off the premises of the owner or of the person keeping or
harboring said dog which the Dog Warden or his agents have reason to
believe is a stray dog.
B. Any dog off the premises of the owner or of the person keeping or
harboring said dog without a current registration tag on his collar.
C. Any female dog in season off the premises of the owner or of the person
keeping or harboring said dog.
D. Any dog running at large in violation of § 83-8.
A. If any dog, seized as provided in § 83-20, wears a collar or harness
having inscribed thereon or attached thereto the name and address of
any person, or a registration tag, or if the owner or the person keeping
or harboring said dog is otherwise known, the Dog Warden shall
forthwith serve or cause to be served on the person whose address is
given on the collar, or on the owner or the person keeping or harboring
said dog, if known, a notice in writing stating that the dog has been
seized and will be liable to be disposed of or destroyed if not claimed
within seven days after the service of the notice.
B. The notice referred to in Subsection A of this section may be served
either by delivering it to the person on whom it is to be served or by
leaving it at the person's usual or last known place of abode or at the
§ 83-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-21
1:197
§ 83-22. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-9-1977 by Ord. No.
77-26; 9-11-1979 by Ord. No. 79-19; 12-9-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-24]
address given on the collar or by forwarding it by post in a prepaid
letter addressed to that person at his usual or last known place of abode
or to the address given on the collar.
C. When any dog seized in accordance with § 83-20 has been detained for
seven days after notice, when notice can be given as above set forth, or
has been detained for seven days after seizure, when notice has not
been and cannot be given as above set forth, and if the owner or person
keeping or harboring said dog has not claimed said dog and paid all
expenses incurred by reason of its detention, including maintenance,
and if the dog is unlicensed at the time of the seizure and the person
keeping or harboring said dog has not produced a license and
registration tag for said dog, the Dog Warden may cause the dog to be
destroyed in a manner causing as little pain as possible. Any
redemption of a dog pursuant to the provisions of this section shall not
be deemed to discharge or release the owner thereof from the penalties
prescribed in § 83-22 hereof for any violation of this chapter.
D. The preceding requirements of Subsections A, B and C of this section
shall not be deemed applicable when any dog seized and impounded
pursuant to § 83-20, whether licensed or unlicensed, is, or appears to
be, suffering from rabies or is immediately dangerous to the public or
has been so badly injured that it cannot be moved or helped by a
veterinarian's care. In such case, the Dog Warden or a member of the
police force may forthwith cause said dog to be destroyed.
A. Any person who violates or fails or refuses to comply with § 75-2, 75-3,
75-4, 75-5, 75-6, 75-8, 75-10, 83-2, 83-3, 83-4, 83-7, or 83-12 or with the
rules and regulations promulgated by the State Department of Health
or the Borough of Kenilworth Health Department governing the
sanitary conduct and operation of kennels, pet shops, shelters and
pounds, to preserve sanitation therein and to prevent the spread of
rabies and other diseases of dogs within and from such establishments,
shall be liable to the assessment of a penalty as follows:
(1) First occurrence: $50.
(2) Second occurrence: not less than $100 nor more than $500.
(3) Third or further occurrences: not less than $500 nor more than
$2,000.
B. Said penalties are to be recovered by and in the name of the Borough. A
person who refuses or neglects to pay forthwith the amount of a
judgment rendered against him and the costs and charges incident
thereto shall be committed by the judge for a period not exceeding 10
days in the case of a first conviction and in the case of a second,
§ 83-21 KENILWORTH CODE § 83-22
1:198
Chapter 87
ENTERTAINMENT AND AMUSEMENT PLACES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Coin-controlled amusements — See Ch. 59. Fees — See Ch. 91.
subsequent or continuing violation for a term not exceeding 30 days but
not less than two days.
§ 83-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-22
1:199

ARTICLE I
Public Entertainment and Gatherings
[Adopted 5-3-1927 by Ord. No. 75]
§ 87-1. Application required; contents of application. [Amended
11-27-1979 by Ord. No. 79-31; at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
No person, persons, firm, corporation or organization of any kind shall hold
a public entertainment, picnic, carnival, parade or other similar gathering
for amusement unless such person or persons or one of the officers of such
corporation or organization shall make application to the Mayor, in writing,
at least 30 days before the time when such occasion is proposed to be held.
Such application shall state the date and hour when such occasion is to be
held, the place where it is to be held, the approximate number of persons
expected to attend, the objects, if for charitable purposes or for pecuniary
profit, the names and addresses of the persons or officers intended to be in
authority and such other information as the Mayor shall deem necessary.
§ 87-2. Additional information required for parade or procession.
In case such applicant or applicants shall desire to hold or conduct a parade
or procession through the public streets of the Borough of Kenilworth, such
application shall set forth, in addition to the information required by § 87-1
of this article, the purpose for holding such parade or procession, the route
to be covered and the number of vehicles to participate therein.
§ 87-3. Granting or denial of permit. [Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
Upon receiving any such application in writing, the Mayor shall, in his
discretion, grant or refuse the applicant or applicants a permit, in writing,
for holding such public entertainment, picnic, carnival, parade or other
public gathering for amusement if he shall deem it best for the welfare,
quiet and good of the Borough. The Mayor may, however, grant said permit
under such terms and conditions as he shall see fit to impose.
§ 87-4. Conditions imposed upon granting of permit for certain
entertainments. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
Whenever any applicant or applicants shall desire a permit to hold a public
entertainment, picnic, carnival or other public gathering for amusement,
the Mayor may grant said permit upon the condition that regular or special
policemen be stationed at such occasion to maintain order, the costs of
which shall be paid by the applicant or applicants. He may also regulate
the sale or giving away of any form of refreshments and the playing of any
games or restrict the hours during which said occasion shall be held.
§ 87-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-5
1:201
§ 87-5. Conditions imposed upon granting of permit for parade or
procession.
Whenever any applicant or applicants shall request the right to hold a
parade or procession through the public streets of the Borough of
Kenilworth, the Mayor may grant said permit upon the condition that
regular or special policemen be stationed along the route of such parade
or procession to maintain order, the costs of which shall be paid by the
applicant or applicants. He may also change the route, hour or character of
such parade or procession.
§ 87-6. Contents of permit.
Whenever any permit shall be granted by the Mayor, the same shall be in
writing, and in the event that any special terms or conditions are imposed
by the Mayor prior to the granting of such permit, such terms and
conditions shall be particularly specified in the permit.
§ 87-7. Compliance required; enforcement. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
In case a permit shall be granted by the Mayor permitting a public
entertainment, picnic, carnival, parade or other public gathering for
amusement to be held within the Borough of Kenilworth, the same shall
be conducted in such a manner as to comply in all respects with the
terms and conditions set forth in the permit. Should there be a failure
to comply with such terms and conditions as set forth therein, or in the
event that the same should be conducted in a disorderly manner, it shall
be the duty of the regular policemen or special policemen stationed thereat
to immediately disperse the same and arrest all persons conducting or
participating therein.
§ 87-8. Powers of Council President in absence of Mayor.
In the event that the Mayor should be sick or absent from the Borough,
application for a permit to hold such occasion shall be made to the President
of the Borough Council. He, when acting in place of the Mayor, shall have
all the powers vested in the Mayor by the provisions of this article.
§ 87-9. Fee. [Amended 9-11-1979 by Ord. No. 79-19]
A fee as provided in Chapter 91, Fees and Licenses, shall be paid to the
Borough of Kenilworth upon the granting of any permit, which fee must
accompany the application.
§ 87-5 KENILWORTH CODE § 87-10
1:202
§ 87-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-11-1979 by Ord. No.
79-19; at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. II)]
Any person, persons, firm or corporation of any kind violating this article
or any section thereof shall be subject to the general penalty set forth in
Chapter 1, Article I, General Penalty, of the Borough of Kenilworth Code.
§ 87-11. Applicability.
Nothing herein contained shall apply to private funerals, wedding
processions or any public gatherings for amusement conducted by religious
or school organizations.
§ 87-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-11
1:203

ARTICLE II
(Reserved)50
§ 87-12. through 87-18. (Reserved)
50.Editor's Note: Former Ch. 87, Art. II, Public Dances, adopted 9-11-1979 by Ord. No. 79-19,
was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 87-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-12
1:205

ARTICLE III
Places of Amusement
[Adopted 4-27-1954 by Ord. No. 54-11]
§ 87-19. License and payment of fee required. [Amended 9-11-1979
by Ord. No. 79-19]
It shall be unlawful to maintain, operate or conduct in the Borough of
Kenilworth any bowling alley, stadium, carnival, circus, motion-picture
theater, swimming pool or skating rink, without first presenting an
application and receiving a license to operate the respective business or
place of amusement and paying the hereinafter-prescribed fee for such
license.
§ 87-20. Application for license.
A. Each application for any license issuable under this article shall be
made to the Borough Clerk in writing and shall set forth the following:
[Amended 9-11-1979 by Ord. No. 79-19]
(1) The location.
(2) The type of business or amusement sought to be licensed.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
(3) The name, residence, age and occupation of the applicant.
(4) The name of the owner of the place sought to be licensed.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
(5) Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a crime.
B. All applications shall set forth any other data which by the rules or
regulations of the License Committee shall be considered pertinent.
C. All applications shall be submitted to the Chief of Police for his
inspection and shall contain thereon a notation by the Chief of Police
setting forth his approval or his disapproval of the application. The
License Committee may require also that where it considers
appropriate, an application shall also be submitted to the Health Officer
and to the Chief of the Fire Department, who shall indicate upon said
application their approval or disapproval thereof, and may require that
when the applicant is not the owner of the premises sought to be
licensed, consent of the owner shall be endorsed on the application.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
D. The Chief of Police, Health Officer and Chief of the Fire Department
shall respectively satisfy themselves as to the moral and public safety
hazards, the sanitary requirements and conditions and the fire hazards
§ 87-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-20
1:207
§ 87-21. Fees.
§ 87-22. License provisions; display of license.
Each license shall entitle the licensee to conduct the licensed business
or game only at the place designated in the license and shall not be
transferable either as to person or place. Each such license shall expire on
the 31st day of December of the year in which it was issued, and in the case
of a license for a carnival or for a circus, the license shall be effective only
for the specific period set forth in said license. Each license shall be kept
in a position in the licensed premises where it is readily observable and is
prominently displayed.
§ 87-23. Gambling or violation of laws prohibited. [Amended at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
No game or amusement licensed under this article shall be used for the
purposes of gambling or for violating any of the ordinances of the Borough
of Kenilworth or any of the statutes of the State of New Jersey.
§ 87-24. Suspension or revocation of license.
Any license issued under this article may be suspended or revoked by the
Borough Council of the Borough of Kenilworth for violation of any of the
terms of this article or for other good cause. Upon any proceeding for
suspension or revocation, written notice of the charges shall be served
upon the licensee within not less than five days of the time set for hearing
thereon, such notice to be either in person or by registered mail addressed
to the licensed place of business, and said hearing may be adjourned from
time to time. In case any license is suspended or revoked, the licensee shall
not be entitled to the return of any part of the license fee.
involved and shall note upon such application their approval or
disapproval within three days after the same has been presented to
them.
E. All such applications shall be accompanied by the appropriate license
fee hereinafter named, and the Borough Clerk shall issue the respective
licenses.
A. The annual fees payable for licenses issued under this article shall be as
provided in Chapter 91, Fees and Licenses. [Amended 9-11-1979 by
Ord. No. 79-19]
B. Except as to a carnival or circus or picnic, the fee for any license issued
after August 1 in any year shall be at the rate of 1/2 of the annual fee
hereinabove specified.
§ 87-20 KENILWORTH CODE § 87-25
1:208
§ 87-25. Inspections.
The Borough Clerk may direct that all places licensed under this article
shall be subject to inspection by the Police Department, or an officer or
officers designated by the Chief of Police for such purpose, and by the
Health Officer and Chief of the Fire Department.
§ 87-26. Conduct in clean and sanitary manner required.
Every place of business licensed under this article shall be conducted in a
law-abiding, clean and sanitary manner and shall provide adequate sanitary
arrangements and facilities in accordance with its necessities, and shall
comply with all regulations, provisions and ordinances of the Borough of
Kenilworth or of its Board of Health or any law which may be applicable to
such places.
§ 87-27. Applicability.
This article shall not apply to any church or fraternal order or other private
non-profit-making association which operates or maintains any of the
herein-specified places or types of amusement or recreation solely for the
use of its own members.
§ 87-28. Age restrictions. [Amended 3-8-1966 by Ord. No. 66-3]
It shall be unlawful for any licensee hereunder to permit or suffer any
person under the age of 18 years to play pool or billiards or to dance in
any place licensed under the terms of this article. Where such place is
also licensed pursuant to Chapter 1 of Title 33 of the Revised Statutes of
New Jersey (Alcoholic Beverage Law), it shall be unlawful for any person
under the age of 21 to play pool or billiards or to dance therein unless
accompanied by a parent or legally appointed guardian.
§ 87-29. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-11-1979 by Ord. No.
79-19; at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. II)]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article
shall, upon conviction, be subject to the general penalty set forth in Chapter
1, Article I, General Penalty, of the Borough of Kenilworth Code.
§ 87-30. Repealer; effective date.
Ordinance Nos. 149, 167 and 289 and any other ordinance or parts of
ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed, and this ordinance
shall take effect as of January 1, 1955.
§ 87-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-30
1:209

ARTICLE IV
(Reserved)51
51.Editor's Note: Former Ch. 87, Art. IV, Pool and Billiard Halls, adopted 3-24-1964 by Ord.
No. 64-7, as amended, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II).
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-30
1:211
Chapter 88
(RESERVED)
Chapter 91
FEES AND LICENSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use fees — See Ch. 120.
§ 87-30 KENILWORTH CODE § 87-30
1:212
ARTICLE I
Fees Generally
[Adopted 9-11-1979 by Ord. No. 79-18]
§ 91-1. Schedule of fees.
A. The following schedule of fees is hereby established with respect to
licenses, permits and activities required or regulated under the
provisions of various chapters of the Code of the Borough of Kenilworth.
Applications for and the issuance of such licenses and permits shall be
subject to the provisions of the specific chapter of the Code which is
indicated for each type of license or permit. The business, activity or
operation for which the license or permit is required shall be subject to
all regulations set forth in the chapter to which reference is made.
[Amended 5-24-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-15; at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
Chapter of Code/Type of Application, License or
Permit Fee
Chapter 55, Alarm Devices [Repealed
3-12-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-3; amended at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
First 12 alarm sensors/heads $50
Each additional group of 25 alarm sensors/heads $17
Chapter 57, Alcoholic Beverages [Last
amended 11-10-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-14]
*Plenary retail consumption license (per year) $1,550
*Plenary retail distribution license (per year) $775
Club license (per year) $150
Identification of employees
Fingerprinting (each) $35*
*New Jersey State Bureau of Investigation
currently charges $35, payable by certified
check. In the event of a change in its fee
schedule, this fee shall be accordingly
changed.
Identification card (each) $10
One-day permit for sale on designated premises
by civic, religious or educational organizations
$50
One-day permit for sale by other organizations $75
Chapter 59, Amusements, Coin-Controlled
[Last amended 11-10-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-14]
§ 91-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 91-1
1:213
Chapter of Code/Type of Application, License or
Permit Fee
Each game licensed to a proprietor $50
Each game licensed to a distributor $50
Each game distributed by a distributor $300
Each game distributed by a distributorproprietor
$400
Coin-controlled music machine (per machine per
year)
$50
Chapter 66, Bicycles
Fee for release of bicycle from impoundment $1
License fee, per bicycle
When licensed period has more than 1 year
before the expiration date
$0.50
When remaining licensed period shall be less
than 1 year before the expiration date
$0.25
Chapter 75, Cats [Added 12-11-1990 by Ord.
No. 90-18; last amended 11-10-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-14]
License fee
Unneutered cat, each $13
Neutered cat, each $10
Delinquent fee $0.50
Chapter 83, Dogs [Last amended 11-10-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-14]
License fee: $9, effective January 1, 2011, and $10
effective February 1, 2011. Fee includes a state
registration fee of $1 and $0.20 for the State of New
Jersey Pilot Clinic fund. In addition, to the above
fee, there shall be an additional fee of $3 for any
dog which has not had its reproductive capacity
permanently altered through sterilization pursuant
to Section 12 of P.L. 1941, c. 151.52
Replacement (lost) tag: $1
Chapter 87, Entertainment and Amusement
Places [Last amended 3-12-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-3]
Carnival (per carnival) $200
Circus (per day) $200
52.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.3.
§ 91-1 KENILWORTH CODE § 91-1
1:214
Chapter of Code/Type of Application, License or
Permit Fee
Chapter 97, Fireworks and Firearms [Added
5-25-1983 by Ord. No. 83-10; amended
6-28-1983 by Ord. No. 83-16; 4-23-2008 by Ord.
No. 2008-06]
Article I, Sale of Fireworks; Firing of Firearms
and Fireworks
Fingerprinting (payable by certified or bank
check, or cash)
$25
Borough of Kenilworth charges $25 for the
fingerprinting and processing of individuals.
Any additional fees reflecting the processing
cost for other state or federal authorities or
agencies will also be collected and are
payable directly to the authority or agency
by certified or bank check.
Chapter 104, Garage Sales [Amended
3-12-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-3; 11-10-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-14]
Garage sale license $10
Out-of-door sale license $10
Chapter 112, Grading, Excavations and
Landfills
Application fee $50
Chapter 116, Industrial Waste [Amended last
11-24-1987 by Ord. No. 87-2553]
Annual rate schedule
Flow (million gallons per year) $167.06 or
$0.16706 per
1,000 gallons
Biochemical oxygen demand (tons per year,
per ton)
$206.10
Suspended solids (tons per year, per ton) $226.12
Alternate $367.07 per
million gallons
per year
Chapter 144, Peddling and Soliciting
[Amended 12-11-1991 by Ord. No. 91-25]
Application fee $50
Permit fee (valid for 30 days) $150
53.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that it be retroactive to January 1, 1987.
§ 91-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 91-1
1:215
Chapter of Code/Type of Application, License or
Permit Fee
Chapter 150, Property Maintenance
Article V, Responsibilities of Creditors and
Mortgage Holders for Vacant, Abandoned and
Foreclosed Properties [Added 7-13-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-06; amended 4-25-2018 by Ord.
No. 2018-04]
Initial registration fee for each vacant and
abandoned property
$500
Renewal fee, first year $1,500
Renewal, second year $3,000
All additional renewals, per year $5,000
Chapter 154, Article I, Special Sales
License fee $25
Renewal license fee $15
Chapter 160, Shopping Carts
Fee for redemption of confiscated carts $10
Storage charge (per month) $3
Chapter 165, Smoke Detectors and Lock Boxes
Article I, Smoke Detectors [Added 11-10-1992
by Ord. No. 92-20; amended 3-25-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009-07]
Smoke and carbon monoxide detector
inspections
Inspections
For which the applicant requests turnaround
within 2 weeks
$50
For which the applicant requests turnaround
within 1 week
$75
For which the applicant requests turnaround
within 3 business days
$100
Reinspections: If required, the second inspection
is included for no additional charge and
thereafter an additional $50 per each
subsequent inspection
All payments for above are to be made
payable to:
§ 91-1 KENILWORTH CODE § 91-1
1:216
Chapter of Code/Type of Application, License or
Permit Fee
Kenilworth Fire Prevention Bureau
491 Washington Avenue
Kenilworth, New Jersey 07033
Chapter 165, Smoke Detectors and Lock Boxes
Article II, Key Lock Box Emergency Access
System [Added 10-12-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-09]
Registration for a key lock box $150
Reinspection, per key in the lock box $25
Chapter 167, Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control
Application for soil erosion and sediment control
plan
$50
Chapter 170, Streets and Sidewalks [Added
9-23-1980 by Ord. No. 80-25; last amended
10-22-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-18]
Section 170-17, street opening permit $500
Reinspection fee for each additional
inspection required for final approval
$200
Driveway and sidewalk permit $100
Reinspection fee $100
Chapter 179, Taxicabs and Limousines
[Amended 3-12-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-3;
11-10-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-14; 4-11-2012 by
Ord. No. 2012-08]
License fee for business operation (per year) $75
License fee per vehicle (per year) $50
License fee per driver (per year) $75
Chapter 181, Tennis Courts
Family permit $6
Individual permit $4
Chapter 181A, Towing [Added 12-14-1993 by
Ord. No. 93-27; amended 12-9-2015 by Ord.
No. 2015-08]
Initial license application $500
Resubmission if initial application is incomplete $250
Renewal of license $250
§ 91-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 91-1
1:217
§ 91-1.1. Seniors and volunteer firemen exempt from certain
construction fees. [Added 9-11-1979 by Ord. No. 79-21; amended
4-14-1999 by Ord. No. 99-5]
Any Kenilworth volunteer fireman or senior citizen who shall be at least
60 years of age who resides in the Borough of Kenilworth and who wishes
to make renovations or perform maintenance or repairs to his or her
residence, and which is not necessitated by a loss or event covered by
hazard or homeowner's insurance, shall be exempt from the payment of the
first $250 of construction permit fees for such renovation, maintenance or
repair.
§ 91-1.2. Handicapped accessibility; waiver of construction fees.
[Added 10-24-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-17]
B. Fees not associated with specific Code provisions. [Added 4-23-2003
by Ord. No. 2003-5]
Type Fee
Pickup and disposal of white goods: refrigerators, air
conditioners, freezers, washers, dryers, stoves and
water heaters (per unit) [Amended 11-10-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-14]
$35
Duplicate tax bill [Added 4-14-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-5]
$5
Duplicate tax sale certificates [Added 2-9-2005 by
Ord. No. 2005-02]
$100
Mailing of notice of tax sale [Added 2-9-2005 by
Ord. No. 2005-02]
$25
C. Charges for purchase of:
Item Fee
Zoning Book $20
Zoning Map $2
Municipal Code Book $400
Master Plan $40
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
BLINDNESS — Central visual acuity of 20/200 or less in the better eye
with the use of a correcting lens. An eye which is accompanied by a
limitation in the fields of vision such that the widest diameter of the
visual field subtends an angle no greater than 20° shall be considered
as having a central visual acuity of 20/200 or less.
DISABLED PERSON — A person who has the total and permanent
inability to engage in any substantial gainful activity by reason of
§ 91-1 KENILWORTH CODE § 91-1.2
1:218
§ 91-1.3. Uniform Construction Code fees. [Added 2-8-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012-01; amended 3-9-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-01]
any medically determinable physical or mental impairment, including
blindness, and shall include, but not be limited to, any resident of this
state who is disabled pursuant to the Federal Social Security Act (42
U.S.C. § 416) or the Federal Railroad Retirement Act of 1974 (45 U.S.C.
§ 231 et seq.) or is rated as having a 60% disability or higher pursuant
to any federal law administered by the United States Veterans' Act.
B. Waiver of fees.
(1) No person shall be charged a construction permit surcharge fee or
enforcing agency fee for any construction, reconstruction,
alteration or improvement designed and undertaken solely to
promote accessibility by disabled persons to an existing public or
private structure or any of the facilities contained therein.
(2) A disabled person, or a parent or sibling of a disabled person, shall
not be required to pay any municipal fee or charge in order to
secure a construction permit for any construction, reconstruction,
alteration or improvement which promotes accessibility to his own
living unit.
A. New construction and additions.
(1) Minimum fee: $50.
(2) Use Groups B, H, I-1, 2, 4, M, E, R-1, 2, 3, 4, 5, U (per cubic foot):
$0.038.
(a) Up to $50,000: $34 per $1,000.
(b) $50,000.01 to $100,000: $26 per $1,000.
(c) Over $100,000: $22 per $1,000.
(3) Use Groups A-1, 2, 3, 4, 5, F-1, 2, S-1, 2 (per cubic foot): $0.021
(a) Up to $50,000: $34 per $1,000.
(b) $50,000.01 to $100,000: $26 per $1,000.
(c) Over $100,000: $22 per $1,000.
(4) Deck or balcony (all use groups):
(a) Up to $50,000: $34 per $1,000.
(b) $50,000.01 to $100,000: $26 per $1,000.
(c) Over $100,000: $22 per $1,000.
(5) Fence (all use groups):
§ 91-1.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 91-1.3
1:219
(a) Up to $50,000: $30 per $1,000.
(b) $50,000.01 to $100,000: $23 per $1,000.
(c) Over $100,000: $19 per $1,000.
(6) Signs (all use groups): $65.
(7) Pylon:
(a) Up to 100 square feet: $6 per square foot.
(b) 101 to 400 square feet: $4.75 per square foot.
(c) Over 400 square feet: $3.50 per square foot.
(8) Wall or ground:
(a) Up to 100 square feet: $3 per square foot.
(b) 101 to 400 square feet: $2.10 per square foot.
(c) Over 400 square feet: $1.40 per square foot.
(9) Pool, in-ground (all use groups):
(a) Less than or equal to 550 square feet: $106.
(b) Greater than 550 square feet: $210.
(10) Pool, aboveground (all use groups):
(a) Less than or equal to 550 square feet: $70.
(b) Greater than 550 square feet: $140.
(11) Temporary structures (all use groups): $129.
(12) Open structural towers:
(a) Up to $50,000: $34 per $1,000.
(b) $50,000.01 to $100,000: $26 per $1,000.
(c) Over $100,000: $22 per $1,000.
B. Rehabilitation.
(1) Minimum fee: $50.
(2) Use Groups B, E, H-1, 2, 3, 4, 5, I-1, 2, 3, 4, M, R-1, 2, 4, U, C, A-1, 2,
3, 4, F-1, S-1, 2:
(a) Up to $50,000: $34 per $1,000.
(b) $50,000.01 to $100,000: $26 per $1,000.
(c) Over $100,000: $22 per $1,000.
§ 91-1.3 KENILWORTH CODE § 91-1.3
1:220
(3) Use Groups R-3 and R-5 (only), roofing and siding: $65 (flat rate).
(4) Roofing (all other use groups):
(a) Up to $50,000: $34 per $1,000.
(b) $50,000.01 to $100,000: $26 per $1,000.
(c) Over $100,000: $22 per $1,000.
(5) Siding:
(a) Up to $50,000: $34 per $1,000.
(b) $50,000.01 to $100,000: $26 per $1,000.
(c) Over $100,000: $22 per $1,000.
(6) Retaining wall (all use groups):
(a) Class 3 Residential:
[1] Less than or equal to 550 square feet: $106.
[2] Greater than 550 square feet: $210.
(b) Other than Class 3 Residential:
[1] Up to $50,000: $34 per $1,000.
[2] $50,000.01 to $100,000: $26 per $1,000.
[3] Over $100,000: $22 per $1,000.
C. Asbestos abatement.
(1) Up to $50,000: $34 per $1,000.
(2) $50,000.01 to $100,000: $26 per $1,000.
(3) Over $100,000: $22 per $1,000.
D. Lead hazard abatement: $196.
E. Radon remediation.
(1) Up to $50,000: $34 per $1,000.
(2) $50,000.01 to $100,000: $26 per $1,000.
(3) Over $100,000: $22 per $1,000.
F. Demolition.
(1) Less than 5,000 square feet in area and over 30 feet in height: $92.
(2) More than 5,000 square feet in area and over 30 feet in height:
$168.
§ 91-1.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 91-1.3
1:221
G. Tank removal.
(1) Use Groups R-3 and R-5: $92.
(2) All other use groups: $168.
H. Solar panels (all use groups).
(1) Minimum fee: $50.
(a) Up to $50,000: $34 per $1,000.
(b) $50,000.01 to $100,000: $26 per $1,000.
(c) Over $100,000: $22 per $1,000.
I. Plan review: alternate systems and nondepletable energy source
provisions of Energy Subcode:
(1) Use Groups R-3 and R-5: $383.
(2) All other use groups: $1,915.
§ 91-1.3 KENILWORTH CODE § 91-1.3
1:222
ARTICLE II
Police Reports and Services
[Adopted 10-27-1964 by Ord. No. 64-24]
§ 91-2. Application and fee required.
Every person, corporation or association required to procure a license or
permit under the provisions of any law or ordinance of the Borough of
Kenilworth or requesting any service of a municipal officer or employee or
copies of any records which are permitted by law shall submit the proper
required application or request accompanied by the full amount of the
license fee or fee for the service or copies requested.
§ 91-3. Collection and deposit of fees.
The proper official, employee or board shall collect all fees, issue licenses
or permits, in the name of the Borough of Kenilworth, and deliver all fees to
the Borough Clerk with a report of collections, and the Borough Clerk shall
deposit them with the Borough Treasurer.
§ 91-4. Fees. [Amended 1-25-1977 by Ord. No. 77-2; 6-9-1981 by
Ord. No. 81-11; 10-12-1994 by Ord. No. 94-19]
The following fees shall be charged by the Police Department:
A. Accident report.
(1) Picked up by applicant: one to three pages, $2; $1 for each
additional page.
(2) Mailed to applicant: one to three pages, $5; $1 for each additional
page.
B. Police report.
(1) Picked up by applicant: one to three pages, $5; $1 for each
additional page.
(2) Mailed to applicant: one to three pages, $7; $1 for each additional
page.
C. Discovery/search reports.
(1) Picked up by applicant: one to three pages, $5; $1 for each
additional page.
(2) Mailed to applicant: one to three pages, $7; $1 for each additional
page.
D. Good conduct letters: $10 each.
E. Letters of recommendation: $10 each.
§ 91-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 91-4
1:223
§ 91-5. Effect on other ordinances.
This article shall in no way affect any other ordinance requiring the payment
of any fee for any license or any other service except as it may be in conflict
herewith.
F. Photostatic copy of arrest report: up to three pages, $10; $5 for each
additional page.
G. Research of records and/or preparation of reports: $30 per hour, with
two-hour minimum charge.
H. Photo reproduction: $7.50 each.
I. Sketch maps.
(1) Not to scale: $50 each.
(2) To scale: $100 each.
J. Applicant review of videotape or audio tape: $30. [Amended
5-24-1995 by Ord. No. 95-13; 9-13-1995 by Ord. No. 95-19]
K. Copy of videotape or audiotape: $50. [Amended 9-13-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-19]
L. Off-duty police services. [Added 8-23-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-18;
amended 5-8-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-8]
Service Fee
Security $30 per hour, plus $5 per hour administrative
fee
Construction/traffic $45 per hour, plus $5 per hour administrative
fee
Executive
protection
$40 per hour, plus 5% per hour administrative
fee
(1) In addition to all fees required for off-duty police services, a fee of
$10 per hour or any part thereof shall be due for the use of any
police vehicle. [Added 5-13-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-10]
M. Police fingerprinting: $25 payable by certified or bank check, or cash.
[Added 4-23-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-07]
(1) This fee is not applicable to parents having children age 12 or
under who are being fingerprinted for identification purposes.
(2) Any additional fees reflecting the processing cost for other state or
federal authorities or agencies will also be collected and are
payable directly to the authority or agency by certified or bank
check.
§ 91-4 KENILWORTH CODE § 91-5
1:224
ARTICLE III
Recreation Programs
[Adopted 9-14-1976 by Ord. No. 76-20]
§ 91-6. Fees for participation in programs. [Amended 2-11-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-02; 7-12-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-06]
The Recreation Committee of the Borough of Kenilworth shall charge fees
per season for each participant in the following program(s):
A. Three dollars for every person under the age of 18.
B. Five dollars for every person 18 years or older.
C. Basketball:
(1) Kindergarten through 2nd grade clinic: $50 per child per season.
(2) 3rd grade through 5th grade instruction: $75 per child per season.
(3) 6th grade through 8th grade instruction: $75 per child per season.
(4) 9th grade through 10th grade instruction: $75 per child per season.
[Added 11-7-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-17]
D. Cheer clinic: $20 per child per season.
E. Softball:
(1) Kindergarten through 2nd grade clinic: $50 per child per season.
(2) 3rd grade through 5th grade instruction: $75 per child per season.
(3) 6th grade through 8th grade instruction: $75 per child per season.
F. Flag football: $25 per person per season.
G. Arts and crafts at the rate of $3 per craft up to three and then $2
thereafter.
H. Summer camp, kindergarten through 7th grade:
If more than one child from the same family or resides in the same home
attends day camp for the entire week, then each child shall be entitled
to a reduction of $10.
(1) Day camp: $75 for a calendar week, Monday through Friday.
(2) Day camp: $45 for no more than three days in a calendar week.
(3) After care: $40 for four or five days in a calendar week (no sibling
discount).
(4) After care: $24 for up to three days in a calendar week (no sibling
discount).
§ 91-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 91-6
1:225
§ 91-7. Promulgation of rules.
The Recreation Director, with the advice of the Recreation Committee, may
promulgate rules not inconsistent with this article as may be approved
by the governing body of the Borough of Kenilworth to provide for the
collection of said fees.
§ 91-8. Collection and payment of fees to Treasurer.
Any members or employees of the Recreation Committee collecting any of
the aforesaid fees shall pay the same to the Borough Treasurer within the
time prescribed by law.
I. Recreational night programs: $5 per night.
J. Homework club, 3rd grade to 8th grade: $200 per month or any portion
thereof of the month.
K. Soccer program, 6th grade to 8th grade instruction: $180 per person
per season.
§ 91-6 KENILWORTH CODE § 91-8
1:226
ARTICLE IV
Technical Review and Inspection Fees
[Adopted 12-14-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-17]
§ 91-9. Fees established.
The following fees shall be paid to the Borough of Kenilworth for technical
reviews and inspections performed:
A. Plot grading/drainage review (residential): $150.
B. Engineering review for final certificate of occupancy: $150.
C. As-built inspection: $100 each occurrence.
D. Commercial/industrial site review.
(1) Up to 10,000 square feet of lot area: $200.
(2) Each foot over the first 10,000 square feet of lot area: $200.
(3) Site inspections (one hour per inspection visit for up to 10,000
square feet of lot area): $100.
E. Road opening permit: $150.
F. Driveway modification: $75.
G. Tree removal permit: $50.
H. Retaining wall review: $150.
§ 91-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 91-9
1:227

ARTICLE V
Bingo and Raffle Licenses
[Adopted 11-8-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-18]
§ 91-10. Fees established.
§ 91-11. Issuing authority. [Added 6-25-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-07]
The Borough Clerk shall perform the duties of the issuing authority for the
approval of the granting of raffle and bingo licenses pursuant to N.J.A.C.
13:47-1.1 et seq.
A. Bingo: $20 for each occasion.
B. On-premises raffle: $20.
C. Off-premises raffle: $20.
D. Carnival games or wheels: $20 for each (maximum six).
E. Calendar raffle: $20 for each occasion.
F. Instant raffle: $20 for each occasion.
G. Golf hole-in-one: $20.
H. Armchair race: $50 per occasion.
I. Casino nights: $100 per occasion.
§ 91-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 91-11
1:229
Chapter 93
FILMING
§ 93-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, these terms shall have the following meanings:
FAMILY VIDEOS — The filming or videotaping of motion pictures solely for
private family use.
FILMING — The taking of still or motion pictures either on film, videotape,
or similar recording medium, for any purpose intended for viewing on
television, in theaters or for institutional uses.
MAJOR MOTION PICTURE — Any film which is financed and/or distributed
by a major motion picture studio, including but not limited to the following:
MOTION PICTURE, TELEVISION PICTURES and STILL PHOTOGRAPHY
— All activities attendant to the staging and/or shooting of commercial
motion pictures, television series, television movies, and commercials and
to the taking of single or multiple photographs for sale or commercial use
where the photographer sets up stationary equipment in any one location
for longer than five consecutive minutes.
NEWS MEDIA — Photography, filming, and/or videotaping for the purpose
of spontaneous, unplanned television news broadcast or reporting for print
media by reporters, photographers or cameramen.
PUBLIC LANDS — The areas, including but not limited to any public street,
highway, sidewalk, square, public park, playground, and other public
places, which are within the jurisdiction and control of the Borough of
Kenilworth.
A. Universal Pictures;
Warner Brothers, including New Line Cinema, Castle Rock Cinema,
Village Road Show and BelAire;
B.
C. Paramount, including MTV Films and Nickelodeon Movie;
D. 20th Century Fox, including Fox Searchlight;
E. Sony/Columbia;
F. Disney/Miramax;
G. MGM — United Artists;
H. Dreamworks;
I. Any film for which the budget is at least $1,000,000; and
J. Recurrent television series programming.
§ 91-11 KENILWORTH CODE § 93-1
1:230
STUDENT FILMS — Motion picture, television or still photography
produced to satisfy a course or curriculum requirement at an educational
institution. The student filmmaker must supply proof that he/she is
currently enrolled.
§ 93-2. Permit required; application location and form; reissuance.
§ 93-3. Issuance of permits; waiting period; required information.
A. No person shall use any public or private property, public right-of-way,
facility, and/or residence for the purpose of taking commercial motion
pictures, television pictures or still photography without first applying
for and receiving a permit from the Borough Clerk of the Borough of
Kenilworth. The permit shall set forth the approved location of such
filming and also the approved duration of such filming by specific
reference to days or dates. No permit shall authorize filming for more
than four consecutive days in any one location, and in no event shall
filming at one location within the Borough exceed a total of 12 days in
any one calendar year, regardless of the number of permits utilized in
reaching the twelve-day maximum. Either or both of the fourconsecutive-
day and the twelve-day limitations may be extended only if
the filming requested satisfies the major motion picture exception
defined by § 93-1 of this chapter. Said permit must be readily available
for inspection by Borough officials at all times at the site of the filming.
B. All permits shall be applied for and obtained from the office of the
Borough Clerk during normal business hours. Applications for such
permits shall be in a form approved by the Borough Clerk and shall be
accompanied by a permit fee in the amount established by this chapter
in § 93-12.
C. If a permit is issued and filming does not in fact take place on the dates
specified due to good cause, including but not limited to by reason of
inclement weather, the Borough Clerk may issue a new permit for
filming on other dates, subject to full compliance with all other
provisions of this chapter. No additional fee shall be paid for this new
permit.
D. The provisions of this section shall not apply to news media, family
videos and/or student films.
A. No permit shall be issued by the Borough Clerk unless it was applied for
at least five days prior to the requested shooting date. However, the
Borough Clerk may waive the five-day period if, in his/her judgment, the
applicant has obtained all other related approvals and also all adjacent
property owners and/or tenants need not be notified.
B. No permit shall be issued for filming upon public lands unless the
applicant shall provide the Borough of Kenilworth with satisfactory
proof of the following:
§ 93-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 93-3
1:231
§ 93-4. Interference with public activity; notice of filming.
(1) Proof of insurance coverage, including but not limited to:
(a) For bodily injury: in the amount of $3,000,000.
(b) For property damage for each occurrence: in the aggregate
amount of $500,000.
(2) An agreement, in writing, whereby the applicant agrees to
indemnify and hold harmless the Borough of Kenilworth from any
and all liability, expense, claim or damages resulting from the use
of public lands.
(3) The posting of cash or maintenance bond for the value of $2,500
protecting and insuring that the location utilized for the filming will
be left in a satisfactory condition, free of debris, rubbish, and
equipment, and that due observance of all Borough ordinances,
laws, and regulations will be followed. Within 15 days of the
completion of the filming, the Borough will return the bond if there
has been no damage to the public property or no public expense
caused by the filming.
(4) The hiring of an off-duty Kenilworth police officer for the times
indicated on the permit.
C. The holder of the permit shall take all reasonable steps to minimize
interference with the free passage of pedestrians and traffic over public
lands and shall comply with all lawful directives issued by the Borough
of Kenilworth Police Department with respect thereto.
A. The holder of the permit shall conduct filming in such a manner as to
minimize the inconvenience or discomfort to adjoining property owners
as a result of such filming and shall, to the extent practicable, abate
noise and park vehicles off the public streets.
B. The parking of all vehicles on public streets and rights-of-way shall be
so done in accordance with all applicable state and local regulations.
C. The holder shall not interfere with previously scheduled activities upon
public lands and shall limit, to the extent possible, any interference with
normal public activity on such public lands.
D. Where the applicant's production activity, by any reason of location or
otherwise, will directly involve and/or affect any business, merchant or
resident, these parties shall be given written notice of the filming at
least three days before the requested shooting date and shall be
informed that objections may be filed with the Borough Clerk, said
objections to form a part of the applicant's application and be
considered in the review of the same. Proof of service of notification to
adjacent owners shall be submitted to the Borough Clerk within two
days of the requested shooting date.
§ 93-3 KENILWORTH CODE § 93-5
1:232
§ 93-5. Filming in residential areas.
Filming in residential zones shall be permitted Monday through Friday
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., and all activity shall meet the
standards of Chapter 134, Nuisances, of the Borough Code, provided that
all requests for night scenes shall be approved in the permit to be granted
in accordance with § 93-8 hereof. The setup, production and breakdown
required by all filming shall be included in the hours as set forth herein.
§ 93-6. Denial of permit; employment of patrolmen and electrician.
§ 93-7. Appeals.
§ 93-8. Waiver of requirements by Borough.
The Borough may authorize filming other than during the hours herein
described. In determining whether to allow an extension of hours under this
A. The Borough of Kenilworth may refuse to issue a permit whenever it
determines, on the basis of objective facts and after a review of the
application and a report thereon by the Police Department and by other
Borough agencies involved with the proposed filming site, that filming
at the location and/or the time set forth in the application would violate
any law or ordinance or would unreasonably interfere with the use and
enjoyment of adjoining properties, unreasonably impede the free flow
of vehicular or pedestrian traffic or otherwise endanger the public's
health, safety or welfare.
B. The Borough reserves the right to require one or more patrolmen on
site in situations where the production may impede the proper flow of
traffic. The cost of said patrolmen shall be borne by the applicant as a
cost of production. Where existing electrical power lines are to be
utilized by the production, an on-site licensed electrician may be
similarly required if the production company does not have a licensed
electrician on staff.
A. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Borough denying or revoking
a permit or a person requesting relief pursuant to this section may
appeal to the Borough Council. A written notice of appeal setting forth
the reasons for the appeal shall be filed.
B. An appeal from the decision of the Borough shall be filed within 10 days
of said decision. The Borough Council shall set the matter down for a
hearing within 30 days of the filing of the notice of appeal. The decision
of the Borough shall be in the form of a resolution at the first regularly
scheduled public meeting after the hearing of the appeal. The appellant
may agree, in writing, to a later date for the decision. If such a
resolution is not adopted within the time required, the decision of the
Borough shall be deemed to be reversed, and a permit shall be issued in
conformity with the application, or the relief pursuant to the waiver
section of this chapter shall be deemed denied.
§ 93-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 93-8
1:233
section, the Borough shall consider factors, including, but not limited to, the
following:
§ 93-9. Copies of permit; inspections.
Copies of the approved permit shall be sent to the New Jersey Film
Commission, as well as the Police and Fire Departments, before filming
takes place. The applicant shall permit the Fire Prevention Bureau or
other Borough inspectors to inspect the site and equipment to be used.
The applicant shall comply with all safety instructions issued by the Fire
Prevention Bureau or other Borough inspectors.
§ 93-10. Reimbursement of certain costs.
In addition to any and all other fees or costs mentioned in this chapter, the
applicant shall reimburse the Borough for any lost revenue, including but
not limited to repairs required to public property and any revenues that the
Borough was prevented from earning because of the filming.
§ 93-11. Special regulations for major motion pictures.
§ 93-12. Schedule of fees.
The schedule of fees for the issuance of permits authorized by this chapter
is as follows:
A. Traffic congestion at the location;
B. The applicant's ability to remove film-related vehicles off the public
streets;
C. Whether the applicant is requesting restrictions on the use of public
streets or public parking during the course of the filming;
D. The nature of the film shoot itself, e.g., indoors or outdoors, day or
night, on public or private lands;
E. Prior experience of the film company/applicant with the Borough, if
any; and
F. Whether there was consultation with the Borough Council.
A. With regard to filming being done on a major motion picture, and upon
a favorable review of the factors set forth in § 93-8, the Borough may
grant an exemption of the four-consecutive-filming-day limit and/or the
limit of 12 total filming days within a calendar year as defined in § 93-2.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
B. Any days that are necessary for setup and preparation of a major
motion picture filming may, at the discretion of the Borough, be counted
as a filming day where such setup is anticipated to involve one or more
of the factors set forth in § 93-8 hereof.
§ 93-8 KENILWORTH CODE § 93-12
1:234
§ 93-13. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 94
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm devices — See Ch. 55.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 78.
Smoke detectors and lock boxes — See Ch.
165.
§ 94-1. Local enforcement. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
Pursuant to § 11 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192), the
New Jersey Uniform Fire Code (N.J.A.C. 5:70-1 et seq.) shall be locally
enforced in the Borough of Kenilworth.
A. Basic filming permit: $300. Where an applicant requests a waiver of the
provisions of § 93-3A, regarding expedited processing of the permit
application, the basic filming permit shall be $500.
B. Daily filming fee payable in addition to basic filming permit: $500 per
day.
C. Daily filming fee payable for filming a major motion picture: $1,500 per
day.
D. Filming permit for nonprofit applicants filming for educational
purposes: a one-time fee of $100.
E. Overnight parking/use of Borough lot: $500 per day.
F. Use of Borough buildings: $1,500 per day.
G. Road closing: $1,000 for four hours.
A. Where the owner of the premises is not the applicant for a permit
required by this chapter, both the owner and the applicant shall each be
liable for violations hereof and the owner shall cosign any application.
B. Any person violating this chapter or these rules and regulations, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not less than $100 and
not exceeding $2,000 per day or by imprisonment in the county jail for a
term not exceeding 90 days, or both. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 93-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-2
1:235
§ 94-2. Agency designation; Bureau of Fire Prevention established.
The local enforcing agency shall be the Kenilworth Fire Department
through its Bureau of Fire Prevention which is hereby created therein. The
Bureau of Fire Prevention shall hereinafter be known as the "local enforcing
agency."
§ 94-3. Duties.
§ 94-4. Organization.
§ 94-5. Appointments; qualifications; term of office; removal.
A. The local enforcing agency shall enforce the Uniform Fire Code in all
buildings, structures and premises within the established boundaries of
the Borough of Kenilworth other than one- and two-unit owner-occupied
dwellings used exclusively for dwelling purposes and buildings,
structures and premises owned or operated by the federal government,
interstate agencies or the state.
B. The local enforcing agency shall faithfully comply with all the pertinent
requirements of the Uniform Fire Safety Act and the Uniform Fire Code.
C. The local enforcing agency shall enforce the Uniform Fire Code. In
addition to the foregoing, the local enforcing agency shall annually and,
upon each change in the occupancy of a residential rental unit that is
not owner-occupied or for the sale of any building, inspect the buildings
of determining that:
(1) Smoke and carbon monoxide alarms are properly functioning;
(2) Required fire extinguishers installed in kitchen(s);
(3) In addition to the above, the local enforcing agency may refer
violations of the property maintenance code, health codes, ICC
code and zoning violations observed in plain view to the Borough
officials responsible for the aforesaid discipline. [Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II)]
A. The Bureau of Fire Prevention established by § 94-2 of this chapter shall
be under the direct supervision and control of the Fire Official who shall
be the Chief in Charge of Fire Prevention in the Kenilworth Fire
Department. By virtue of the office of Fire Official, he shall hold the
rank of Deputy Chief within the Fire Department. This rank of Deputy
Chief is only within the Fire Prevention Bureau and is not a command
rank within the table of organization of the Kenilworth Fire
Department.
B. The Bureau of Fire Prevention shall have no more than five paid
inspectors. The Fire Official, fire inspectors and any other employees
shall be compensated by the Fire Prevention Bureau.
§ 94-2 KENILWORTH CODE § 94-5
1:236
§ 94-6. Life-hazard uses.
The Bureau of Fire Prevention established by § 94-2 of this chapter shall
carry out the periodic inspections of life-hazard uses required by the
Uniform Fire Code on behalf of the Commissioner of the New Jersey
Department of Community Affairs.
§ 94-7. Residential inspection fees. [Amended 3-25-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009-08; 1-24-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-01]
A. Appointment and qualification of Fire Official. The Fire Official shall be
certified by the state and shall maintain his license throughout his
tenure in said position. The Fire Official shall be appointed by the
governing body upon the recommendation of the Chief of the
Kenilworth Fire Department. The Fire Official shall be an active or
exempt member of the Kenilworth Fire Department.
B. Appointment and qualifications of inspectors and other employees.
Inspectors and other employees of the enforcing agency shall be
appointed by the governing body upon the recommendation of the Fire
Official and Fire Chief. All inspectors shall be certified by the state and
shall maintain their license throughout their tenure in said position. All
inspectors shall be active or exempt members of the Kenilworth Fire
Department.
C. Appointment of legal counsel. The governing body shall specifically
appoint legal counsel to assist the agency in enforcing the Uniform Fire
Code.
D. Term of office. The Fire Official shall serve for a term of four years. All
inspectors shall be appointed for a term of one year. Any vacancy shall
be filled for the unexpired term.
E. Disciplinary action; removal from office. The Fire Official, inspectors
and other employees of the agency shall be subject to removal by the
governing body for just cause. Before removal from office, all persons
shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard by the governing body or a
hearing officer designated by the same in accordance with the
procedure established in Chapter 37, Personnel Policies, of this Code.
A. The fee schedule for annual residential inspections of non-owner
occupied dwellings which shall be paid for by the landlord and which
may not be included as additional rent is as follows:
(1) Single-family home: $100.
(2) Two-family home: $160.
(3) Greater than a two-family: $80 plus $45 times the total number of
residential units in the structure.
§ 94-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-7
1:237
§ 94-8. Adoption of Fire Prevention Code; public record.
§ 94-9. Technical amendments. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
The State Uniform Fire Safety Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq.) and
regulated statutes and the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code (N.J.A.C. 5:70 and
5:71) is amended and supplemented as follows:
B. The fee schedule for the sale or transfer of title if requested two or
more weeks in advance shall be equal to the fee set forth in the
preceding paragraph.
C. The fee for the change of occupancy inspection of a single residential
unit shall be $100.
D. In the event that a structure fails to comply with the fire code when
inspected, the owner shall be entitled to one reinspection at no
additional cost.
E. Landlords shall be entitled to expedited inspection within two full
business days from the date of the completed application for inspection
upon paying an additional $50.
A. Adoption of Fire Prevention Code. The Uniform Fire Code, as amended
and as promulgated by the Division of Fire Safety, is hereby adopted by
reference as the Fire Prevention Code of the Borough of Kenilworth for
the control of buildings and structures as therein provided, subject to
such definitions, modifications or amendments as are hereinafter set
forth. A copy of this code is annexed to and made a part of this chapter
without the inclusion of the text herein.
B. Public record. Three copies of the Uniform Fire Code have been placed
on file in the offices of the Borough Clerk and the Construction Official
for the use of and examination by the public.
A. (Reserved)54
B. (Reserved)55
C. (Reserved)56
D. Hazardous materials. The provisions of this section shall cover the
spilling, leaking, dumping or discharging into the atmosphere of
hazardous material or substances, as defined by the New Jersey
54.Editor's note: Former Subsection A, Fire lanes, was repealed 1-24-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-01.
55.Editor's note: Former Subsection B, Vacant buildings, was repealed 1-24-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-01.
56.Editor's note: Former Subsection C, Fire prevention maintenance, was repealed 1-24-2018
by Ord. No. 2018-01.
§ 94-7 KENILWORTH CODE § 94-9
1:238
§ 94-10. Variances from regulations.
Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) Hazardous Materials
and Waste Index (Index).
(1) It shall be the responsibility of the property owner, upon discovery,
to immediately notify the Fire Department of all hazardous
materials or substances and waste spills, leaks, dumping or
discharges into the atmosphere, whether on public or private
property. Cleanup efforts shall be diligently pursued to abate all
conditions.
(2) In addition to the hazardous materials identified in the Index, all
combustible, flammable, corrosive, radioactive and oxidizing
materials, as well as poisonous gases and substances, etiological
agents, potentially explosive chemicals, highly reactive or toxic
materials shall be considered hazardous materials.
(3) The failure to report immediately upon discovery a hazardous
material or waste spill discharge or dumping to the Fire
Department shall subject the violator to a fine as set by the fire
code official consistent with the Uniform Fire Code. [Amended
1-24-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-01; at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
A. Upon the application of the owner of a building, structure or premises,
the enforcing agency may grant variances from the requirements of a
regulation issued pursuant to this chapter. No variance shall be granted
in a particular case unless the enforcing agency shall find that:
(1) Strict compliance with the regulation would result in undue
hardship to the owner; and
(2) The variance, if granted, will not unreasonably jeopardize the
safety of intended occupants, firefighters and the public generally.
B. An application for a variance pursuant to this section shall be filed in
writing with the enforcing agency and shall set forth specifically:
(1) A statement of the requirements of the regulation from which a
variance is sought;
(2) A statement of the manner by which strict compliance with the
regulation would result in undue hardship;
(3) A statement of the nature and extent of the undue hardship; and
(4) A statement of feasible alternatives to the requirements of the
regulation which would adequately protect the safety of the
occupants or intended occupants, firefighters and the public
generally.
§ 94-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-10
1:239
§ 94-11. Appeals from decisions of enforcing agency.
A person aggrieved by any ruling, action, order or notice of a local
enforcement agency pursuant to this chapter shall be entitled to an
administrative hearing before the Union County Construction Board of
Appeals. The applications for the hearing shall be filed with the
Construction Board of Appeals by the 15th day after the receipt by the
person of notice of the ruling, action, order or notice complained of.
§ 94-12. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
Enforcement of violations of this chapter and the penalties imposed shall be
in accordance with the terms and provisions of the Uniform Fire Safety Act
(N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq.), the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code (N.J.A.C.
5:18-1 et seq.), the Code of the Borough of Kenilworth and any other
applicable laws of the State of New Jersey. The enforcement agency shall be
the Bureau of Fire Prevention of the Kenilworth Fire Department.
§ 94-13. Unsatisfactory inspection [Added 1-24-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-01]
C. Within 30 days of receiving the application for a variance, the enforcing
agency shall grant or deny the application, in writing, stating the
reason for granting or denying the application. If the application is not
granted within 30 days, the applicant shall consider it to have been
denied and shall have the same appeal rights as in the case of a written
denial. The enforcing agency shall maintain records of all applications
for variances and the action taken on them and shall make the records
reasonably available for public inspection. An enforcing agency other
than the Department of Community Affairs shall provide copies of the
records to the Commissioner of the Department of Community Affairs.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
A. In the event of an unsatisfactory inspection by the Fire Official of a
vacant rental unit, such property shall not thereafter be registered, nor
shall a rental license issue, and the owner of the property or his agent
shall not lease or rent such property, nor shall any tenant occupy the
property, until the necessary corrections have been made so as to bring
the property and rental unit into compliance with the applicable code,
and the property is thereafter subsequently inspected, registered and
licensed. In the event that the property is occupied when such
conditions are discovered, all such corrections shall be made within 30
days, and, if not made within that time period, the owner shall be
deemed in violation of this chapter, and every day that the violation
continues shall constitute a separate and distinct violation, subject to
the penalty provisions of the fire code. The owner, however, shall be
permitted to apply for extension of time to make repairs or corrections
so as to comply with this chapter, for good cause shown, provided that
such extension shall not exceed 30 days.
§ 94-10 KENILWORTH CODE § 94-13
1:240
Chapter 97
FIREWORKS AND FIREARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 94.
B. No person shall occupy any rental unit that is required to have been
inspected, nor shall the owner permit occupancy of any rental unit
within the Borough of Kenilworth which has not been inspected and
approved by July 1, 2019, in accordance with this chapter. If a landlord
fails to register the rental unit and/or fails to maintain the registration,
rent collected in excess of four months in any calendar year shall not be
deemed earned by the landlord. The unearned rent paid shall be
returned to the tenant within 30 days of service of a written demand.
§ 94-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-13
1:241

ARTICLE I
Sale of Fireworks; Firing of Firearms and Fireworks
[Adopted 5-7-1929 by Ord. No. 94]
§ 97-1. Possession of certain items prohibited; exceptions.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, firm or corporation to sell or
offer for sale, or have within his or its custody or possession, any toy pistol,
squib, firecracker, rocket, Roman candle or fire balloon, or any combustible
fireworks, or any article for making pyrotechnic displays, provided that this
article shall not be construed to prohibit the Borough of Kenilworth from
granting permission to any person or persons, firm or corporation to give
pyrotechnical displays of fireworks in the public highways, squares or parks
of the Borough at such times and under such conditions as the Borough of
Kenilworth shall think proper.
§ 97-2. Discharging or firing of certain items prohibited;
exceptions.
No person shall fire any toy pistol, revolver, gun, rifle, cannon or firearms of
any kind, or discharge or fire any squib, firecracker, Roman candle or other
combustible fireworks, within the Borough of Kenilworth after the adoption
of this article, provided that this section shall not apply to any person or
persons who shall be engaged in any public duty under the authority of the
Borough, the state or the federal government.
§ 97-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-11-1979 by Ord. No.
79-19; at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. II)]
Any person, firm or corporation who or which violates any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction, be subject to the general penalty set forth in
Chapter 1, Article I, General Penalty, of the Borough of Kenilworth Code.
§ 97-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-3
1:243

ARTICLE II
Firearms and Projectiles
[Adopted 4-26-1955 by Ord. No. 55-6]
§ 97-4. Discharge or use within Borough prohibited.
Except as hereinafter excepted, no person shall discharge or use any air
rifle, air gun, spring gun, slingshot, bow and arrow, shotgun or firearm of
any kind, or any other missile-projecting device or contrivance, of any kind
within the Borough of Kenilworth.
§ 97-5. Possession by minor prohibited.
Except as hereinafter excepted, no parent, guardian or person standing in
loco parentis of any minor under the age of 16 years shall purchase for such
minor or shall knowingly permit such minor who is in his or her care or
custody to purchase, have, hold, possess, own, use, handle or play with any
of the articles or guns or devices described in § 97-4.
§ 97-6. Applicability.
This article shall not apply to any of the following or under any of the
following circumstances:
A. Any member of any police department or any other person duly
authorized by law to use such weapons or devices nor to any person
warranted when circumstances require the use of such weapons in the
defense of his life, limb or property.
B. Any person not under the age of 16 years who carries such weapon to
any place outside the Borough of Kenilworth for hunting or any other
lawful purposes.
C. Any person not under 16 years of age who carries, fires or uses any
such instrument within the Borough of Kenilworth for the purpose of
military drill under competent supervision or for the purpose of
competition or target practice in and upon a firing range approved by
the governing body of the Borough of Kenilworth.
D. Any person under the age of 16 years who carries, fires or uses any
such instrument or weapon in the presence of his father, guardian or
some other responsible adult person, or for the purpose of military drill
under competent supervision, or for the purpose of competition or
target practice in and upon a firing range approved by the governing
body or the Chief of Police of the municipality in which such range is
located.
E. Any person under the age of 16 years while carrying any bow and arrow
to any target range, provided that prior thereto the accredited
organization or person conducting any such military drill, competition
or target practice shall notify the Chief of Police of the time and place of
§ 97-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-6
1:245
§ 97-7. Sale of bows and arrows and slingshots restricted.
No person shall offer for sale any bows and arrows to any person under
16 years of age, and no person shall offer for sale any slingshots or similar
device in the Borough of Kenilworth.
§ 97-8. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to promote the safety of persons and property
of the inhabitants of the Borough of Kenilworth.
§ 97-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-11-1979 by Ord. No.
79-19; at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. II)]
Any person, firm or corporation who or which violates any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction, be subject to the general penalty set forth in
Chapter 1, Article I, General Penalty, of the Borough of Kenilworth Code.
§ 97-10. Construal of provisions.
This article shall not be construed to authorize the commission of any act
otherwise forbidden by law.
such event and provide a list of the persons under 16 years of age who
intend to carry a bow and arrow to such place, and provided further
that such minor shall have a certificate of such organization or person
authorizing the carrying of such bow and arrow designating the time
when and places between which said bow and arrow is to be carried,
and provided further that while such bow and arrow is being carried to
or from such place the string on such bow shall not be taut so as to be
able to project any arrow.
§ 97-6 KENILWORTH CODE § 97-10
1:246
Chapter 98
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Grading, excavations and landfills — See Ch.
112.
Land use — See Ch. 120.
Soil erosion and sediment control — See Ch.
167.
§ 98-1. Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has, in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et
seq., delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote public health, safety, and general welfare
of its citizenry.
§ 98-2. Findings of fact.
§ 98-3. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:
A. The flood hazard areas of the Borough of Kenilworth are subject to
periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety, and general welfare.
B. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and velocities
and, when inadequately anchored, cause damage in other areas. Uses
that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise protected
from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
A. To protect human life and health;
B. To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood-control
projects;
C. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
§ 97-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-3
1:247
§ 98-4. Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
§ 98-5. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phases used in this chapter shall
be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. As used in this
chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
APPEAL — A request for a review of the Construction Official's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO or AH Zone on a
community's Flood Insurance Rate Map with a one-percent or greater
chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly
defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable
E. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, and bridges
located in areas of special flood hazard;
F. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood-blight areas;
G. To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area
of special flood hazard; and
H. To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
A. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
B. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
C. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers which help accommodate or channel
floodwaters;
D. Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which
may increase flood damage; and
E. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
§ 98-3 KENILWORTH CODE § 98-5
1:248
and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by
ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within
a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any
given year.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support of
the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse
under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or
storage of equipment or materials located within an area of special flood
hazard.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building built, in the case of a
building in an area of special flood hazard, to have the top of the elevated
floor elevated above the ground level by means of piling, columns (posts
and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water and adequately
anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during
a flood up to the magnitude of the base flood. In an area of special flood
hazard, "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill
or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the
unimpeded movement of floodwaters.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided in which
the Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as
the Flood Insurance Rate Map and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion
control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term
A. The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
B.
§ 98-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-5
1:249
describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which
provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and
reduction.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than 0.2
foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for the
parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a
basement is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such
enclosure is not built so to render the structure in violation of other
applicable nonelevation design requirements.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term "manufactured home" does not include a recreational vehicle.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION
— A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain regulation adopted
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 98-5 KENILWORTH CODE § 98-5
1:250
by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by the municipality.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is built on a single chassis,
400 square feet or less when measured at the longest horizontal
projections, designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a lightduty
truck, and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but
as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal
use.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — For other than new construction or
substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L.
No. 97-348), includes substantial improvements and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement
was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as
the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings or piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms, nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or a
gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which exceeds
50% of the market value of the structure before the start of construction
of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred
substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The
term does not, however, include either:
§ 98-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-5
1:251
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which
permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this
chapter.
§ 98-6. General provisions.
§ 98-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined
not more than $2,000 or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both, for
each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in
the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Borough of Kenilworth
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement officer and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will
not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure.
B.
A. Lands to which this chapter applies. This chapter shall apply to all areas
of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of Kenilworth, Union
County, New Jersey.
B. Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.
(1) The areas of special flood hazard for the Borough of Kenilworth,
Community No. 340466, are identified and defined on the following
documents prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency:
(a) A scientific and engineering report, "Flood Insurance Study,
Union County, New Jersey (All Jurisdictions)," dated September
20, 2006.
(b) Flood Insurance Rate Map for Union County, New Jersey (All
Jurisdictions), as shown on Index and Panel Numbers 0011,
0012, 0020, 0021, 0022, whose effective date is September 20,
2006.
(2) The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part
of this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and maps are on file at
567 Boulevard, Kenilworth, New Jersey 07033.
§ 98-5 KENILWORTH CODE § 98-7
1:252
from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy
any violation.
§ 98-8. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
and any other ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
§ 98-9. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
§ 98-10. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
§ 98-11. Administration.
A. Considered as minimum requirements;
B. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
A. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural
causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special
flood hazard or uses permitted within such area will be free from
flooding or flood damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Borough, any
officer or employee thereof or the Federal Insurance Administration for
any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any
administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
A. Establishment of development permit.
(1) A development permit shall be obtained before construction or
development begins within any area of special flood hazard
established in § 98-6B. Application for a development permit shall
be made on forms furnished by the local administrator and may
include, but not be limited to: plans in duplicate drawn to scale
showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the
area in question; existing or proposed structures; fill; storage of
materials; drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing.
(2) Specifically, the following information is required:
(a) Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all structures;
§ 98-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-11
1:253
(b) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure
has been floodproofed;
(c) Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential
structure meet the floodproofing criteria in § 98-14B(2);
(d) Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be
altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.
B. Designation of the local administrator. The Construction Official is
hereby appointed to administer and implement this chapter by granting
or denying development permit applications in accordance with its
provisions.
C. Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. Duties of the local
administrator shall include, but not be limited to:
(1) Permit review. The local administrator shall:
(a) Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
(b) Review all development permits to determine that all
necessary permits have been obtained from those federal,
state or local governmental agencies from which prior
approval is required.
(c) Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway and assure that the
encroachment provisions of § 98-14B(4) are met.
(2) Use of other base flood and floodway data. When base flood
elevation and floodway data has not been provided in accordance
with § 98-6B, Basis for establishing the areas of special flood
hazard, the Construction Code Official shall obtain, review, and
reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data
available from a federal, state or other source, in order to
administer § 98-14B(1), Specific standards, Residential
construction, and § 98-14B(2), Specific standards, Nonresidential
construction.
(3) Information to be obtained and maintained. The local administrator
shall:
(a) Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures, and whether or not the
structure contains a basement.
(b) For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
§ 98-11 KENILWORTH CODE § 98-11
1:254
§ 98-12. Appeals and variances.
[1] Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean
sea level); and
[2] Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in
§ 98-11A(2)(c).
(c) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter.
(4) Alteration of watercourses. The local administrator shall:
(a) Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department
of Environmental Protection, Dam Safety and Flood Control
Section, and the Land Use Regulation Program prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence
of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.
(b) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so the flood-carrying
capacity is not diminished.
(5) Interpretation of FIRM boundaries. Make interpretations, where
needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of
special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a
conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions).
The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a
reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in
§ 98-12.
A. The Appeal Board as established by the Borough of Kenilworth shall
hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter.
B. The Appeal Board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there
is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the
Construction Official in the enforcement or administration of this
chapter.
C. Those aggrieved by the decision of the Appeal Board or any taxpayer
may appeal such decision to the Superior Court as provided by law.
D. In passing upon such applications, the Appeal Board shall consider all
technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other
sections of this chapter, and:
(1) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(2) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
§ 98-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-12
1:255
§ 98-13. Conditions for variances.
(3) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
(4) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
(5) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(6) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(7) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
(8) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program of that area;
(9) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
(10) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
(11) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
E. Upon consideration of the factors of § 98-12D and the purposes of this
chapter, the Appeal Board may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.
F. The Construction Official shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions, including technical information, and report any variances to
the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
A. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less in
size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base flood level, provided that items in
§ 98-12D(1) through (11) have been fully considered. As the lot size
increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical justification required for
issuing the variance increases.
B. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as
a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to
preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
§ 98-12 KENILWORTH CODE § 98-13
1:256
§ 98-14. Provisions for flood hazard reduction.
C. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
D. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is
the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
E. Variances shall only be issued upon:
(1) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(2) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(3) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public as identified in § 98-12D, or conflict with
existing local laws or ordinances.
F. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor
elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood
insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from
the reduced lowest floor elevation.
A. General standards. In all areas of special flood hazard the following
standards are required:
(1) Anchoring.
(a) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of
the structure.
(b) All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist flotation,
collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may
include, but are not to be limited to, use of over-the-top or
frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to
applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting
wind forces.
(2) Construction materials and methods.
(a) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to
flood damage.
(b) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
(3) Utilities.
§ 98-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-14
1:257
(a) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters
into the system;
(b) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters
into the systems and discharge from the systems into
floodwaters;
(c) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during
flooding; and
(d) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
(4) Subdivision proposals.
(a) All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage;
(b) All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems
located and constructed to minimize flood damage;
(c) All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage
provided to reduce exposure to flood damage; and
(d) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed development which contain at
least 50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).
(5) Enclosure openings. All new construction and substantial
improvements having fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor
that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or
storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to
flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic
flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of
floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be
certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or must
meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding shall be provided.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
§ 98-14 KENILWORTH CODE § 98-14
1:258
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
covering or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
B. Specific standards. In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood
elevation data has been provided as set forth in § 98-6B, Basis for
establishing the areas of special flood hazard, or in § 98-11C(2), Use of
other base flood and floodway data, the following standards are
required:
(1) Residential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any residential structure shall:
(a) Have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above
base flood elevation.
(b) Require within any AO Zone on the municipality's FIRM that all
new construction and substantial improvement of any
residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including
basement, elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least
as high as the depth number specified in feet (at least two feet
if no depth number is specified), and require adequate
drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
(2) Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential
structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated to the level of the base flood elevation or, together with
the attendant utilities and sanitary facilities, shall require within
any AO Zone on the municipality's FIRM that all new construction
and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other
nonresidential structure shall either:
(a) Have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number
specified in feet (at least two feet if no depth number is
specified), and require adequate drainage paths around
structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away
from proposed structures; or
(b) Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure
is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water, have structural components capable of
resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of
buoyancy, and be certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards of
practice for meeting the applicable provisions of this
subsection. Such certification shall be provided to the official
as set forth in § 98-11C(3).
§ 98-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-14
1:259
Chapter 100
FOOD HANDLING ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Food and beverage vending machines — See
Ch. 202.
Sanitary standards — See Ch. 212.
§ 100-1. Compliance with state standards. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
All retail food establishments shall comply with N.J.A.C. 8:24, Sanitation
in Retail Food Establishments and Food and Beverage Vending Machines,
relating to the construction, operation and maintenance of retail food
establishments, and all violations are hereby declared to be nuisances
hazardous to health.
(3) Manufactured homes.
(a) Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with
§ 98-14A(1)(b).
(b) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
within an area of special flood hazard shall be elevated on a
permanent foundation such that the top of the lowest floor is at
or above the base flood elevation.
(4) Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard
established in § 98-6B are areas designated as floodways. Since the
floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of
floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion
potential, the following provisions apply:
(a) Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements, and other development, unless a
technical evaluation demonstrates that encroachment shall not
result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of
the base flood discharge.
(b) If § 98-14B(4)(a) is satisfied, all new construction and
substantial improvements must comply with § 98-14,
Provisions for flood hazard reduction.
(c) In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood
elevation data has been provided and no floodway has been
designated, the cumulative effect of any proposed
development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, shall not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood more than 0.2 of a foot at any point.
§ 98-14 KENILWORTH CODE § 100-2
1:260
§ 100-2. License required; fee; expiration.
§ 100-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
Any person who violates any provision of or order promulgated under this
chapter or code shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the general
penalty set forth in Chapter 1, Article I, General Penalty, of the Borough of
Kenilworth Code. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each
day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 102
GAMES OF CHANCE
§ 102-1. Conduct on Sunday. [Amended 1-23-1968 by Ord. No. 68-3]
The conduct of legalized games of chance in the Borough of Kenilworth
under the provisions of Chapter 8 of Title 5 of the Revised Statutes of the
State of New Jersey on the first day of the week, commonly known and
designated as Sunday, be and the same is hereby authorized.
Chapter 104
GARAGE SALES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 91. Special sales — See Ch. 154.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person(s) or any body corporate to conduct a
retail food establishment, as defined in and governed by N.J.A.C. 8:24,
Sanitation in Retail Food Establishments and Food and Beverage
Vending Machines, relating to the construction, operation and
maintenance of retail food establishments, without first having
procured a license from the Borough Council upon the recommendation
of the Board of Health, or to conduct said activities without complying
with any or all of the provisions concerning the construction, operation
and maintenance of the same as contained in the aforementioned
N.J.A.C. 8:24. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
B. The annual license fee to be paid for conducting a retail food
establishment is set forth in Chapter 212, Sanitary Standards, Article
XIII. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
C. The license granted by the Council shall expire on the 30th day of June
of each year.
§ 100-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 102-1
1:261
§ 104-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GARAGE SALE — Any sale customarily entitled "garage sale," "lawn sale,"
"porch sale," "rummage sale," "yard sale," "basement sale," "flea market
sale," or any other similar sale of tangible property occurring on residential
property.
GOODS — Any tangible personal property.
OUT-OF-DOOR SALE — Any sale other than a garage sale conducted out of
doors by a person not regularly engaged in the business of selling the goods
sold at the place where they are sold.
PERSON — All individuals, partnerships, associations, corporations or
entities other than governmental entities.
§ 104-2. Exemptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to or affect the following
persons or sales:
§ 104-3. License required; fee. [Amended 9-11-1979 by Ord. No.
79-19]
It shall be unlawful to conduct a garage sale or out-of-door sale in the
Borough of Kenilworth without first filing with the Borough Clerk the
information hereinafter specified and obtaining from such Clerk a license so
to do, to be known as a "garage sale license." The fee for such license shall
be as provided in Chapter 91, Fees.
A. Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of
competent jurisdiction.
B. Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public
officials.
C. Any person selling or advertising for sale an item or items of personal
property which are specifically named or described in the
advertisement and which separate items do not exceed five items, or
personal motor vehicles which do not exceed two in number, being sold
at one time and not part of a garage sale and in a residential zone.
D. Any bona fide charitable, religious, educational, cultural or
governmental institution or agency; provided, however, that the burden
of establishing the exemption shall be on the organization or institution
claiming such exemption. Such exemption may be permitted by
resolution of the Borough Council after application by any of the
aforementioned types of organizations.
§ 102-1 KENILWORTH CODE § 104-4
1:262
§ 104-4. Issuance and display of license; fees.
§ 104-5. Hours.
§ 104-6. Information to be filed; copies.
A. Such license for garage sales shall be issued for any one person or
premises twice within a twelve-month period, and no such license shall
be issued for more than three consecutive days nor a second license
issued within the period beginning on the date of the last date of sale
and thence running 90 days therefrom.
B. Out-of-door sales.
(1) Licenses shall be issued for any one person or premises by the
Borough Clerk after filing the information hereinafter specified.
The license issued shall be known as an "out-of-door sale license."
(2) The fee for such license shall be as provided in Chapter 91, Fees.
[Amended 9-11-1979 by Ord. No. 79-19]
(3) Such license can be issued for any one person or premises three
times within a twelve-month period, and no such license can be
renewed within the period beginning on the date of the last day of
sale and thence running 90 days therefrom.
C. The license issued under this chapter must be prominently displayed on
the premises or within the area of the sale and visible from the street
upon which the sale is conducted throughout the entire period of the
licensed sale.
A. All garage sales shall be conducted between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and
6:00 p.m. only.
B. All out-of-door sales shall be conducted between the hours of 9:00 a.m.
and 10:00 p.m. only.
A. The information to be filed with the Borough Clerk pursuant to this
chapter shall be as follows:
(1) Name of person, firm, group, corporation, association or
organization conducting said sale.
(2) Name of owner of property on which said sale is to be conducted or
written consent of owner if applicant is other than owner.
(3) Location at which sale is to be conducted.
(4) Number of days of sale.
(5) Date and nature of any past sale.
§ 104-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 104-6
1:263
§ 104-7. Responsibilities of license holder and owner of premises.
The person to whom such license is issued and the owner or tenant of
the premises on which the sale or activity is conducted shall be jointly
responsible for the maintenance of good order and decorum on the
premises during all hours of such sale or activity. No such persons shall
permit loud or boisterous conduct on said premises nor permit vehicles to
impede the passage of traffic on any roads or streets in the area of such
premises. All such persons shall obey the reasonable orders of any member
of the Police or Fire Department of the Borough in order to maintain the
public health, safety and welfare. All licensed premises shall at all times be
subject to such reasonable rules as may be made from time to time by the
Borough Council and shall be subject to inspection at all times by the Zoning
Officer, Chief of Police and Fire Chief, or any of their agents or other duly
authorized representative of the Borough of Kenilworth.
§ 104-8. Signs.
No signs for advertising or directing customers are to be posted on any
place other than the premises where the sale is to be held. The sign shall not
exceed two feet by two feet in size and shall not be placed on the premises
earlier than one week prior to the sale and must be removed within 24 hours
after the sale has terminated.
§ 104-9. Location of sale.
Garage sales, as defined and permitted under this chapter, shall be
conducted on the licensed premises only in the dwelling, garage or rear
yard.
§ 104-10. Restrictions on sale of certain items.
It shall be unlawful for any person to offer for sale mattresses, bedsprings,
cots, lounges and sofas in any garage sale authorized under this chapter
without first complying with the appropriate section of N.J.S.A. 26:10-1
through 26:10-18, with respect to the labeling, sterilizing and disinfecting
of said mattresses, bedsprings, cots, lounges and sofas.
(6) A description of merchandise being sold, including a statement as
to the date or dates when applicant obtained or purchased the
goods.
(7) Sworn statement or affirmation by the person signing that the
information therein given is full and true and known to him to be
so.
B. A copy of the license shall be given to the applicant, Consumer Affairs
Assistance Officer, Chief of Police and Zoning Officer, and one copy shall
be retained by the Borough Clerk. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 104-6 KENILWORTH CODE § 104-11
1:264
§ 104-11. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Director of Consumer Affairs. It shall
be the duty of the Director of Consumer Affairs to investigate any violation
of this chapter coming to his attention. If a violation does exist, he shall
prosecute a complaint by issuing a violation ticket and issuing a summons
for local court appearance pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. It
shall be the duty of the Police Department of the Borough to bring to the
attention of the Director of Consumer Affairs for further investigation any
violations of this chapter of which the Police Department becomes aware
during the course of its normal duties.
§ 104-12. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-11-1979 by Ord. No.
79-19; at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. II)]
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the general penalty set
forth in Chapter 1, Article I, General Penalty, of the Borough of Kenilworth
Code. Each day of sale in violation of any or all of the provisions of this
chapter shall be a separate violation.
Chapter 106
GARBAGE, RUBBISH, REFUSE AND RECYCLING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 125.
§ 104-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 104-12
1:265

ARTICLE I
Collection and Removal
[Adopted 5-13-1958 by Ord. No. 58-14]
§ 106-1. Applicability.
The collection, removal and disposal of garbage, rubbish and ashes shall
include any and all waste matter in the Borough of Kenilworth, including
all refuse that may be disposed of in Clean-Up Week but excepting
manufacturing and industrial waste and ashes or cinders from buildings or
from premises in which steam power is used for manufacturing purposes.
If there should be any question as to what is intended to be collected and
removed in the Borough, the Public Works Chairman shall be the judge of
what was intended to be collected.
§ 106-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GARBAGE — All kitchen refuse, animal or vegetable matter and offal,
and all decaying and decomposing substances which may accumulate in
the Borough, together with paper liners which may be used for sanitary
purposes in containers.
RUBBISH and REFUSE — Includes all of the accumulations and waste
substances from private houses and premises, boardinghouses, stores and
all public places and shall include particularly such articles as ashes, paper
cartons, wooden boxes, paper and paper materials, tin cans, rags, corn
husks, grass, lawn and yard rakings, hedge and plant trimmings, discarded
household receptacles and utensils, toys and such other household
equipment as may be discarded from a private residence, and such articles
and things as are daily discarded from a private residence, and such articles
and objects as are daily thrown into wastebaskets and rubbish containers,
but shall not include building materials nor the refuse from any new
building nor the refuse from any old building which is torn down in whole
or in part nor trade waste from manufacturing plants, trees, tree branches,
tree stumps nor waste from excavations, broken concrete or dead animals.
If there should be any question as to what is intended to be collected and
removed in the Borough, the Public Works Chairperson shall be the judge of
what was intended to be collected.
§ 106-3. Pickup of special items; preparation of materials for
pickup.
A. All wastepaper, excelsior, rags, clothes, bedding, paper cartons, wooden
boxes, hedge and plant trimmings, discarded household receptacles
and utensils, toys and all other such items which may be discarded from
time to time but do not fall within the classification of garbage and
rubbish which would be in the realm of materials that are discarded
normally on every collection day shall be picked up on the last
§ 106-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 106-3
1:267
§ 106-4. Restrictions on collection from nonresidential locations.
[Amended 6-26-1990 by Ord. No. 90-6]
collection day of each month. [Amended 9-14-1994 by Ord. No.
94-13]
B. All cardboard boxes, wooden boxes and like materials shall be broken,
flattened and securely tied for convenient loading and to prevent
papers and debris from being allowed to scatter onto the street or
adjoining properties.
C. All hedge and plant trimmings shall be broken and securely tied for the
same reasons.
D. All leaves shall be in containers, boxes, baskets or plastic bags easily
handled for dumping or loading into or onto the garbage or collection
trucks. [Added 5-28-1968 by Ord. No. 68-13]
E. All branches shall be picked up on such days as the Mayor and Council
shall by resolution designate. All branches shall be cut to or be in
lengths no longer than five feet in length and shall be tied in bundles.
All trunks of trees shall be in lengths between 18 inches and 20 inches.
Lumber from minor home repairs will be picked up on such days as the
Mayor and Council by resolution shall designate, but all such lumber
shall be cut to four-foot lengths and tied in bundles. [Added 5-28-1968
by Ord. No. 68-13]
F. No automobile or motor vehicle parts of any kind and no lumber from
major construction or reconstruction or from demolition shall be
collected, and no person shall place any such items in any place
intending that they be collected as rubbish or refuse. [Added
5-28-1968 by Ord. No. 68-13; amended 11-13-1990 by Ord. No.
90-14]
G. Grass, lawn and yard rakings shall be properly bagged and sealed so as
to prevent the contents from spilling or leaking out when picked up. No
person shall bag, permit or cause to be bagged with grass clippings any
household garbage, household items, cans, bottles, construction
materials or debris or any other item other than grass clippings, lawn
and yard rakings. [Added 9-14-1994 by Ord. No. 94-13]
A. Collections made from manufacturing plants, stores, business
operations and all locations not used as a residence shall be limited to
the collecting of garbage and debris that would be expected to be found
in the usual offices and rest rooms of manufacturing plants, stores,
business operations and all locations not used as a residence. It shall
not include any garbage or waste from the manufacture, processing or
other commercially generated refuse. Commercially generated refuse
includes but is not limited to decayed vegetables, fruits, foodstuffs,
boxes and containers.
B. (Reserved)
§ 106-3 KENILWORTH CODE § 106-4
1:268
§ 106-5. Collection schedule. [Amended 4-13-1965 by Ord. No. 65-9;
5-14-1968 by Ord. No. 68-6]
The collection schedule which shall be adhered to in the collection of
garbage and ashes in the Borough of Kenilworth shall be fixed and revised
from time to time by resolution of the governing body.
§ 106-6. Receptacle requirements.
All garbage and rubbish shall be deposited in a metal container which shall
be watertight and equipped with tightfitting covers of metal. The metal
container shall not be more than 30 inches in height, and the diameter of
said container shall not be more than 20 inches. The combined weight of
the receptacle and the contents shall not exceed 75 pounds.
§ 106-7. Hours of collection; placement and removal of receptacles.
[Amended 5-28-1968 by Ord. No. 68-13; 11-13-1990 by Ord. No.
90-16; 4-28-1992 by Ord. No. 92-7]
§ 106-8. Collections on holidays. [Amended 11-13-1990 by Ord. No.
90-15]
No collections will be made in the Borough of Kenilworth on New Year's
Day, Martin Luther King's birthday, Memorial Day, July 4, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day and Christmas. Collections will be made the next
regularly scheduled collection day.
§ 106-9. (Reserved)57
C. (Reserved)
A. Collections shall start no earlier than 5:00 a.m. and shall be completed
no later than 5:00 p.m., and householders and other persons, firms and
corporations shall place their garbage receptacles no more than 10 feet
from the curb. The placing of garbage, cleanup or recyclables at the
curbside at any residence or buildings in the Borough shall not take
place prior to 5:00 p.m. on the night before the regularly scheduled
pickup. All receptacles shall thereafter be removed from the curb no
later than 7:30 p.m. on the day of collection. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
B. It shall be the responsibility of the landlord, owner or person in charge
of any residence or building to inform tenants of garbage, cleanup and
recycling requirements of the Borough as set forth herein. Failure to
comply with any of these requirements will be the responsibility of said
landlord, owner or person otherwise in charge of the residence or
building.
57.Editor's Note: Former § 106-9, Permit required; restrictions, added 5-28-1968 by Ord. No.
68-13, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 106-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 106-10
1:269
§ 106-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-11-1979 by Ord. No.
79-19; at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. II)]
Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate any of the
foregoing provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject
to the general penalty set forth in Chapter 1, Article I, General Penalty, of
the Borough of Kenilworth Code, for each offense.
§ 106-10.1. Refuse from outside Borough. [Added 10-9-1984 by Ord.
No. 84-22]
§ 106-10.2. Enforcement. [Added 9-14-1994 by Ord. No. 94-13]
The Police Department, Board of Health and the Superintendent of the
Department of Public Works are hereby designated as the enforcing agents
pursuant to this article. Any summons issued pursuant to this article shall
issue in the name of the Borough of Kenilworth and be prosecuted in the
Municipal Court.
A. No person or business shall place or permit to be placed garbage, trash,
household items or refuse of any kind from outside of the Borough of
Kenilworth on any Borough property or any other area within the
Borough intending that it shall be collected or received in any manner
by the Department of Public Works.
B. Each item so placed shall be deemed a separate violation of this section.
C. A fine of not less than $250 nor more than $500 shall be imposed for
each such violation.58
58.Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, which immediately followed this subsection and
which dealt with designation of the enforcing agent, was repealed 9-14-1994 by Ord. No.
94-13. See now § 106-10.2.
§ 106-10 KENILWORTH CODE § 106-10.2
1:270
ARTICLE II
Mandatory Recycling
[Adopted 11-10-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-1559]
§ 106-11. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMERCIAL AND INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENTS — Retail,
wholesale, restaurants, taverns, schools, institutions, including
government, warehouses, construction sites, factories, offices, etc., but
specifically excluding fairs, parks, concerts, and other outdoor events.
COMMINGLED — A combining of nonputrescible source-separated
recyclable materials for the purpose of recycling.
COVERED ELECTRONIC DEVICE — A subset of electronic waste which
shall include only the following: a computer central processing unit of a
laptop computer or desktop computer, a cathode ray tube, a cathode ray
tube device, a flat panel display or similar video display device with a screen
that is greater than four inches measured diagonally and that contains one
or more circuit boards, including a television, and cell phones.
DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those materials designated
below that shall be source-separated for the purpose of recycling. These
materials include:[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
Designated materials for residential waste generators:
Aluminum, tin, and steel
Corrugated cardboard
Electronic waste
Glass containers
Grass and brush
Household batteries
Leaves
Mixed paper
Motor oil
Motor oil filters
Newspaper
Office paper
Plastic containers (Nos. 1 and 2)
Tires
A.
59.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. II, Mandatory Recycling, adopted
3-12-1991 by Ord. No. 91-2, as amended.
§ 106-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 106-11
1:271
ELECTRONIC WASTE — A computer central processing unit and associated
hardware including keyboards, modems, printers, scanners and fax
machines; a cathode ray tube, a cathode ray tube device, a flat panel display
or similar video display device with a screen that is greater than four inches
measured diagonally and that contains one or more circuit boards, including
a television, and cell phones.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — Any building or structure or complex of
buildings in which three or more dwelling units are owner-occupied, rented
or leased, or offered for rental or lease, for residential purposes (see N.J.S.A.
13:1E-99.13a) and shall include hotels, motels, or other guest houses
serving transient or seasonal guests as those terms are defined under
Subsection (j) of Section 3 of the Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Law, P.L.
1967, c. 76 (N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1 et seq.).[Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
Vehicle batteries
White goods (air conditioners, refrigerators)
Wood
Source separation and recycling requirements for commercial,
institutional and industrial waste generators:
Aluminum, tin, and steel
Computer and peripherals
Corrugated cardboard
Electronic waste
Fluorescent bulbs
Glass containers
Grass and brush
Household batteries
Leaves
Mixed paper
Masonry (asphalt, brick, block, concrete)
Motor oil
Motor oil filters
Newspaper
Office paper
Plastic containers (Nos. 1 and 2)
Tires
Vehicle batteries
White goods (air conditioners, refrigerators)
Wood
B.
§ 106-11 KENILWORTH CODE § 106-11
1:272
MUNICIPAL RECYCLING COORDINATOR — The person or persons
appointed by the municipal governing body and who shall be authorized to,
among other things, enforce the provisions of this article, and any rules and
regulations which may be promulgated hereunder.
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE (MSW) STREAM — All solid waste generated
at residential, commercial, and institutional establishments within the
boundaries of the municipality of Kenilworth.
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL — Those materials which would otherwise
become solid waste, and which may be collected, separated, or processed
and returned to the economic mainstream in the form of raw materials or
products.
SOURCE SEPARATION — The process by which recyclable materials are
separated at the point of generation by the generator thereof from solid
waste for the purposes of recycling.
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Recyclable materials
which are separated at the point of generation by the generator thereof
from solid waste for the purposes of recycling.
UNIVERSAL WASTE — A specific hazardous waste stream that has been
designated by the EPA or those waste streams identified in the New Jersey
Universal Waste Rule (N.J.A.C. 7:26A-7). Only the following materials may
be managed as universal waste:
§ 106-12. Exemption from source-separation requirements.
A. Rechargeable batteries and button cell batteries;
Mercury-containing equipment, including thermometers and
thermostats;
B.
C. Pesticides;
D. Fluorescent lamps (light bulbs);
E. Electronic waste; and
F. Oil-based paints and finishes.
A. Mandatory source separation. It shall be mandatory for all persons who
are owners, tenants, or occupants of residential and nonresidential
premises, which shall include but not be limited to retail and other
commercial locations, as well as government, schools and other
institutional locations within the municipality of Kenilworth, to separate
designated recyclable materials from all solid waste. Designated
recyclable materials shall be deposited separate and apart from other
solid waste generated by the owners, tenants, or occupants of such
premises and shall be placed separately at the curb or other location(s)
in a manner and on such days and times as may be hereinafter
established by regulations promulgated by the Borough of Kenilworth
Public Works Department.
§ 106-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 106-12
1:273
§ 106-13. Collection of recyclable materials.
The collection of recyclable material shall be in the manner prescribed as
follows:
§ 106-14. Residential dwelling compliance requirements.
B. Exemptions. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.16(d), the governing body of
a municipality may exempt persons occupying commercial or
institutional premises within its municipal boundaries from the sourceseparation
requirements of this article which requires persons
generating municipal solid waste within its municipal boundaries to
source-separate from the municipal solid waste stream the specified
recyclable materials if those persons have otherwise provided for the
recycling of all designated recyclable materials. To be eligible for an
exemption pursuant to this article, a commercial or institutional
generator of solid waste shall file an application for exemption with the
municipal recycling coordinator on forms to be provided for this
purpose. The form shall include, at a minimum, the following
information: the name of the commercial or institutional entity, the
street address location and lot and block designation; the name, official
title and phone number of the person making the application on behalf
of the commercial or institutional entity; the name, address, official
contact person and telephone number of the facility which provides the
service of recycling those designated recyclable materials; and a
certification that the designated recyclable materials will be recycled
and that, at least on an annual basis, said recycling service provider or
commercial/institutional generator shall provide written documentation
to the municipal recycling coordinator of the total number of tons
collected and recycled for each material.
A. All containers and brown paper bags containing recyclable materials
shall be placed, prior to collection, between the curb and the sidewalk,
or in the absence of curb and sidewalk, as near to the street as not to
constitute a danger, where such receptacles shall be readily accessible
to the collector without providing obstruction to pedestrians. The
owner or occupant of the premises shall keep all receptacles clean and
in safe handling condition. Receptacles or other items to be disposed of
shall be placed as noted above any time after 5:00 p.m. of the day
immediately preceding the day of collection. After collection, any
containers shall be removed from the curbside by no later than 7:30
p.m. of the day of collection. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
B. All receptacles or dumpsters shall be kept clean and maintained in a
safe manner.
A. The owner of any residential property shall be responsible for
compliance with this article. Citizens are responsible for sourceseparating
mandated items according to this article and delivering
§ 106-12 KENILWORTH CODE § 106-14
1:274
them to the municipal collection system (whether curbside collection or
drop-off center). These items must be source-separated; no mandated
recyclables are permitted in the garbage put out for collection; no
garbage is permitted in recyclables placed in the municipality's
collection system.
B. For multifamily units, the owner or manager is responsible for the
following:
(1) The property owner/management is responsible for ensuring that a
recycling system is established and that it is operated in
compliance with the requirements of this article. The property
owner/management is responsible for setting up and maintaining
the recycling system. The property owner/management is
responsible for receiving and responding to warnings, notices of
violation, and penalty assessments and for correcting violations.
The property owner/management will be expected to correct
violations promptly and to make necessary direct contacts with
residents.
(2) Drop-off centers must be established and maintained so that they
are conveniently accessible to residents. Curbside collection may
be made available in place of, or in conjunction with, these drop-off
centers. The recycling system must provide for all designated
recyclables in the residential waste stream. The recycling system
may utilize separate containers for each recyclable material or it
may provide for two or more materials to be placed in one
container, provided that the recycling hauler can take the materials
commingled. Container capacity must be adequate to hold the
amount of materials generated between pickups. It must be clear to
an inspector that the system is being serviced.
(3) It must be clear that the system is being used properly by
employees and tenants. There must not be garbage in the recycling
containers or recyclables in the garbage containers. The property
owner/management is responsible for resolving problems which
may arise from the improper use of containers and for training
employees and tenants to properly understand and use the
recycling system.
(4) Notification and collection rules shall be issued by the management
to new tenants when they arrive and to all residents every three
months. Copies of these notices, or other proof of distribution of the
notices, must be sent to the municipal recycling coordinator at the
time of each mailing or distribution.
(5) The property owner/management is responsible for arranging to
have recyclables picked up and for resolving any problems with the
transporter of recyclables.
(6) The property owner/management must arrange to obtain
documentation in order to report the tonnages of materials
§ 106-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 106-14
1:275
§ 106-15. Commercial and institutional establishment compliance
requirements.
recycled at least once per year or else he/she must arrange to
have the collector provide that documentation directly to the
municipality. Arrangements with recycling companies or with
haulers handling recyclables should include provisions for
obtaining this information. Documentation must be maintained by
the management. When the municipality provides recyclables
collection service, reporting and proof are not needed.
(7) Single/dual-stream recycling. Multifamily locations may opt to
collect their recyclables in a single stream or dual stream (fiber,
commingled), provided the material recovery facility (MRF) that
receives the material has certified that it has the ability to separate
and maximize the capture rate of the designated recyclables. The
UCUA Division of Solid Waste Enforcement will compile and
maintain an updated list of those facilities. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
A. The owner/operator (or in case of construction, the contractor) is
responsible for ensuring that a recycling system is established and that
it is operated in compliance with the requirements of this article. The
owner/operator/contractor is responsible for receiving and responding
to warnings, notices of violation, and penalty assessments and for
correcting violations promptly.
B. The recycling system must be established and maintained so that it is
conveniently accessible to users. The recycling system must provide for
all designated recyclables in the commercial/institutional waste stream.
The recycling system may utilize separate containers for each
recyclable material or it may provide for two or more materials to be
placed in one container, provided that the recycling hauler can take the
materials commingled. Containers must be clearly marked and the area
neatly maintained. Container capacity must be adequate to hold the
amount of materials generated between pickups. It must be clear to the
inspector that the system is being serviced.
C. The owner/operator/contractor must ensure that the system is being
used properly by employees, customers or tenants. There must not be
garbage in the recycling containers or recyclables in the garbage
containers. The owner/operator/contractor is responsible for resolving
problems which may arise from the improper use of containers and for
instructing employees, tenants, and customers to understand and use
the recycling system.
D. If patrons, customers or employees are involved in the waste disposal
process (i.e., fast-food stores or company/school cafeteria), the
recycling system must allow for this and include notice to customers as
to their responsibilities.
§ 106-14 KENILWORTH CODE § 106-15
1:276
E. The owner/operator/contractor is responsible for arranging for
recyclables to be removed from the premises and for assuring that they
go into the recyclables market. The owner/operator/contractor may
make arrangements to deliver the recyclables to the municipal
collection system (drop-off center). Otherwise, the owner/operator/
contractor is responsible for arranging to have recyclables picked up
and for resolving any problems with the transporter of recyclables.
F. The owner/operator/contractor must arrange to obtain documentation
in order to report the tonnages of materials recycled at least once per
year or else he/she must arrange to have the collector provide that
documentation directly to the municipality.
G. Single/dual-stream recycling. Commercial and institutional
establishments may opt to collect their recyclables in a single stream or
dual stream (fiber, commingled) provided the material recovery facility
(MRF) that receives the material has certified that it has the ability to
separate out and maximize the capture rate of the mandated
recyclables. The UCUA Division of Solid Waste Enforcement will
compile and maintain an updated list of those facilities. [Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
H. Recycling containers. Commercial and institutional establishments that
have outdoor garbage containers for their customers must also have
outdoor recycling containers. There must be sufficient recycling
containers for any mandated recyclables in the commercial/institutional
waste stream.
I. All schools must provide written notice at the beginning of each school
year to all students, teachers, and other staff on the recycling
requirements. The notice must contain a contact number to call if they
observe any problems associated with recycling or if recycling is not
properly occurring.
J. All schools and businesses that have their municipal solid waste (Type
10) picked up by the Borough of Kenilworth must place their MSW in
clear plastic bags.
K. Single-stream recycling of mixed classes of construction recyclables.
Construction/demolition sites may opt to collect all recyclables in one
container, provided that there are no other materials (including
garbage) in that container. To qualify for this provision, recyclables
must go to a transfer station/MRF that is properly permitted by the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and has certified that it
has the ability to separate out and maximize the capture rate of the
mandated materials. The specific materials that may be commingled
together will be determined by the provisions in the receiving transfer
station/MRF's permit.
L. All food service establishments, as defined in the Health Code, shall, in
addition to compliance with other recycling requirements, be required
§ 106-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 106-15
1:277
§ 106-16. Compliance requirements for fairs, parks, concerts,
streets, and other outdoor events.
§ 106-17. New developments of multifamily residential units or
commercial, institutional, or industrial properties.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13a and 99.16c:
to recycle grease and/or cooking oil created in the processing of food
or food products and maintain such records as may be prescribed for
inspection by any code enforcement officer.
A. The organizer/owner/contractor of the location must provide a
recycling system that is operated in compliance with the requirements
of this article.
B. The recycling system must provide for any mandated recyclables
generated at the event. It must be clear to an inspector that the system
is being serviced, i.e., containers must be clearly marked and the area
neatly maintained; there must not be garbage in the recyclables or
recyclables in the garbage; container capacity must be adequate to hold
materials between pickups. There must be sufficient recycling
containers for any mandated recyclables generated at the event.
C. The organizer/owner/contractor of the location is responsible for
arranging for recyclables to be removed from the premises and for
ensuring that they are taken to an approved recyclables market. The
owner/operator/contractor may make arrangements to deliver the
recyclables to the municipal collection system (drop-off center).
Otherwise, the owner/operator/contractor is responsible for arranging
to have recyclables collected and transported and for resolving any
problems with the transporter of recyclables.
D. The recycling system must be made accessible and available to all
patrons, customers, and employees. Notice/signs must be provided to
ensure all are aware of their responsibilities.
E. The owner/operator/contractor of the location is responsible for
obtaining pertinent documentation in order to report the tonnages of
materials recycled at least once per year or else he/she must arrange to
have the collector provide that documentation directly to the
municipality.
F. Single/dual-stream recycling. The recycling system may utilize separate
containers for each recyclable material or it may provide for two or
more materials to be placed in one container. Establishments may opt to
collect their recyclables in a single stream or dual stream (fiber,
commingled), provided that the MRF that receives the material has
certified that it has the ability to separate out and maximize the capture
rate of the mandated recyclables.
§ 106-15 KENILWORTH CODE § 106-17
1:278
§ 106-18. Solid waste mixed with recyclable materials.
§ 106-19. Enforcement.
A. Any application to the Planning Board of the municipality of Kenilworth,
for subdivision or site plan approval for the construction of 25 or more
units of multifamily residential housing, single-family developments of
50 or more units, or any commercial, institutional, or industrial
development proposal for the utilization of 1,000 square feet or more of
land, must include a compliant recycling plan. This plan must contain,
at a minimum, the following:
(1) A detailed analysis of the expected composition and amounts of
solid waste and recyclables generated at the proposed
development; and
(2) Locations documented on the application's site plan that provide
for convenient recycling opportunities for all owners, tenants, and
occupants. The recycling area shall be of sufficient size and
convenient location and contain other attributes (signage, lighting,
fencing, etc.) as may be determined by the municipal recycling
coordinator.
B. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the municipality of
Kenilworth, the owner of any new multifamily housing or commercial,
institutional, or industrial development must supply a copy of a duly
executed contract with a hauling company for the purposes of collection
and recycling of source-separated recyclable materials, in those
instances where the municipality does not otherwise provide this
service.
C. Provision shall be made for the indoor, or enclosed outdoor, storage and
pickup of solid waste, to be approved by the Municipal Engineer.
A. It shall be unlawful for solid waste collectors to collect solid waste that
is mixed with, or contains visible signs of, designated recyclable
materials. It is also unlawful for solid waste collectors to remove for
disposal those bags or containers of solid waste which visibly display a
warning notice sticker or some other device indicating that the load of
solid waste contains designated recyclable materials.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the resident or occupant to properly
segregate the uncollected solid waste for proper disposal or recycling.
Allowing such unseparated solid waste and recyclables to accumulate
will be considered a violation of this article and the local sanitary code.
C. Once placed in the location identified by this article, or any rules or
regulations promulgated pursuant to this article, no person, other than
those authorized by the municipality, shall tamper with, collect, remove,
or otherwise handle designated recyclable materials.
§ 106-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 106-19
1:279
§ 106-20. Violations and penalties.
§ 106-20.1. Grant monies.
Pursuant to P.L. 2007, c. 311 (the Recycling Enhancement Act),60 "All grant
monies received by a municipality shall be expended only for its recycling
program."
A. The recycling coordinator, Police Department, Health Officer and
Zoning Officer of Kenilworth, and the Union County Office of Health
Management and the Union County Utilities Authority are hereby
individually and severally empowered to enforce the provisions of this
article. An inspection may consist of, but is not limited to, sorting
through containers and opening of solid waste bags to detect, by sound
or sight, the presence of any recyclable material.
B. The recycling coordinator may designate another Public Works
employee to perform inspections and enforcement.
C. The Municipal Court shall have jurisdiction over proceedings to enforce
and collect any penalty imposed because of a violation of this article.
The proceedings shall be summary and in accordance with N.J.S.A.
2A:58-10 et seq. Process shall be in the form of a summons and shall
issue from the Department of Public Works, Police Department, Board
of Health, or Zoning Office, as plaintiff. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
A. Any person, corporation, occupant, or entity that violates or fails to
comply with any provision of this article or any of the rules and
regulations hereunder shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a
fine not to exceed $50 for a first offense and $100 for a second and each
subsequent offense. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
B. Fines levied and collected pursuant to the provisions of this article shall
be immediately deposited into an account solely used for recycling
programs.
60.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. § 13:1E-96.2 et seq.
§ 106-19 KENILWORTH CODE § 106-20.1
1:280
ARTICLE III
(Reserved)61
§ 106-21. through § 106-24. (Reserved)
61.Editor's Note: Former Art. III, Separation of Materials by Commercial and Institutional
Facilities, adopted 9-8-1987 by Ord. No. 87-16, was superseded 3-12-1991 by Ord. No.
91-2. See now Art. II of this chapter. Former Art. III, Clothing Recycling, adopted
2-13-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-01, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II). See now Ch. 120, Land Use, Art. 32, Clothing Bins.
§ 106-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 106-21
1:281

ARTICLE IV
Dumping
[Adopted 11-10-1987 by Ord. No. 87-23]
§ 106-25. Restricted activity; use of dumpsters. [Amended 5-8-1990
by Ord. No. 90-5]
A. No person or business shall dump or place or shall permit to be dumped
or placed any refuse of any kind, including but not limited to garbage,
trash, household items, leaves, refuse or any items that are recyclable
pursuant to other Borough ordinances, in any area within the Borough
other than in the yard or curb of his or its own residence or business,
and then he or it may only place in his or its yard or curbside such items
for collection by the Department of Public Works as may lawfully be
collected by the Department of Public Works pursuant to the Borough
recycling ordinances, Articles I and II of this chapter.
B. No person or business shall allow or permit the accumulation of debris
or litter on or around construction sites or its storage in such a manner
that it is likely to be removed by natural forces onto adjacent property.
C. All owners, lessees, tenants, occupants or persons in charge of any
building or structure shall keep and cause to be kept the sidewalk and
curb abutting said building or structure free from obstruction and
nuisances of every kind and shall keep sidewalks, areaways, backyards,
courts and alleys free from litter and other debris.
D. Any and all persons causing the distribution of advertisements,
handbills or unsolicited material of any kind shall ensure that said
materials are securely placed at each dwelling so that they will not be
blown away by natural forces; otherwise, no person shall place any
advertisement, handbill, circular or paper on or in any public street,
sidewalk, building or vehicle within the Borough.
E. (Reserved)62
F. (Reserved)
G. (Reserved)
H. (Reserved)
I. Dumping solid or liquid waste. [Added 9-24-1997 by Ord. No. 97-17]
(1) No person shall, regardless of intent, dump, deposit or otherwise
dispose of solid waste in excess of 0.148 cubic yard of solids or 30
U.S. gallons of liquids, whether for profit or otherwise, within the
Borough of Kenilworth. The provisions of this subsection shall not
62.Editor's Note: Former § 106-25E through H, regarding roll-off dumpsters, added
10-12-1994 by Ord. No. 94-15, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II). See now Ch. 170, Art. IX, Placement of Dumpsters on Public
Rights-of-Way, Sidewalks or Streets.
§ 106-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 106-25
1:283
§ 106-26. Offenses to be separate.
Each item wrongfully dumped or placed shall be deemed a separate
violation of this article.
§ 106-26.1. (Reserved)63
§ 106-27. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-12-1994 by Ord.
No. 94-15]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article shall,
upon conviction thereof, pay a penalty not less than $500 nor more than
$1,000 or be imprisoned for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both, for each
offense, except as provided for in § 106-25F.
§ 106-28. Designation of enforcement agent.
The Chief of Police is hereby designated as the enforcing agent with the
Kenilworth Police Department and shall continue to serve in such capacity
at the pleasure of the governing body of the Borough of Kenilworth.
apply to the lawful disposal of solid waste at the Kenilworth
Department of Public Works yard as may be permitted, from time to
time, by the governing body or by the Department of Public Works.
Any person who dumps, deposits or otherwise dispose of solid
or liquid waste at the Department of Public Works yard without
permission or proper authorization shall be subject to the fines and
penalties as provided for herein.
(2) Any person who violates the provisions of this Subsection I shall be
subject to the penalties prescribed in N.J.S.A. 13:1E-9.4.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
63.Editor's Note: Former § 106-26.1, Revocation of permit for roll-off containers, added
10-12-1994 by Ord. No. 94-15, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II). See now Ch. 170, Art. IX, Placement of Dumpsters on Public
Rights-of-Way, Sidewalks or Streets.
§ 106-25 KENILWORTH CODE § 106-28
1:284
ARTICLE V
(Reserved)64
§ 106-29. through § 106-32. (Reserved)
64.Editor's Note: Original Art. V, Medical Waste Disposal, adopted 9-13-1988 by Ord. No.
88-34, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 106-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 106-29
1:285

ARTICLE VI
Yard Waste Collection Program
[Adopted 5-24-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-08]
§ 106-34. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish a yard waste collection and
disposal program in the Borough of Kenilworth, so as to protect public
health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to
comply.
§ 106-35. Definitions and word usage.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
CONTAINERIZED — The placement of yard waste in a trash can, bucket,
bag or other vessel, such as to prevent the yard waste from spilling or
blowing out into the street and coming into contact with stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive,
or other way, which is an existing state, county, or municipal roadway,
and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or
unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, parking areas, and other areas within the street lines.
YARD WASTE — Leaves and grass clippings.
§ 106-36. Yard waste collection.
Sweeping, raking, blowing or otherwise placing yard waste that is not
containerized at the curb or along the street is only allowed during the
seven days prior to a scheduled and announced collection, and it shall not
be placed closer than 10 feet to any storm drain inlet. Placement of such
yard waste at the curb or along the street at any other time or in any other
manner is a violation of this article. If such placement of yard waste occurs,
the party responsible for placement of the yard waste must remove the
yard waste from the street or said party shall be deemed in violation of this
article.
§ 106-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 106-37
1:287
§ 106-37. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Police Department,
Department of Public Works, Board of Health and code enforcement officers
of the Borough of Kenilworth.
§ 106-37 KENILWORTH CODE § 106-37
1:288
Chapter 108
GASOLINE STATIONS
§ 108-1. Hours.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to conduct a business
of a gasoline service station in the Borough of Kenilworth before 6:00 a.m.
and later than 10:00 p.m. The hours referred to in this chapter shall be
either Eastern standard time or Eastern daylight saving time, whichever is
in effect in the Borough of Kenilworth.
§ 108-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-11-1979 by Ord. No.
79-19; at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. II)]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to the general penalty set forth in
Chapter 1, Article I, General Penalty, of the Borough of Kenilworth Code, for
each and every offense.
Chapter 109
GRAFFITI
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 150.
§ 109-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DEFACE — To cover, mark, write on, paint, color or otherwise mar, disfigure
or draw whatsoever on any private or public property of any nature without
the express consent of the owner.
GRAFFITI — Any form of inscription, word, figure, marking or design that is
marked, etched, scratched, drawn on or painted on any building, structure,
fixture or other improvement, whether permanent or temporary, including,
by way of example only and without limitation, fencing surrounding
construction sites, whether public or private, without the consent of the
owner of the property, or the owner's authorized agent, which is visible from
the private right-of-way.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the public has access, including
but not limited to a public street, road, thoroughfare, sidewalk, bridge,
alley, plaza, park, recreation or shopping area, public transportation facility,
§ 106-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 109-1
1:289
vehicle used for public transportation, parking lot or any other parking,
public building, structure or any municipal parking signs, etc., or area.
§ 109-2. Prohibited acts.
No person shall willfully or maliciously damage, deface or vandalize the
property of another by painting, scribbling or inscribing in what is
commonly referred to as "graffiti" on any public place or private property
and commit graffiti thereon, whether the same embraces any obscenity,
vulgarity or any other inscriptions or markings.
§ 109-3. Violations and penalties.
§ 109-4. Violations by juveniles; restitution.
§ 109-5. Jurisdiction over violations; additional restitution.
A. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not exceeding $2,000,
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days or a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days, or a combination thereof.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
B. Any person who violates this chapter may also be responsible for
cleaning, repairing, painting or otherwise restoring the property which
he or she has damaged, defaced or vandalized so as to bring the
property to the condition it was in prior to its defacement.
A. Violations by juveniles. If at the time of the offense charged any person
shall be under the age of 18 years, the Superior Court, Chancery
Division, Family Part, shall have exclusive jurisdiction of the trial of
such infant or infants, and such infant or infants shall be surrendered to
the Superior Court, Chancery Division, Family Part, and the case,
including all papers and process pertinent thereto, shall be transferred
to said Court as provided in N.J.S.A. 2C:4-11. Any person taking a
juvenile into custody shall immediately notify the parents or the
juvenile's guardian, if any that the juvenile has been taken into custody,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:4A-33.
B. Restitution for additional violations by juveniles. In the event that the
present complaint shall result in a second determination of a violation
of this chapter by any person under the age of 18 years, the parents or
guardian of such infant shall be liable in an action brought by the
injured property owner before the Municipal Court for restitution in the
amount of the pecuniary damage sustained by the injured property
owner.
A. The Municipal Court shall have exclusive jurisdiction over any person,
who is not a juvenile, who violates the provisions of this chapter.
§ 109-1 KENILWORTH CODE § 109-5
1:290
Chapter 110
(RESERVED)
Chapter 112
GRADING, EXCAVATIONS AND LANDFILLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 91. Soil erosion and sediment control — See Ch.
167.
§ 112-1. Changing of grade restricted; compliance required.
No person, firm or corporation shall change the grade of any real property
in the Borough of Kenilworth except as hereinafter provided, and then
only in full compliance with the requirements, standards and conditions
contained herein. For the purposes of this chapter, the phrase "change the
grade" shall mean any significant change in topography and shall include
any change in grade which violates § 112-2 of this chapter.
§ 112-2. Restrictions.
No person, firm or corporation shall change the grade of any real property
within the Borough of Kenilworth where the result will be to:
B. (Reserved)65
C. As a condition of sentencing, the Municipal Court shall have the
authority to order that the offender be responsible for cleaning,
repairing, painting or otherwise restoring the damaged property to the
condition it was in prior to being damaged, provided that a
determination is made that any restoration efforts made by the offender
shall not subject the offender to unreasonable risk of death or serious
physical injury or otherwise be a violation of law.
D. In the event that the offender is unable to comply with the above, the
Municipal Court shall have the authority to order that said offender
make full monetary restitution to restore the property to its original,
undamaged condition. The Municipal Court shall have the full
discretion to set the terms of restitution.
A. Interfere with the natural drainage of the general area surrounding the
property.
65.Editor's Note: Original § 109-5B, which contained penalties for violations of this chapter,
was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II). See now
§ 109-3, Violations and penalties.
§ 109-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-2
1:291
§ 112-3. Conformance required.
No person, firm or corporation shall change the grade of any property
within the Borough of Kenilworth except in conformance with maps, plans
and specifications approved by either the Municipal Engineer or the
Planning Board of the Borough of Kenilworth as provided in this chapter.
§ 112-4. Permit required.
No person, firm or corporation shall change the grade of any real property
without a permit so to do.
§ 112-5. Application for permit.
B. Interfere with the riparian or drainage rights or easements of other
property owners.
C. Interfere with lateral supports or slopes.
D. Cause an unreasonable accumulation or flow of surface water upon or
over any property.
E. Create or aggravate any condition detrimental to the public health and
safety.
A. An application for such a permit shall be made to the Building Inspector
of the Borough of Kenilworth by the owner of the property or his duly
authorized agent on forms provided by the Building Inspector,
accompanied by four sets of maps and plans and specifications
prepared by and bearing the seal of a licensed engineer or licensed land
surveyor, drawn to such scale as to be reasonably clear and showing the
following:
(1) The name and address of the owner of the property.
(2) Description of property by street address and Tax Map designation.
(3) The location of the property and its geographic relation to
neighboring properties, showing all buildings and lots within 100
feet of the boundaries of the plot on which the change in grade is
proposed.
(4) The location of that portion of the municipal storm sewer serving
the property.
(5) Existing topography of the property with contour intervals at
significant points showing the existing flow of surface water from
the property to the municipal sewer system.
(6) Proposed topography of the property with contour intervals at
significant points showing the proposed flow of surface water from
the property to the municipal sewer system.
§ 112-2 KENILWORTH CODE § 112-5
1:292
§ 112-6. Issuance or denial of permit.
§ 112-7. Appeals.
The owner may appeal the denial of the permit to the Planning Board of the
Borough of Kenilworth on five days' written notice to the Building Inspector,
the Municipal Engineer and all persons owning property within 100 feet
from the property proposed to be regraded. The Planning Board shall adopt
reasonable rules governing its procedure upon such appeal. If the Planning
Board determines that the proposed change in grade does not violate any
of the provisions of § 112-2 hereof, it shall direct the Building Inspector to
issue the permit.
§ 112-8. Certification of completion of change of grade.
Not less than 30 days after the completion of any change of grade, the
owner shall furnish the Building Inspector with the written certification of
a licensed engineer or licensed land surveyor that the change of grade has
been completed in accordance with the application. Failure to furnish such
a certification shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. In no event shall a
certificate of occupancy be issued prior to the furnishing of the certification.
(7) The elevation of all ground level windows, doors and openings of
buildings on the property.
(8) Such other information as may be necessary to establish that the
proposed change of grade does not violate any of the provisions of
§ 112-2 hereof.
B. All applications shall be accompanied by a fee as provided in Chapter
91, Fees, which shall be nonrefundable. [Amended 9-11-1979 by Ord.
No. 79-19]
A. The Building Inspector shall promptly refer the application to the
Borough Engineer who shall, upon the receipt of same, examine the
same and inspect the property. If the Municipal Engineer determines
that the proposed change in grade does not violate any of the provisions
of § 112-2 hereof, he shall so certify in writing to the Building Inspector
who shall, upon receiving said certification, issue the permit requested.
B. If the Municipal Engineer determines that the proposed change of
grade violates any of the provisions of § 112-2 hereof, he shall report his
reasons therefor in writing to the Building Inspector who shall deny the
permit and furnish the applicant with the report of the Municipal
Engineer.
§ 112-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-9
1:293
§ 112-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-11-1979 by Ord. No.
79-19; at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. II)]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to the general penalty set forth
in Chapter 1, Article I, General Penalty, of the Borough of Kenilworth Code.
Each day that a violation shall continue shall constitute a separate violation
of this chapter.
Chapter 114
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 106.
Industrial waste — See Ch. 116.
Nuisances — See Ch. 134.
Sanitary standards — See Ch. 212.
§ 114-1. Responsibility for cleanup costs.
In the event that there occurs a spill, discharge, leakage or any other
type of release of hazardous waste onto any private or public property,
including waterways, roadways or any other place within the Borough of
Kenilworth, the individual(s) or entity(ies) having ownership and control of
the facility, building, vehicle, system or container from which said release
emanated shall be responsible for all reasonable costs associated with and
necessitated to the Borough's response thereto, including but not limited to
costs of manpower, equipment, materials, supplies and any other expense
reasonably related to said response by the Borough.
§ 114-2. Accounting of cleanup costs.
Upon the conclusion of response, containment and/or cleanup efforts, the
heads of the Police Department, Fire Department and Department of Public
Works involved in the response shall prepare an accounting of all costs
and expenses associated with said response, including but not limited to
a pro rata cost for personnel time, equipment, materials, supplies and any
other expense reasonably related thereto. The same shall be presented,
in writing, as soon as practicable to the Municipal Finance Office for
verification and approval, and shall then be transmitted to the Borough
Clerk for appropriate follow-up action.
§ 112-9 KENILWORTH CODE § 114-2
1:294
Chapter 116
INDUSTRIAL WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewerage Authority — See Ch. 45. Sewers — See Ch. 158.
§ 116-1. Purpose; definitions.
§ 116-2. Discharge of certain waste restricted. [Amended 7-11-1978
by Ord. No. 78-23]
No industrial liquid waste shall be discharged into the sanitary sewer
system of the Borough of Kenilworth unless it is amenable to secondary
or biological treatment processes. No toxic materials or wastes containing
explosives or flammable substances which would be detrimental to the
collection system, including pumping stations and all treatment plant
facilities and equipment or treatment processes, shall be permitted to be
discharged into the collection system.
§ 116-3. Chemical analysis required. [Amended 7-11-1978 by Ord.
No. 78-23]
Every industry proposing to connect with the Borough of Kenilworth sewer
system and to discharge industrial waste into same shall submit a complete
chemical analysis of the waste, including biochemical oxygen demand
(BOD), chemical oxygen demand (COD), suspended solids, chlorine
demand, phosphates, nitrates and other waste characteristics required by
A. The purpose of this chapter is to provide for equitable charges to
industrial users based upon quantity and strength of wastewater
discharge in compliance with Federal Regulation 18 CFR 601.34, dated
July 2, 1970.
B. For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated: [Added 6-24-1975 by Ord. No. 75-1466]
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — Liquid or other wastes, discharged into the
sanitary sewerage system of the Borough of Kenilworth, resulting from
any process of industry, manufacture, trade or business or from the
development or processing of any natural resource or material.
C. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, there shall be no
charge based on flow alone where the annual flow is less than 500,000
gallons. [Added 6-24-1975 by Ord. No. 75-14]
66.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 75-14 provided as follows: "This ordinance shall take effect
retroactive to January 1, 1975.
§ 114-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116-3
1:295
the regulatory agencies and the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection.
§ 116-4. Annual charges to cover costs of treatment. [Amended
7-11-1978 by Ord. No. 78-23]
Every industry connected to the Borough of Kenilworth system and
discharging industrial wastes shall pay an annual charge to the Borough of
Kenilworth to cover the cost of treatment of such industrial waste.
§ 116-5. (Reserved)67
§ 116-6. Additional charges or modification of rates. [Amended
7-11-1978 by Ord. No. 78-23]
The Borough of Kenilworth reserves the right to include additional charges
for industrial waste characteristics as may be imposed by the Sewerage
Authority on the Borough of Kenilworth or to modify the rates based upon
actual cost to the Borough of Kenilworth.
§ 116-7. Annual rate schedule. [Amended 1-27-1976 by Ord. No.
76-2; 6-14-1977 by Ord. No. 77-23; 7-11-1978 by Ord. No. 78-2368;
9-11-1979 by Ord. No. 79-19]
The annual rate schedule for industrial wastes shall be as provided in
Chapter 91, Fees.
§ 116-8. Sampling and testing. [Amended 7-11-1978 by Ord. No.
78-23]
The Borough of Kenilworth shall undertake periodic sampling and testing of
the waste to determine both volume and strength or waste characteristics.
The owner shall reimburse the Borough for all costs of sampling and testing.
§ 116-9. Determination of volume. [Amended 7-11-1978 by Ord. No.
78-23]
The volume of sewage and/or industrial waste from each industrial
establishment may be determined by meters paid for and installed and
maintained by the owner, actual water meter records and/or private well
meter records combined with municipal water records or from estimates or
measurements made by the Borough of Kenilworth consulting engineer.
§ 116-10. Determination of characteristics. [Amended 7-11-1978 by
Ord. No. 78-23]
67.Editor's Note: Former § 116-5, Basis for payment, was repealed 7-11-1978 by Ord. No.
78-23.
68.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 78-23 provided that the operation of this ordinance be
retroactive to January 1, 1978.
§ 116-3 KENILWORTH CODE § 116-10
1:296
§ 116-11. Acceptance upon execution of agreement. [Amended
7-11-1978 by Ord. No. 78-23]
The Borough of Kenilworth will accept industrial wastes into the sanitary
sewerage system upon execution of a formal, written agreement and under
and subject to the provisions appearing in said agreement and the rules,
regulations and rates stated herein. The agreement will set out in detail the
characteristics of the wastes, the flow conditions which shall govern and
the conditions with respect to the physical connection or connections. It
will be the policy of the Borough of Kenilworth to consider each application
on its own merits and to establish specific conditions applicable to the
particular situation for each agreement. No connection shall be made prior
to execution of the agreement.
§ 116-12. Submission of data prior to approval of application.
[Amended 7-11-1978 by Ord. No. 78-23]
Prior to approving an application for a connection involving the acceptance
of industrial liquid wastes, the applicant shall submit complete data with
respect to the following:
A. The characteristics of the industrial waste shall be determined from
actual sampling or other approved means and shall be based upon
analyses made in accordance with the procedures outlined in the latest
edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater published by the American Public Health Association. The
Borough of Kenilworth may require the installation of automatic
samplers at the cost of the owner to obtain representative samples
during a calendar quarter or as may be required. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
B. Additional classifications of waste characteristics or modifications of
the rate schedule may be established by the Borough of Kenilworth
from time to time as deemed necessary.
A. Average, maximum and minimum rates of flow to be expected daily and
seasonally.
B. Flow diagram, showing points of applications of chemicals, type and
quantity of each chemical used per day and per shift, a schedule of
operations, expected chemical characteristics of the untreated wastes
and the point or points of connection to the sewerage system. The
normal situation will require the separation of, and separate points of
connection for, domestic sewage and industrial wastes from each
industrial establishment.
C. Chemical analyses and waste characteristics of liquid industrial waste
to be discharged into system.
§ 116-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116-13
1:297
§ 116-13. Prohibited wastes.
Wastes containing the following substances or possessing the
characteristics listed below will not be accepted:
§ 116-14. Right of Borough to require preliminary treatment;
characteristics.
The Borough of Kenilworth reserves the right to require preliminary
treatment where the chemical characteristics of the proposed industrial
wastes, in the opinion of the Borough of Kenilworth or in the opinion of
the State Department of Environmental Protection or the local Board of
Health, make such preliminary treatment desirable or mandatory. Some
of the characteristics which may dictate preliminary treatment are listed
below:
A. Any vapors or steam.
B. Any fluids with temperature in excess of 150° F.
C. Any fluid wastes which contain in excess of 100 parts per million of fat,
oil or grease, either vegetable or mineral.
D. Any volatile, explosive or flammable substances such as benzene,
gasoline, naphtha, fuel oil or similar substances.
E. Any solid or viscous matter which may contain any ashes, cinders, sand,
mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood,
paunch manure, hair or similar substances. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
F. Any fluid wastes having a pH value less than 5.5 or in excess of 9.0 or
possessing other properties capable of causing damage or hazard to
sewers, structures, treatment process, equipment or operating
personnel.
G. Any wastes containing toxic or poisonous substances in sufficient
concentration to interfere with the sewage treatment process or to
cause injury to animals or persons or to create an unacceptable
condition in the receiving streams.
H. Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance which causes a public
nuisance.
A. Five-day BOD in excess of 350 milligrams per liter.
B. Suspended solids in excess of 350 milligrams per liter.
C. Presence of arsenic, barium, cadmium, chloride, copper, cyanide,
fluoride, iron, lead, magnesium, manganese, nickel, nitrate, selenium,
sulfate, zinc or pH values outside the acceptable limits.
D. pH below or above the allowable limits.
§ 116-13 KENILWORTH CODE § 116-14
1:298
§ 116-15. Submission of drawings and specifications; control
manhole.
In such instances where it is agreed that the industrial waste will be
received following preliminary treatment, drawings and specifications shall
be submitted for approval showing all pertinent details of the construction
proposed to accomplish the preliminary treatment, to include details of
the indicator-record-register type of fluid meter and housing to be used to
meter the flow of industrial wastes and also details of the control manhole
to be constructed on the industrial wastes connection within the sidewalk
area. The control manhole shall be provided with adequate access manhole
covers of approved type, through which access shall be possible to the
Borough of Kenilworth personnel at all times. Drawings, specifications,
reports, etc., shall be submitted in quadruplicate and shall be prepared by
a registered professional engineer.
§ 116-16. Maintenance of preliminary treatment facilities.
Where preliminary treatment facilities are required, they shall be provided
and continuously maintained in an effectively operating condition at all
times at the expense of the owner.
§ 116-17. Maintenance of quality of effluent. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
Each owner connected shall be responsible for maintaining a quality of
effluent from the premises which conforms to the provisions established
in the owner's agreement with the Borough of Kenilworth. Sampling and
analysis shall be done to conform with accepted practice and in accordance
with the current edition of Standard Methods for Examination of Water and
Wastewater published by the American Public Health Association.
§ 116-18. Responsibility for costs.
The cost of preparing and submitting this data for consideration by the
Borough of Kenilworth shall be borne by the industry; likewise, the cost
of sampling and analysis to determine compliance with the terms of the
agreement shall be borne by the owner although conducted by the Borough
of Kenilworth or its duly authorized representative.
§ 116-19. Control meter and sampling manhole.
Industries permitted to connect to Borough of Kenilworth sewers, even
though not initially required to provide preliminary treatment, may be
required to provide a control manhole and or meter as described above.
E. A chlorine demand in excess of 30 milligrams per liter.
§ 116-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116-20
1:299
§ 116-20. Requirements where owner provides own water supply.
Where the owner provides its own water supply, entirely separate from
that supplied by the Borough of Kenilworth, or provides from its own
sources a portion of the water consumed on the premises, which eventually
finds its way into the sewerage system of the Borough of Kenilworth, all
aforementioned provisions will apply. This does not relieve the owner from
the requirement to furnish, install and maintain a meter of the indicatorregister-
record type to measure the discharge of industrial wastes, as
provided herein. All costs of furnishing, installing and maintaining the
industrial waste flow meter will be borne by the owner.
§ 116-21. Access to meters.
The Borough of Kenilworth representative shall have access at reasonable
times to industrial establishments and to any meters used to determine
waste volumes discharged into the sewer system or excluded from the
sewer system.
§ 116-22. Prohibited connections.
Under no circumstances will any of the following be connected to the
sanitary sewers, directly or indirectly:
§ 116-23. Domestic sewage.
A separate connection shall be provided for domestic sewage and the
waste shall not be commingled with the industrial waste within the plant.
The Borough of Kenilworth shall determine the equivalent household
connections from the discharge of domestic sewage from each industrial
plant. This shall be determined by dividing the average daily domestic
sewage flow by 300 gallons per day, the latter representing the average
household domestic sewage discharge. The annual rate for discharge of
domestic sewage into the Borough of Kenilworth sewer system shall be
computed by multiplying the number of equivalent units, as determined
by the formula above, times the annual sewer charge applied to each
household unit.
A. Floor drain, area drain or yard drain.
B. Rain conductor or downspout.
C. Grease pit.
D. Air-conditioning equipment.
E. Stormwater inlets or catch basin.
F. Drains from a piece of equipment or manufacturing process, except
when specifically authorized under the provisions of these rules and
regulations.
§ 116-20 KENILWORTH CODE § 116-24
1:300
§ 116-24. Payments.
§ 116-25. Connection to sewers required.
Each owner of premises located on streets in which sewers are available
shall connect all sewerage facilities on said premises to the sewer system
immediately upon such sewerage facilities becoming available and use said
sewerage facilities at all times for sewage disposal therefrom.
§ 116-26. Alterations and repairs to sewer system.
No alteration or repair to any part of the sewer system or any connection
thereto shall be made except by duly authorized representatives or
employees of the Borough of Kenilworth without application for such having
been made to the Borough of Kenilworth and approved and upon
compliance with the rules and regulations of the Borough of Kenilworth
relating thereto.
§ 116-27. Prohibited connections.
No cesspool, privy vault, subsoil or cellar drains, rainwater or surface
drains shall be connected with the sewer system or any part thereof. Only
the sewerage system of the premises shall be so connected.
§ 116-28. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-11-1979 by Ord. No.
79-19; at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. II)]
Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall fail to comply with or
violate the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to
the general penalty set forth in Chapter 1, Article I, General Penalty, of the
Borough of Kenilworth Code.
Chapter 118
A. The rates and charges fixed by the Borough of Kenilworth shall be in
lieu of and in substitution for any other sewer charges heretofore made
by any other agency for such quarter or any succeeding period.
B. Bills for said charges and rents shall be rendered to the owner of each
premises quarterly in advance as soon as may be practicable after the
beginning of each quarter and may be rendered with the tax bills
covering real estate, and said charges and rents shall become due and
payable as herein prescribed.
C. Said charges and rents shall draw interest and be a lien upon the
premises until paid, and the Borough of Kenilworth shall have and
exercise the remedies for the collection thereof with interest, costs and
penalties as it has by law for the collection of taxes upon real estate.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 116-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116-28
1:301
INSURANCE
§ 116-28 KENILWORTH CODE § 116-28
1:302
ARTICLE I
Fire Damage Claims
[Adopted 2-27-1979 by Ord. No. 79-3]
§ 118-1. Payment of claims on fire-damaged property. [Amended
4-24-1996 by Ord. No. 96-7]
No insurance company authorized to issue fire insurance policies in the
State of New Jersey shall pay any claims in excess of $2,500 for fire
damages on any real property located within the Borough of Kenilworth,
pursuant to any fire insurance policy issued or renewed after the adoption
of this article and after the filing of this article with the State Commissioner
of Insurance, until such time as all anticipated demolition costs, taxes and
assessments and all other municipal liens or charges due and payable,
appearing on the official certificate of search, shall have been paid by either
the owner of such real property or by the insurance company, pursuant to
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 17:36-10, or the Borough of Kenilworth submits to
the insurance company a copy of a resolution adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A.
17:36-11. The governing body of the Borough of Kenilworth may enter into
an agreement with the owner of any fire-damaged property to pay in full
all delinquent demolition costs, assessments or other municipal liens by
installments, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-19, or for the redemption of the tax
sale lien by installment payments pursuant to Article 7 of Chapter 5 of Title
54 of the New Jersey Revised Statutes, if the governing body is satisfied
that the claim for fire damage is to be used to restore or improve the
fire-damaged property. An insurance company receiving a certified copy
of a resolution of agreement from the governing body of the Borough of
Kenilworth is authorized to make full payment on the claim to the insured
person.
§ 118-2. Statutory authority.
This article shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 184 of the Laws of
1979 and any amendments thereto.69
69.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 17:36-8 et seq.
§ 118-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 118-2
1:303
Chapter 120
LAND USE
§ 118-2 KENILWORTH CODE § 118-2
1:304
Part 1
Administration
ARTICLE 1
Title, Purpose, Scope and Definitions
§ 120-1.1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Land Use Ordinance of the Borough of
Kenilworth" ("Borough").
§ 120-1.2. Purpose.
This chapter implements the Municipal Land Use Law of the State of New
Jersey (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.) within the Borough. It is the intent and
purpose of this chapter to:
A. Guide the appropriate use or development of all lands in this Borough in
a manner which will promote the public health, safety, morals, and
general welfare;
B. Secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other natural and man-made
disasters;
C. Provide adequate light, air and open space;
D. Encourage the appropriate and efficient expenditure of public funds by
the coordination of public development with land use policies;
E. Provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for a variety of
residential, recreational, and commercial uses and open space, both
public and private, according to their respective environmental
requirements in order to meet the needs of all of the Borough's citizens;
F. Promote a desirable visual environment through creative development
techniques and good civic design and arrangement;
G. Promote the conservation of historic sites and districts, open space, and
energy resources and prevent degradation of the environment through
improper use of land;
H. Encourage coordination of the various public and private procedures
and activities shaping land development with a view of lessening the
cost of such development and to the more efficient use of land;
I. Promote utilization of renewable energy sources; and
J. Promote the maximum practicable recovery and recycling of recyclable
materials from municipal solid waste through the use of planning
practices designed to incorporate the State Recycling Plan goals and to
complement municipal recycling programs.
§ 120-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-1.3
1:305
§ 120-1.3. Scope.
The provisions and requirements of this chapter shall be held paramount
to any corresponding or similar but less restrictive provisions and
requirements of any existing law, ordinance, rule, regulation, deed,
restriction or private covenant affecting lands and premises in the Borough,
provided the Borough as an entity shall be exempt from all provisions of this
chapter unless otherwise provided herein or as may be required by New
Jersey law.
§ 120-1.4. Definitions.
As used in this Part 1 and throughout this Land Use Ordinance of the
Borough of Kenilworth, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABANDONMENT — The relinquishment of property or a cessation of the
use of property without the intention to resume by the owner or lessee,
without any intention of transferring rights to the property to another
owner or of resuming the use of the property, in concurrence with some
overt act or some franchise to act which carries the implication that the
owner neither claims nor retains any interest in the subject site. While the
mere nonuse of a nonconforming right does not constitute abandonment,
the property owner bears the burden of proof to show that the nonusage did
not manifest an intent to abandon.
ABOVE-GRADE STRUCTURE — Any building, roofed structure or other
structure which has a height above the ground of at least one foot. If only
part of said structure is one foot or higher above the ground, then only
that part shall be considered an "above-grade structure." This shall include,
but is not necessarily limited to, swimming pools, hot tubs, ornamental
pools, porches, decks, balconies, tanks, fireplaces and barbecue pits, roofed
arbors and trellises, any or all of which are located above grade as defined
herein. Notwithstanding the above, the following shall not be construed to
be above-grade structures for the purposes of this chapter: fences, walls,
retaining walls, flagpoles, mailboxes, signs, and lawn ornaments.
ABUTTING — Touching or joining at the edge or border, adjacent,
contiguous.
ACCESS DRIVE OR AISLE — That portion of a parking area or facility not
devoted to parking spaces which permits vehicles to move from the roadway
to the parking stall and includes both the portion leading to the parking
spaces from the driveway as well as the aisle or space between parking
stalls which permit automobile maneuvering for the purpose of parking.
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — A building or structure
occupied or devoted exclusively to an accessory use on the same lot with a
subordinate purpose to a principal building or structure. More particularly,
but not by way of limitation, an accessory building or structure in a
residential zone shall be construed to include a deck; detached private
garage; private greenhouses; private summerhouses; private sheds;
gazebos; other private roofed structures; a private swimming pool; and a
§ 120-1.3 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-1.4
1:306
private tennis court and private racquetball, private platform tennis, private
paddleball, or private handball court.
ACCESSORY USE — A use naturally and normally incidental and
subordinate to the principal and primary use upon any premises. More
particularly, but not by way of limitation, a residential accessory use shall be
construed to include such uses as a private swimming pool, private tennis
court, and private racquetball, platform tennis, paddleball or handball
courts.
ACRE — A unit of land with a surface area of 43,560 square feet.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICE — An office where the primary function is
dealing with other branches or divisions of the same enterprise, and where
there is only minimum contact with the general public due to such primary
function.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The government official designated by the
Planning Board with administering land development regulations.
ADULT BOOKSTORE — Any business having as a predominant part of
its stock-in-trade books, magazines, photographs, pictures, films, devices,
newspapers, recordings, periodicals or any other item or paraphernalia
devoted to the presentation or exploitation of parts of the anatomy, human
or animal, in an obscene manner or for obscene purposes.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING — Housing which is affordable by persons of low
or moderate income based upon the standard of income and affordability
established by the regulations of the New Jersey State Council on Affordable
Housing, as amended from time to time, or as established in the Borough
Code.
AGE-RESTRICTED MULTIFAMILY RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — A
residential development containing age-restricted dwellings and providing
facilities and services specifically designed to meet the needs of older
persons, consistent with the guidelines and requirements of the United
States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). Affordable
housing units in age-restricted multifamily residential developments must
meet all necessary standards and requirements for low- and moderateincome
housing units in accordance with the rules and regulations of the
New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing (COAH).
AGRICULTURAL LAND — Land used for growing crops; raising or breeding
dairy, poultry or other livestock; truck gardening; woodlots; a nursery or
greenhouse or other agricultural or horticultural purposes. Agricultural
land shall also include open or wooded areas, ponds, brooks, meadows,
swamps and land used for hunting, trapping, wild game preserves and
noncommercial recreational purposes.
ALTERATION — Any change in or rearrangement in the structural parts or
existing facilities as applied to an existing building or structure, except such
change as may be required by the Borough for safety. Also, an enlargement
or addition to any building by extension of any side or by increasing its
height, or by any change in use, conversion, or removal of a building,
§ 120-1.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-1.4
1:307
structure or a part thereof from one location or position to another.
"Alteration" shall also mean to change the appearance of exterior elements
of a structure or to change the materials used. Ordinary maintenance shall
not be considered an alteration within this definition.
ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE — Structures such as clock towers,
bell steeples, light poles and similar alternative design-mounting structures
that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers.
AMEND or AMENDMENT — Any repeal, modification or addition to a
regulation; any new regulation; any change in the number, shape, boundary,
or area of a zone; or any repeal or abolition of any map, part thereof or
addition thereto.
ANCILLARY — Accessory or auxiliary.
ANTENNA, EXEMPT — An antenna of any of the following types:
ANTENNA, GENERAL — A device used to transmit and/or receive radio or
electromagnetic waves between earth and/or outer space based structures
generally, but not including cellular communication antennas.
APARTMENT HOUSE — See "dwelling, multifamily."
APARTMENT UNIT — One or more dwelling rooms with private bath and
kitchen facilities comprising an independent, self-contained dwelling unit
in a building containing more than one dwelling unit on a single lot, and
includes one or more such dwelling rooms above a commercial facility
where such use is permissible.
APARTMENT, GARDEN PROJECT — A grouping or complex of buildings
containing individual apartment units and characterized by their low-height
and low-density design wherein a large proportion of the total project land
area remains free of structures and pavement for recreational and aesthetic
purposes. See also "dwelling, multiple-group."
APPLICANT — A developer, owner, or contract purchaser with owner's
consent submitting an application for development.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — The application form and all
accompanying documents required by this chapter for approval of a
subdivision plat, site plan, planned development, conditional use, zoning
variance, or for the issuance of a permit for the development of all
construction on property located in the Borough.
APPROVING AUTHORITY — The Planning Board of the municipality, unless
a different agency is designated by ordinance when acting pursuant to the
authority of this chapter.
An antenna that is designed to receive television broadcast signals
(TVBS), provided that if it is located on a mast, the mast is 12 feet or
less in height.
A.
An antenna used for reception of shortwave broadcasts or for use by
persons licensed as amateur radio operators by the FCC, provided that
if it is located on a mast, the mast is 12 feet or less in height.
B.
§ 120-1.4 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-1.4
1:308
AREA — The measurement of a plan surface expressed in acres or square
feet.
ASSISTED LIVING RESIDENCE — A building or group of buildings
designed as residences for the frail elderly that provide rooms, meals and
personal care, and which may include assisted living facilities, nursing
or convalescent homes and skilled or intermediate care nursing facilities,
which are required to be licensed by the State of New Jersey pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 26:2H-1 et seq.
AT-GRADE STRUCTURE — Any structure which has a height above the
ground of less than one foot.
ATTACHED DWELLING UNITS — Dwelling units which occupy their own
separate lot of land but which share a common wall with the adjacent
abutting dwelling unit.
ATTIC — The open space between the ceiling beams of the top habitable
floor and the roof rafters in any building.
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING — See "junkyard."
AWNING — A rooflike cover made of fabric, flexible plastic or thin metal
over a frame, which projects from and is supported solely by the wall of a
building, the purposes for which may include the shielding of a doorway,
window or sidewalk from the elements and the display of signs.
BALCONY — An exterior structure of wood, masonry, metal, stone, asphalt
or other substance without a roof, the floor level of which is elevated above
ground level more than four feet and either supported by, attached to or
accessible from the principal building or structure.
BANNER — Any sign or string of one or more signs, usually made of cloth
or other lightweight material, which is used to attract attention, whether
or not imprinted with words or characters, including but not limited to
balloons and pennants. Flags shall not be considered banners.
BASEMENT — A portion of the building partly underground but having less
than 1/2 of its clear height below the average grade of the adjoining ground.
(See "cellar.")
BAY WINDOW — An alcove of a room projecting from an outside wall and
having its own windows, usually but not always having a shortened floor or
ledge.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST — A single dwelling structure licensed by the State
of New Jersey, occupied by the resident owner and family or occupied by
a resident manager, in which bedrooms are rented and a morning meal
provided to transient and temporary lodgers on a daily basis for
compensation.
BEDROOM — A room within a dwelling unit which is used for sleeping
on a regular basis, usually containing a bed or similar service for sleeping
and usually equipped with a door for purposes of privacy and a closet for
storage.
§ 120-1.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-1.4
1:309
BIG-BOX RETAIL STORE — A retail use that stocks an inventory of goods in
large quantities for the purpose of selling retail from a building in which the
goods are held and which utilizes warehouse stack storage technique on the
sales floor area.
BILLBOARD — See "sign, outdoor advertising."
BLINDNESS — Central visual acuity of 20/200 or less in the better eye with
the use of a correcting lens. An eye which is accompanied by a limitation in
the fields of vision such that the widest diameter of the visual field subtends
an angle no greater than 20° shall be considered as having a central visual
acuity of 20/200 or less.
BLOCK — A group of platted lots facing one side of one street between two
cross streets.
BOARD — The Planning Board of the Borough.[Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
BOARDINGHOUSE or ROOMING HOUSE — A dwelling in which, for
compensation, lodging or meals or both are furnished to two or more, but
not exceeding six, guests.
BOROUGH COUNCIL — Members of the governing body.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form any structure or
construction adapted to permanent, temporary, or continuous occupancy
and equipped with a roof, whether or not supported by columns, pillars or
walls.
BUILDING COVERAGE — That portion of a lot covered by the main or first
floor of a building or buildings.
BUILDING HEIGHT — Vertical distance from the average level of the
existing or natural grade along the wall or walls of the building to the
highest level of a flat roof surface, the slope of which is not more than
one inch vertical to one foot horizontal; for all other roofs the vertical
distance measured from the existing or natural grade to the ridge of the
roof. Existing or natural grade is to be measured at the foundation wall at
the building corners. The building height measured will be the largest so
measured.
BUILDING LINE — The line beyond which the foundation wall and/or any
enclosed or covered porch, vestibule, or other enclosed or covered portion
of a building, including attached private garages, shall not project, except
as hereinafter provided.
BUILDING PERMIT — A permit issued by the Construction Official prior
to the start of construction, erection or alteration of any building or other
structure, or part thereof, and prior to the putting into use of any lot or
area of land, or part thereof, for any purpose, certifying that such building
or other structure, or part thereof, or such use of any lot or area of land,
or part thereof, is in accordance with all applicable requirements of the
Borough Building Code.70
§ 120-1.4 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-1.4
1:310
BUILDING, FLOOR AREA OF — The total number of square feet of floor
area in a principal building, excluding attics, cellars and crawl spaces,
unenclosed or uncovered steps, terraces, patios, porches and breezeways,
attached private garages, and accessory buildings as hereinbefore defined.
Any space with a clear ceiling height of less than the minimum prescribed
in the Borough Building Code shall not be included as part of the floor area
of a building. Only those portions of a basement, as hereinbefore defined,
finished off and used for living purposes shall be considered as part of the
floor area for a residential building. The floor area shall be determined
by using horizontal measurements between the exterior faces of walls or
between the center lines of common party walls.
BUILDING, GROUND AREA OF — The number of square feet of horizontal
surface covered by a building, including covered porches, covered wood
decks, attached garages and accessory buildings. All measurements shall
be made between exterior faces of walls, foundations, piers or other means
of support.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building or buildings on a lot in which is
conducted the principal use of the property.
BULK AND LOT REGULATIONS — Regulations involving height, yard
dimensions, lot area, lot width, lot frontage, lot depth, lot coverage by a
building or structure or other improvements, floor area ratio and other
regulations of the dimensions of the buildings, structures, yards or lot.
BUSINESS OR COMMERCIAL OFFICE — A business or commercial
establishment which does not offer a product or merchandise for sale to
the public on the premises but which provides a service to patrons as its
primary function. Personal service establishments, including but not limited
to barbershops, or repair services, such as radio and television repair shops
and similar businesses, shall not be included as a business or commercial
office.
BUSINESS SERVICES — Services primarily rendered to other business
establishments on a fee or contract basis rather than to the general public.
Such services as advertising and mailing, building maintenance,
employment services, management and consulting services, protection
services, equipment rental and leasing, commercial research development
and testing, and photo finishing are examples of business services.
"C" VARIANCE — Any variance which is not a "D" variance, relating to a
deviation from the bulk or area requirement circumscribed in a particular
zone as more fully set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c(2).
CALIPER — American Association of Nurserymen standard for trunk
measurement of nursery stock. Caliper of the trunk shall be taken six inches
above the ground for up to and including four-inch caliper size, and 12
inches above the ground for larger sizes.
70.Editor's Note: The original definition of "building, accessory," which previously followed
this definition, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II). See the definition of "accessory building or structure" within this section.
§ 120-1.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-1.4
1:311
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM — A proposed schedule of all future
projects listed in order of construction priority together with cost estimates
and the anticipated means of financing each project. Included are all major
projects requiring the expenditure of public funds over and above the
annual local government's operating expenses for the purchase,
construction, or replacement of the physical assets for the community.
CELLAR — A portion of the building partly underground, having 1/2 or more
than 1/2 of its clear height below the average grade of the adjoining ground.
(See "basement.")
CELLULAR TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA — An antenna that is
intended for commercial transmission or reception of personal wireless
telephone services, including commercial mobile services communications,
common carrier wireless exchange access services, and any other accessory
structures and equipment necessary for such transmission or reception.
A freestanding cellular telecommunications antenna is such an antenna
supported by a tower, mast, pole, or similar structure designed primarily for
supporting and raising the vertical elevation of such antenna. Such antenna
shall also mean any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on
a tower, building or structure and used in communications that radiate
or capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio
frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications signals
or other communication signals.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — A certificate issued by the Construction
Official signifying completion of a building, structure or other improvement
in accordance with applicable laws and/or ordinances, and permits the
occupancy or use of the building, structure or improvement for the stated
uses.
CHANGE IN TENANCY — A discontinuance of an existing conforming use
and the substitution of the same or similar conforming use in the same
space without alteration.
CHANGE IN USE — The use of a building or land which is in any manner
different from the previous use by way of function, operation, extent,
products sold or manufactured and the like, including a change from one
permitted use to another kind of permitted use in the same zone, as well
as any change in activity which changes, alters or enlarges the previous
use or which will change, alter, enlarge or affect drainage, traffic, parking,
sidewalks, paving, landscaping, fencing, sanitary disposal or other similar
considerations under the site plan review requirements.
CHILD-CARE CENTER — Any facility which is maintained for the care,
development, and supervision of six or more children who attend the facility
for less than 12 hours a day and which offers such programs as childcare
centers, day-care centers, drop-in centers, day nursery schools, play
schools, cooperative child centers, centers for children with special needs,
infant-toddler programs, employment-related centers, and/or kindergartens
that are not an integral part of a private educational institution or system
offering elementary education in grades kindergarten through sixth. A
child-care center shall not offer programs operated by a public or private
§ 120-1.4 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-1.4
1:312
day school of elementary and/or high school grade, special activity
programs for children, youth camps, and/or religious classes or centers.
Child-care centers shall have a license from the Department of Human
Services pursuant to P.L. 1983, c. 492 (N.J.S.A. 30:5B-1 et seq.).
CLASSIFICATION — Assignment to a category within a system of
categories.
CLEARING — Any intentional or negligent act to cut down, remove all or a
substantial part of, or damage a tree or other vegetation that will cause the
tree or other vegetation to decline and/or die. Such acts shall include but
not be limited to damage inflicted upon the root system of the vegetation
by the application of toxic substances, by the operation of equipment and
vehicles, by storage of materials, by the change of natural grade due to
excavation or filling, or by the alteration of natural physical conditions.
CLINIC, ANIMAL — A facility for the treatment of animals in which there
are no boarding provisions and no outdoor facilities or runs.
CLINIC, MEDICAL — A facility for the medical treatment of outpatients
only, without boarding or overnight provisions for patients.
COAH — The New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing.
COMMERCIAL — An activity set characterized by an interchange or sale of
goods or services with emphasis on profit.
COMMON FACILITIES — Includes but is not limited to facilities for the
common use of two or more dwelling units, such as roads, sidewalks,
swimming pools, playgrounds, trees, greens, fairways and parking areas.
COMMON OWNERSHIP — Ownership of land and/or real improvements
by an association, cooperative or the like.[Added at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
COMMON OPEN SPACE — An open space area within or related to a
site designated as a development, designed and intended for the use or
enjoyment of residents and owners of the development. Common open
space may contain such complementary structures and improvements as
are necessary and appropriate for the use or enjoyment of residents and
owners of the development.
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE FOR PERSONS WITH HEAD INJURIES — A
community residential facility licensed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 30:11B-1 et seq.,
providing food, shelter and personal guidance, under such supervision as
required, to not more than 15 persons with head injuries who require
assistance, temporarily or permanently, in order to live in the community,
and shall include but not be limited to group homes, halfway houses,
intermediate care facilities, supervised apartment living arrangements, and
hotels.
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE FOR THE DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED —
Any community residential facility licensed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 30:11B-1 et
seq., providing food, shelter and personal guidance, under such supervision
as required, to not more than 15 developmentally disabled or mentally ill
§ 120-1.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-1.4
1:313
persons who require assistance, temporarily or permanently, in order to
live in the community, and shall include but not be limited to group homes,
halfway houses, intermediate care facilities, supervised apartment living
arrangements, and hotels.
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE FOR THE TERMINALLY ILL — Any community
residential facility operated as a hospice program providing food, shelter,
personal guidance and health care services, under such supervision as
required, to not more than 15 terminally ill persons.
COMMUNITY SHELTER FOR VICTIMS OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE — Any
shelter approved for a purchase of service contract and certified pursuant
to standards and procedures established by regulations of the Department
of Human Services (DHS) providing food, shelter, medical care, legal
assistance, personal guidance, and other services for not more than 15
persons who have been victims of domestic violence and temporarily
require shelter and assistance in order to protect their physical and
psychological welfare.
COMPLETE APPLICATION — An application form completed as specified
by ordinance and the rules and regulations of the Planning Board, and
all accompanying documents required by ordinance for approval of the
application for development. An application shall be certified as complete
by the administrative officer upon the meeting of all requirements specified
in the ordinance and in the rules and regulations of the Planning Board, and
shall be deemed complete as of the day it is so certified for the purpose
of the commencement of the time period for action by the Planning Board.
On the day the application is so certified as complete, the time period for
action on the application by the Planning Board begins.[Amended at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
CONCEPT PLAN — The optional, initial development plan for subdivisions
and/or site plans of sufficient accuracy and detail to be used for the purpose
of informal review, evaluation and nonbinding comment by the Board and
meeting the requirements of this chapter.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district only
upon a showing that such use in a specified location will comply with
the conditions and standards for the location or operation of such use
as contained in Part 3, Zoning, Article 30, and upon the issuance of an
authorization therefor by the Planning Board.
CONDOMINIUM — One or more buildings or structures, and the land
on which it is situated, containing multiple residential dwelling uses or
multiple nonresidential uses characterized by a form of ownership of real
property under a master deed providing for ownership by one or more
owners of units of improvements together with an undivided interest in
common elements appurtenant to each unit. See N.J.S.A. 46:8B-1 et seq.
CONSERVATION EASEMENT — A nonpossessory easement granting a right
or interest in real property that is appropriate to retaining land or water
areas predominately in their natural, scenic, open, or wooded condition;
retaining such areas as suitable habitat for fish, plants, or wildlife; or
§ 120-1.4 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-1.4
1:314
maintaining existing land uses, and requiring that the described land will
remain in its existing natural state in perpetuity.
CONSTRUCTION OFFICIAL — The official who administers the
construction codes adopted pursuant to the New Jersey Uniform
Construction Code Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.71
CONTIGUOUS — Synonymous with "abutting."
CONTINUING CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — A certificate issued by the
Construction Official signifying completion of a building, structure or other
improvement in accordance with applicable laws and/or ordinances, and
permits the occupancy or use of the building, structure or improvement for
the stated uses.
COOPERATIVE — A form of ownership of a building or structure containing
multiple residential dwelling uses or multiple nonresidential uses
characterized by individual ownership of shares of a corporation in an
amount related to the space of an occupied unit, with the corporation
owning the building and land as a whole. See N.J.S.A. 46:8D-1 et seq.
COURT, INNER — A court enclosed on all sides by exterior faces of a
building or group of buildings or by freestanding walls. The least dimension,
the distance between opposite sides measured at right angles to the longest
side, is controlling in design and layout of the inner court.
COURT, OUTER — A court open on at least one side for not less than 75%
of its width and extending to any yard on the lot or to a street, alley or
public way. The depth of an outer court shall be the greatest horizontal
dimension measured at right angles from the yard, street, alley or public
way upon which such court opens to the face of the building or freestanding
wall opposite thereto. The width of an outer court is its least horizontal
dimension measured at right angles to the depth of such court.
COVERAGE BY BUILDINGS AND ABOVE-GRADE STRUCTURES — The
combined area of all buildings and above-grade structures on a lot,
including but not limited to porches, balconies and cantilevered parts of
the building at any level, but excluding, however, cornices, eaves, and other
structures which are specifically excluded by this chapter. Said coverage
shall be measured at the exterior surface of such buildings and structures
and shall be divided by the lot area and expressed as a percentage.
COVERAGE BY IMPROVEMENTS — The coverage by buildings and abovegrade
and at-grade structures on a lot as defined above, plus the ground
coverage of the plan projection of any structures, driveways, sidewalks,
parking areas and other paved areas, divided by the lot area and expressed
as a percentage. This definition includes all man-made features, except
vegetation, organic mulch, soil and other structures which are specifically
designed to be excluded by this chapter.
71.Editor's Note: The original definition of "construction permit," which previously followed
this definition, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II). See the definition of "building permit" within this section. The definition of
"construction sign," which previously followed this definition, was revised to read "sign,
construction" and relocated in alphabetical order within this section.
§ 120-1.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-1.4
1:315
CRAWL SPACE — Area of nonhabitable space with a ceiling height of less
than three feet.
CUL-DE-SAC (DEAD END) — Any street or combination of streets having
only one outlet or connection to a street having more than one outlet or
means of access.
"D" VARIANCE — Permission to depart from the literal requirements of the
zoning regulations as set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d to permit:
DAYS — Calendar days.
DBH (DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT) — Tree trunk diameter measured
at a height of 4.5 feet above the ground. If a tree splits into multiple trunks
below 4.5 feet, the trunk is measured at its most narrow point beneath the
split.
DCA — The New Jersey Department of Community Affairs.
DECK — A structure of wood, masonry, metal, stone, asphalt or other
substance without a roof, the floor level of which is elevated above average
ground level more than one foot but not more than four feet and which is
used for recreational purposes.
DENSITY — The permitted number of dwelling units per gross acre of land
to be developed.
DESIGN WAIVER — A grant of permission by the Planning Board to deviate
from the design standards established by law and contained in this chapter.
DETACHED DWELLING UNIT — A single dwelling unit which occupies its
own separate lot of land, as in a single-family house.
DETACHED SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL BUILDING OR STRUCTURE
— A building or structure on a separate lot of land containing one dwelling
unit and not attached to any adjoining dwelling unit by a common wall.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any
land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including the
A use or principal structure in a district restricted against such use or
principal structure;
A.
B. An expansion of a nonconforming use;
Deviation from a specification or standard pertaining solely to a
conditional use;
C.
D. An increase in the permitted floor area ratio as defined in this chapter;
An increase in the permitted density as defined in this chapter, except
as applied to the required lot area for a lot or lots for detached oneor
two-dwelling-unit buildings, which lot or lots are either an isolated
undersized lot or lots resulting from minor subdivision; or
E.
A height of a principal structure which exceeds by 10 feet or 10% the
maximum height permitted in the district for a principal structure.
F.
§ 120-1.4 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-1.4
1:316
holder of an option or contract to purchase or other person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels;
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or other structure, or any mining,
excavation or landfill; and any use or change in the use of any building or
other structure or land or extension of use of land for which permission may
be required.
DEVELOPMENT FEES — Money paid by an individual, person, partnership,
association, company or corporation for the improvement of property as
permitted under COAH's rules.
DEVELOPMENT REGULATION — A zoning, subdivision, site plan, official
map or other regulation of the use and development of land, or amendment
thereto, adopted and filed pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
et seq.).
DHS — The New Jersey Department of Human Services.
DISABLED — A person who has the total and permanent inability to engage
in any substantial gainful activity by reason of any medically determinable
physical or mental impairment, including blindness, and shall include, but
not be limited to, any resident who is disabled pursuant to the federal Social
Security Act, 42 U.S.C. § 416, or the federal Railroad Retirement Act of
1974, 45 U.S.C. § 231 et seq., or is rated as having a 60% disability or higher
pursuant to any federal law administered by the United States Veterans Act.
DISH ANTENNA (SATELLITE EARTH STATION) — A dish-shaped antenna
designed to receive television broadcasts relayed by microwave signals
from earth-orbiting communications satellites.
DISTRICT — Synonymous with "zone district," and being a division of the
Borough permitting only certain categories of uses, requiring certain lot
sizes or other development conditions, or a combination of both.
DOH — New Jersey Department of Health.
DRAINAGE — The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by
drains, grading or other means necessary for water supply preservation
or prevention or alleviation of flooding, including the control of runoff
to minimize erosion and sedimentation during and after construction or
development.
DRAINAGE RIGHT-OF-WAY — The lands required for the installation or
maintenance of stormwater sewers, brook enclosure, brook channel
improvements or drainage ditches, or required along a natural stream or
watercourse for preserving its channel and providing for the flow of water
therein to safeguard the public against flood damage in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 58:1A-1 et seq.
DRIPLINE — A limiting line established by a series of perpendicular drop
points marking the maximum radius of the crown of an existing tree but not
less than six feet from the trunk, whichever is greater.
§ 120-1.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-1.4
1:317
DRIVEWAY — An improved or delineated area on a lot leading from a street
to a garage or entrance to or exit from a building or a parking area intended
and designed for use by motor vehicles.
DUPLEX — The same as an attached dwelling unit but limited to two units.
DWELLING — A building, or portion thereof, used to provide living facilities
for one or more families, but not including boardinghouse or rooming house
facilities or motel and hotel facilities.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms comprising living accommodations
designed and used for occupancy by one family living together as a single
housekeeping unit containing sanitary, sleeping, and kitchen and dining
facilities, fixed or portable. All residential properties are limited to one
kitchen per dwelling.
DWELLING, AGE-RESTRICTED — A housing unit that is restricted to
occupancy by at least one person that is at least 55 years of age or older.
DWELLING, DETACHED — A building used to provide living facilities to
one or more families and which is entirely separated from any building by
spaces on all sides.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A building containing three or more dwelling
units.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-GROUP — A group of two or more multifamily
dwellings occupying a parcel of land under one ownership, all joined as a
unit by common open space and similar architectural styling and subject to
the special regulations and provisions.
DWELLING, SEMIDETACHED — A building situated astride two abutting
lots and consisting of two dwellings separated by a common party wall
along the dividing lot line and separated from any other building by space
on all sides.
DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE — One of a series of three to 10 attached
dwelling units separated from one another by continuous vertical walls
without openings from basement (cellar) floor to roof.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A building containing not more than two
dwelling units, arranged one above the other or side by side.
EASEMENT — The right of one party to enter upon or use the land of
another party.
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION, NONPUBLIC — Any private or parochial
institution which offers college, high school, junior high school, elementary,
kindergarten or nursery school instruction, provided that the following
requirements shall apply:
The Planning Board shall review the plot plan and make
recommendations thereon prior to the issuance of any building permit
or certificate of occupancy.
A.
§ 120-1.4 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-1.4
1:318
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT (EIS) — A written report,
including appropriate maps and exhibits, describing a proposed
development and assessing the environmental and ecological impacts of the
development in order to alert the Borough and the developer to potential
risks and dangers.
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE — The value of a property determined by
the Borough Tax Assessor through a process designed to ensure that all
property in the Borough is assessed at the same assessment ratio or ratios
required by law. Estimates at the time of issuance of a building permit
may be obtained utilizing estimates for construction cost. Final equalized
assessed value will be determined at project completion by the Borough Tax
Assessor.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — The erection, construction, alteration or
maintenance by public utilities or by municipal or other governmental
services in any street, alley, right-of-way or easement provided therefor on a
subdivision plat of underground or overhead electrical and communications
systems; gas, steam, or water transmission, distribution or supply systems;
sewerage and other collection and disposal systems; and traffic control
and police protection systems, including all equipment, accessories, and
appurtenances in connection therewith, provided that "essential services"
shall not be construed to include public utility facilities, as defined in this
section. In the event of conflict between the two, "public utility facility"
shall be deemed to apply. Essential services may not exceed 50 feet in
height.[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
EXCEPTION — Permission granted by formal action of the Board to depart
from the design standards in Part 2, Article 17.
EXOTIC ANIMAL — Any species of animal not considered a domestic animal
or indigenous wildlife.
FAA — The Federal Aviation Administration.
FACADE — The exterior vertical surface of a building, including
ornamentation, windows, doors, or overhangs.
FAMILY — Any number of persons, whether or not related by blood,
marriage or adoption, living together in a single dwelling unit as a single
housekeeping unit. Employees, roomers or boarders meeting the above
definition shall be included as part of the family.
FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME — Any private residence approved by the
Department of Children and Families or an organization with which the
Department contracts for family day care in which child-care services are
regularly provided to no fewer than three and no more than five children for
no less than 15 hours per week. A child being cared for under the following
circumstances is not included in the total number of children receiving
Schools or studies offering music, art or dancing instruction, or
instruction in a vocational trade, shall not be classified as nonpublic
educational institutions.
B.
§ 120-1.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-1.4
1:319
child-care services:[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
FEE SIMPLE — A form of ownership of real estate where the owner or
owners are entitled to the entire property with unconditional power of
disposition during life and which passes to heirs upon death pursuant to the
intestacy laws, or if there is a will, to the devisee by will.
FENCE — An artificially construed barrier of wood, wire or metal or any
other combination of materials erected for the enclosure or screening of
areas of land supported by posts or other similar devices placed in the
ground.
FINAL APPROVAL — The official action of the Board taken on a preliminary
approved major subdivision or site plan, or part thereof, after all conditions,
engineering plans and other requirements have been completed or fulfilled
and the required improvements have been installed or guarantees properly
posted for their completion, or approval conditioned upon the posting of
such guarantees.
FINAL PLAT — The final map of all or a portion of the subdivision which is
presented to the Borough Planning Board for final approval in accordance
with regulations established by Part 2 and which, if approved, shall be filed
with the proper county recording officer complying with the Map Filing
Law.72
FINE ARTS SCHOOLS — Establishments primarily engaged in offering
instruction in the arts, including dance, art, drama and music, except for
academic purposes, including but not limited to art (except commercial
or graphic) instruction, ballet schools, ceramics instruction, conservatory
of music, dance instruction, dance schools, dance studios, drama schools,
handicrafts instruction, music instruction, performing arts schools,
photography schools, drama schools, sculpture instruction, theater schools
and voice instruction.
FIRE ESCAPE — An emergency egress from a building used for human
occupancy, constructed to meet the requirements of the Uniform
Construction Code.
FLOOD AREA — An area adjacent to a floodway as defined by the Borough
Code.
FLOODWATER DETENTION OR RETENTION BASIN — Any storm drainage
control technique which retards or detains stormwater runoff from land or
buildings by the use of a containment device, such as a chamber or basin.
A. The child being cared for is legally related to the provider; or
The child is being cared for as part of a cooperative agreement between
parents for the care of their children by one or more of the parents,
where no payment for the care is being provided.
B.
72.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:26B-1 et seq.
§ 120-1.4 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-1.4
1:320
FLOODWAY — The space contained within the banks of a stream or river as
defined by NJDEP.
FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR) — The ratio of the gross floor area of a building
to the total lot area.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS (GFA) — The area of a floor computed by measuring
the dimensions of the outside walls in a building or dwelling unit, excluding
attic, basement, and cellar floors, porches, patios, terraces, breezeways,
carports, verandas, garages, atria, galleries, indoor mechanical
installations, interior parking and loading spaces, and guard houses,
provided that such excluded areas are not utilized for work or storage space
in nonresidential buildings.
FLOOR AREA, HABITABLE — The area of that portion of a building or
structure designed, intended, heated, and furnished for year-round human
occupancy, measured on each floor from the inside of the outside walls.
"Habitable floor area" shall not include unheated areas, garages or attic
spaces which are inaccessible or of inadequate height or unheated. The
floor area of stairwells and/or elevator shafts shall be the area of one floor
of such stairwell or shaft.
FRONT — The portion of a lot facing a street. On corner lots and through
lots, the front shall be the street facing the front door or the majority of
front doors.
FRONT YARD — See "yard, front."
FRONTAGE — The distance measured along the street property line
between the point where one side line of a lot meets the front street
property line. On through lots the property shall have frontage on both
streets. On corner lots, along the front street line between the two side lines
as projected.
FUNERAL HOME (MORTUARY) — An establishment whose uses shall be
limited to the usual and normal funeral activities, provided that the
embalming of persons shall be limited to the embalming of clients of the
funeral home and shall not include embalming for other funeral homes.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — An enclosed accessory building or portion of a
principal building used for the housing of private motor vehicles and in
which no occupation, business or service for profit may be carried on and
which shall be a minimum of 240 square feet of surfaced floor area, but
not more than 300 square feet for one-car garages and not to exceed 650
square feet for two-car garages. No more than one two-car garage shall
be permitted for any one- or two-family detached dwelling. In the event
that the gross floor area of a residential dwelling, exclusive of garage area,
exceeds 3,000 square feet, the garage may be expanded to an amount not
to exceed 25% of the gross floor area, exclusive of the garage. However, no
more than three garage door openings shall be permitted. A garage may be
a detached accessory building on the same lot of such dwelling or may be
attached to or incorporated into such dwelling.
§ 120-1.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-1.4
1:321
GARAGE, PUBLIC — Any building, structure, lot or land on or upon which
a business service or industry involving the storage, maintenance, or
servicing, and storage in connection therewith, of motor vehicles or boats
is maintained, conducted or rendered, provided that it shall not include
a building, structure, lot or land on which a business is conducted which
involves motor vehicle body repair or painting.
GARAGE, SERVICE AND REPAIR — A building, or portion thereof, other
than a motor vehicle sales establishment, used for the repair and servicing
of motor vehicles and the sale of replacement parts and accessories. Heavy
body and collision repair work, painting and refinishing shall be excluded.
Such garage shall not be used for the storage of dismantled or wrecked
motor vehicles or junk.
GARDEN APARTMENT — A building or group of buildings situated on one
lot and containing separate dwelling units for no fewer than three families
and not exceeding two habitable floors.
GARDEN CENTER — A commercial establishment selling plants and garden
products, seeds, fertilizer, tools and other related items primarily at retail
to the public.
GASOLINE FILLING STATION — Any area of land, including buildings and
other structures thereon, that are used for dispensing of motor vehicle
fuels, oils and accessories at retail, where repair service is incidental, where
no storage or parking space is offered for rent, and where storage of
dismantled or wrecked motor vehicles or motor vehicle sales are prohibited.
No gasoline filling station shall be located within 1,500 feet of a public or
nonpublic educational institution, nor another gasoline filling station where
such station would be located on the same street or on an intersecting
street. Such distance shall be measured on a radius of 1,500 feet from any
part of the lot or plot on which such station is to be located from the lot line
of a public or nonpublic educational institution or another gasoline filling
station.
GASOLINE SERVICE STATION — Any building, structure, lot or land on
or upon which a business, service or industry involving the storage,
maintenance, or servicing of motor vehicles is maintained, conducted,
operated or rendered, and in association therewith, motor fuel is offered for
sale to the public, provided that a gasoline service station shall not include
any building, structure, lot or land upon which a business is conducted
involving motor vehicle body repair or painting.
GAZEBO — A detached residential accessory structure with a roof but no
walls.
GLARE — The sensation produced by luminance within the visual field that
is sufficiently greater than the luminance to which the eyes are adapted to
cause annoyance, discomfort or loss in visual performance or visibility.
GOLF COURSE — Land laid out for golf and having a minimum area of
50 or more contiguous acres to support an eighteen-hole, full-size facility,
together with the necessary uses, buildings and structures, such as, but
not limited to, clubhouse facilities, driving range, dining and refreshment
§ 120-1.4 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-1.4
1:322
facilities, equipment sale facilities ("pro shop"), swimming pools, tennis
courts and other recreational facilities, provided that the operation of all
such facilities is incidental to the operation of the golf course.
GOVERNING BODY — The Mayor and Council of the Borough.
GRADE — The elevation of the surface of the earth or, where applicable, the
average elevation of land around a building or structure as measured at the
foundation. Also, the percent of rise of a sloping surface.
GRADE, FINISHED — The average ground elevation of the lot at the front
building line after all proper lot grading has taken place.
GRANDFATHERED CONDITION — Describes the status accorded certain
properties, structures, uses, and activities that legally exist prior to the date
of adoption of the zoning ordinance or provisions of the zoning ordinance.
GROSS FLOOR AREA — See "floor area, gross."
HABITABLE FLOOR AREA — See "floor area, habitable."
HEALTH CLUB — An establishment that provides facilities for any personal
improvements, such as aerobic exercises, running and jogging, exercise
equipment, game courts, swimming facilities and saunas, showers, massage
rooms and lockers, or similar activities.
HEIGHT OF TELECOMMUNICATION TOWER OR OTHER STRUCTURE —
As referred to in Part 3, Article 28, the distance measured from the lowest
finished grade of the parcel to the highest point on the tower or other
structure, including the base pad and any antenna.
HISTORIC SITE — Any real property, man-made structure, natural object
or configuration or any portion or group of the foregoing of historical,
archaeological, cultural, scenic or architectural significance.
HOME OCCUPATION —
An accessory use customarily conducted for profit entirely within a
dwelling and carried on by the inhabitants thereof, which use is clearly
incidental to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes and does
not alter the character thereof, provided that:
In connection with which there is used no display except one
sign, not exceeding a total area of two square feet, affixed to the
building, and if illuminated, illuminated only by a shielded indirect
light source or equivalent light not offensive to surrounding
residences;
(1)
In connection with which there is kept no stock-in-trade or
commodity sold upon the premises;
(2)
In connection with which only a member or members of the
resident family are employed; and
(3)
Not more than 30% of the floor area of the building is used for such
accessory use.
(4)
A.
§ 120-1.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-1.4
1:323
HOMESTEAD LOT — An existing lot upon which a single-family residence
has been or is to be constructed.73
HOT TUB — A plumbing fixture which can be located both inside and
outside a dwelling capable of accommodating several persons at the same
time and having water circulation or aerating equipment and having a water
surface area when full not exceeding 100 square feet. The water surface
up to a maximum of 100 square feet of any hot tub shall not count towards
impervious lot cover.
HOTEL — A building containing hotel units, each having its only access
from an interior corridor, which building has a public lobby and full-time
management serving the guests, and which may contain ancillary services
and facilities, such as restaurants, shops and boutiques, recreation
facilities, meeting rooms and conference and convention facilities, which
shall be accessible from the interior of the building.[Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
HOUSE OF WORSHIP — A building or structure or group of buildings or
structures which by design and construction are primarily intended for use
by groups or persons to conduct organized religious services and whose
secondary uses are associated therewith, notwithstanding the fact that
such buildings or structures are called by other names by the religious
denomination utilizing them. This denomination shall include, but not be
limited to, chapels, churches, congregations, temples, mosques, shrines and
similar designations, as well as rectories, parish houses, convents and such
other buildings or structures intended for secondary uses located on the
same lot.
HOUSING FOR THE ELDERLY — One or more dwelling units intended and
designed to be occupied by single individuals 55 years of age or older;
married couples, at least one of whom is 55 years of age or older; or two
or more persons not related by blood, marriage or adoption when all such
persons are 55 years of age or older. One person under age 55 but over age
20 years may reside in a dwelling unit with an elderly person or persons
as permitted above if the presence of said person is essential for the care
or economic support of the elderly person or persons. Children 20 years
Such activities and uses as boardinghouse or rooming house
operations, tourist homes, clinics, barbershops and beauty parlors,
animal hospitals, private nursery and kindergarten schools, music
studios, art or dancing schools for group instruction, repair of heavy
mechanical or electrical equipment, the keeping of and use of
mechanical or electrical equipment that would cause electrical or other
interference with radio or television reception in nearby residences,
and all other activities and uses which would cause offensive and
excessive noise, light, vibration or other disturbances, or would result
in excessive residential street traffic, shall not be deemed home
occupations under the terms of this chapter.
B.
73.Editor's Note: The original definition of "hotel," which was a duplicate term and which
previously followed this definition, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II). See the definition of "hotel" within this section.
§ 120-1.4 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-1.4
1:324
or older may reside with a parent or parents as permitted above. Rental,
leasing, resale or occupancy of units must comply with the age restrictions
as herein set forth to qualify as housing for the elderly.
HUD — United States Department of Housing and Urban Development.
IMPERVIOUS COVER — The sum of the areas of all impervious surfaces and
structures divided by the area of the lot; impervious surfaces and structures
include buildings, sidewalks, driveways, patios, decks, pools and roofed
structures.
IMPROVEMENTS — Anything placed on a lot which does not exist naturally,
provided that earth, rocks, grass, shrubs, trees and other vegetative
material, although placed on the lot by the developer, shall not be construed
as an "improvement" defined herein, and further provided that the above
shall not be construed to exempt filling, excavation, grading, or landscaping
from the requirement to obtain site plan approval if required by this
chapter.
INDUSTRIAL USE — A use characterized by manufacturing of products,
the use of processes, the assembly of component parts of premanufactured
products other than structures or other fixed improvements, and the
blending of materials, usually into a tangible product.
INTERESTED PARTY — In a criminal or quasi-criminal proceeding, any
citizen of the State of New Jersey. In the case of a civil proceeding in any
court or in an administrative proceeding before a Borough agency, any
person, whether residing within or without of the Borough, whose right to
use, acquire, or enjoy property is or may be affected by any action taken
under this chapter, or whose rights to use, acquire, or enjoy property under
this chapter, or under any other law of this state or of the United States,
have been denied, violated or infringed upon by an action or a failure to act
under the Municipal Land Use Law.74
JOINT PARKING PROGRAM — A program approved by the Board pursuant
to an application whereby parking facilities are shared by occupants of two
or more premises.
JUNKYARD — Any space or area, whether inside or outside a building or
structure, used or intended to be used for the storage, selling, buying,
trading in, keeping, or abandonment of used or discarded or scrap metal,
glass, paper, fabric, cordage or other similar material or for the dismantling,
demolition or abandonment of motor vehicles, or other vehicles or
machinery, appliances, equipment, fixtures, or parts thereof. It shall not
apply to facilities operated by the Borough or an agency thereof as a
convenience to its citizens for the purposes of disposal of organic materials
or discarded household items or by a nonprofit organization on public
property with the permission of the governing body and under its control
for the purpose of recycling.
LAND DISTURBANCE — Any activity involving the clearing, grading,
transporting, filling or excavation of land which causes land to be exposed
74.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 120-1.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-1.4
1:325
to the danger of erosion, except for normal farming practices executed for
the purposes of farming.
LIMITED MANUFACTURING — The fabrication, processing or assembly of
goods and materials, or the storage of bulk goods and materials, where such
activities, goods or materials create no major hazard from fire or explosion,
produce no toxic or corrosive fumes, gas, smoke or odors, produce no
obnoxious dust or vapors, produce no offensive noise or vibrations, glare,
flashes or objectionable effluent or produce no danger from radiation.
LOADING SPACE — An off-street space, bay or berth on the same lot with
a structure, or contiguous to a group of structures and buildings, for the
temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading and unloading
merchandise or materials.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law to be used, developed or built upon as a unit.
Adjoining parcels in common ownership which do not meet the dimensional
and area requirements for building lots as set forth in Part 3, Zoning, shall
be considered as a single lot for the purposes of Part 2.
LOT AREA — The total square footage of any lot as measured within the lot
lines.
LOT COVERAGE — See "building coverage" and/or "coverage by
improvements" as applicable.[Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
LOT DEPTH — The average distance between the front lot line and the rear
lot line. Lot depth shall be measured along a line connecting the midpoint
of the front lot line and the midpoint of the rear lot line, and along the lines
drawn parallel to said line at ten-foot intervals from said line throughout
the width of the lot, provided that those said lines located entirely within
the lot shall be used for measuring lot depth. The average of the above
measurements shall be the lot depth. In the case of corner lots, the greater
of such average dimensions shall be the lot depth.
LOT FRONTAGE — The length of the front lot line. In the case of a
subdivision application, when the rear lot line or side lot line of the lot
sought to be divided is coterminous with the end of a street (other than a
cul-de-sac), such rear or side lot line shall not be deemed lot frontage.
LOT LINE — A line of record bounding a lot which divides one lot from
another or from a public or private street.
LOT LINE, FRONT — The lot line separating a lot from a street right-of-way.
On corner lots, the front lot line shall be the line to which the front door
or majority of front doors face. In addition, for purposes of this definition,
when the lot lines at an intersection are rounded, the front lot line shall be
measured to the point of intersection of the extension of the front lot line
and street side lot line.
LOT LINE, REAR — The lot line or lines opposite and most distant from
the front lot line. In the case of triangular lots, the rear lot line shall be
construed to be an imaginary line that intersects the point of intersection of
§ 120-1.4 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-1.4
1:326
the side lot lines and follows the alignment of the rear lot lines of adjacent
properties, the intent being to maintain the existing rear yard pattern of the
neighborhood.
LOT LINE, SIDE — The lot line other than a front or rear lot line. On corner
lots, the lot line opposite the side of the principal structure shall be the side
lot line.
LOT WIDTH — The shortest straight line distance between the side lot
lines of any lot, measured parallel to the front line and at a distance from
the front lot line equal to the minimum required front yard setback. If
the front lot line of any lot is not a straight line, the lot width shall be
measured parallel to the shortest imaginary line which is entirely within
the lot and tangent to the front lot line. The lot width shall be measured
parallel to said imaginary line at a distance equal to the minimum front yard
setback.[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
LOT, CORNER — A parcel of land at the junction of and having frontage on
two or more intersecting streets or a lot at a section along a street where
the street alignment has an angle more acute than 135°. Front yard setback
requirements shall be provided for all street frontages of a corner lot.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE — A lot, other than a corner lot, having frontage
on two streets.
LOT, FLAG — A lot with the following configuration: a narrow portion wide
enough to accommodate a driveway or other access corridor and extending
from the front lot line back to an enlarged area at the rear of the lot, with
the enlarged area being wide and deep enough to accommodate a permitted
use or structure.
LOT, INTERIOR — Any lot which is not a corner lot or through lot.
LOT, THROUGH — A lot which has frontage upon streets at its front and
rear and by other lots at its side.
LOW-INCOME HOUSING — Housing that is affordable, according to HUD
or other recognized standards for homeownership and rental costs, and
occupied or reserved for occupancy by households with a gross household
income equal to 50% or less of the median gross household income for
households of the same size within the house region in which the housing is
located, and is subject to affordability controls.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE — Any security which may be accepted by
a municipality for the maintenance of any improvements required by the
Municipal Land Use Law, including but not limited to surety bonds, letters
of credit under the circumstances specified in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.5, and
cash.
MAJOR SITE PLAN — Any site plan not classified as a minor site plan.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — All subdivisions not classified as minor
subdivisions.
§ 120-1.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-1.4
1:327
MANUFACTURING — The production or assembly of articles or finished
products from previously refined raw materials by giving them new forms,
qualities, or compositions.
MASTER PLAN — A composite of the mapped and written proposals
recommending the physical development of the Borough, which has been
duly adopted by the Planning Board in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28.
MEDIAN INCOME — The level of income where 1/2 the persons having
income are below that level and 1/2 the person having income are above
that level.
MINOR SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots which:
MINOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision:
Is limited to the following where no new variances are required:
(1) Freestanding sign.
Alteration of a facade of the building or structure. [Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II)]
(2)
Increase or decrease in floor area (either gross or habitable) of less
than 500 square feet or 10%, whichever is greater.
(3)
Addition of a permitted accessory building, structure or use no
larger than 500 square feet in floor area or 10%, whichever is
greater.
(4)
Adding no more than five parking spaces or altering a site which
requires no more than five parking spaces.
(5)
(6) Modification of utilization not involving any of the above.
Change from one commercial use to another commercial use, or
one office use to another office use, for which there is no other
variance required.
(7)
A.
Does not involve planned development, any new street or extension of
any off-tract improvement which is to be prorated pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-42.
B.
Contains the information reasonably required in order to make an
informed determination as to whether the requirements established by
this chapter for approval of a minor site plan have been met.
C.
D. Requires no variances, waivers or exceptions.
A. Resulting in not more than three lots fronting on an existing street.
Not involving any new streets or roads or the extension of Borough
facilities.
B.
§ 120-1.4 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-1.4
1:328
MIXED-USE DEVELOPMENT — The development of a tract of land,
building or structure containing more than one principal permitted use and
designed as a comprehensive, integrated development.
MOBILE HOME —
MOBILE STORAGE STRUCTURES — Any assembly of materials which is
so designed, constructed or reconstructed to make it portable and capable
of movement from one site to another, designed to be used without a
permanent foundation, designed with the purpose of storing tangible
property and not for occupancy by persons, and to have one dimension
exceeding 10 feet. Mobile storage structures, as defined herein, are
prohibited in the Borough, except such a structure shall not be deemed
a mobile storage structure for purposes of this chapter as specifically
described hereafter:
Not adversely affecting the development or probable development of
the remainder of the parcel.
C.
Reviewed by the Borough Engineer and Borough Planner for
consistency with this chapter and classified as a minor subdivision.
D.
A structure of vehicular, portable design, which is:
Built on a chassis and designed to be moved from one site to
another, and to be used with or without a permanent foundation;
(1)
Designed to be used, when connected to utilities, as a dwelling on
a permanent or nonpermanent foundation; and
(2)
Manufactured in accordance with the standards promulgated for
a manufactured home by the Secretary of the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development pursuant to the
National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety
Standards Act of 1974, Pub. L. 93-383 (42 U.S.C. § 5401 et seq.)
and the standards promulgated for a manufactured or mobile home
by the Commissioner of the New Jersey Department of Community
Affairs pursuant to the State Uniform Construction Code Act, P.L.
1975, c. 217 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.).
(3)
A.
"Mobile home," for purposes of this chapter, does not include modular
homes.
B.
The loading, unloading and/or parking of any mobile storage structure
commonly known as a "truck trailer" which is properly registered under
the laws of any state as a motor vehicle, provided the parking, loading
and/or unloading of said motor vehicle complies with all other
provisions of New Jersey law and this chapter.
A.
The loading or unloading of mobile storage structures on industrial,
commercial or residential sites so long as said activity does not exceed
a forty-eight-hour period of time.
B.
§ 120-1.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-1.4
1:329
The use of mobile storage structures in industrial or commercial zones
for the disposal of waste materials by a contractor licensed for such
disposal services.
C.
The use of mobile storage structures at construction sites for storage
and/or disposal of materials, provided that a permit is obtained from the
Borough for use in excess of 48 hours, which use and placement shall
be limited to a maximum of six months, and provided that its placement
satisfies all other provisions of this chapter.
D.
The use of mobile storage structures by the Borough, its agencies or
subdivisions.
E.
The use of mobile storage structures designed for human occupancy
which are regulated under other provisions of this chapter and/or New
Jersey law.
F.
The use of no more than three mobile storage structures in the
nonresidential zones only so long as the Zoning Officer determines that
the mobile storage structure(s) satisfies the following criteria:
Does not exceed 40 feet in length, is not greater than 2,600 cubic
feet in size, is not greater than eight feet in height from the bed
of the structure, is not greater than 13 feet in height measured
from the ground to the top of the structure, and is not greater
than eight feet in width. At no time shall the top of any mobile
storage structure exceed the height of the building behind which it
is located;
(1)
Whether the mobile storage structure(s) is permitted shall be
determined by rear yard coverage limitations for accessory
structures contained in this chapter;
(2)
Mobile storage structures shall not be located in or impede the use
of any parking area, loading area, aisle or driveway;
(3)
Mobile storage structures shall not be located in the public rightof-
way;
(4)
Mobile storage structures shall only be located on private property
and only in the rear yard of the principal structure on that property
as defined in this chapter;
(5)
Mobile storage structures shall not be in violation of any bulk
variance requirement of this chapter;
(6)
Mobile storage structures shall not be located in any residential
zone;
(7)
Mobile storage structures shall be properly buffered so they are
screened from view from any adjacent public way or residential
use; and
(8)
G.
§ 120-1.4 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-1.4
1:330
MODIFICATION OF UTILIZATION — A change in the degree of utilization
of land, buildings or structures which, although permitted in the particular
zone district, nevertheless constitutes such a significant increase or
decrease in the number of occupants, patrons, visitors, or other persons
using the land, buildings, or structures; the need for public utility or
transportation services; the extent of traffic generation or parking
requirements; or other similar factors that, in the opinion of the Zoning
Officer, site plan review and approval of the Board is required. By way of
example, but not limitation, a use involving any of the following shall be
presumed to be a modification of utilization:
MOTEL — A building or group of buildings containing any group of two
or more rooms or suites of rooms, usually having a direct entrance from
the exterior of the building, for the overnight accommodation of transient
guests and having adjacent, readily accessible off-street parking facilities.
Said building or buildings may have full-time management and may contain
restaurants and recreation facilities primarily intended to serve transient
guests of the motel.
MOTOR INN — See "hotel."
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle, omnibus, road tractor, trailer, truck
and/or truck tractor, and shall have the meaning stated and defined in
N.J.S.A. 39:1-1 et seq., but shall not include mobile storage structures as
defined elsewhere in this chapter.
MOTOR VEHICLE BODY REPAIR SHOP — Any building, structure, lot or
land on or upon which a business, service or industry licensed by the State
of New Jersey involving the repair and/or painting of motor vehicle bodies,
and storage in connection therewith, is maintained, conducted, operated or
rendered.
MOTOR VEHICLE SALES ESTABLISHMENT — A lot, or portion thereof,
and any structures thereon, including buildings, used for the storage,
display and sale of new and/or used motor vehicles and where normal
servicing and repair work is incidental to the principal use of such lot, or
portion thereof, and structures.
No materials classified as high hazard by the New Jersey Uniform
Construction Code may be stored in any mobile storage structure.
(9)
An enlargement, reduction or relocation of the building, floor area or
land area containing the use;
A.
A substantial change in the products or materials manufactured,
stored, used or sold on the premises;
B.
A substantial change in the amount and/or nature of traffic, parking,
shipping or deliveries associated with the use on the premises;
C.
D. A change in the number of dwelling units; and
A substantial change in the hours, days or season during which the use
is conducted.
E.
§ 120-1.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-1.4
1:331
MOTOR VEHICLE SERVICE SHOPS and MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR SHOPS
— Any building, structure, lot or land on or upon which a business, service
or industry involving the mechanical repair or maintenance of motor
vehicles and storage in connection therewith is maintained, conducted,
operated or rendered.
MULTIFAMILY USE — A use where three or more separate dwelling units
are permitted as the primary use on one lot.
MUNICIPAL RESIDENT — A person who is domiciled in the Borough.
MUNICIPAL USE — Any use by the Borough of any property owned or
leased by it.
NEW OR USED CAR DEALER — Any person licensed under New Jersey
law as a new or used car dealer, or any person who maintains or operates
a facility where automobiles, either new or used, are stored, displayed or
offered for sale or lease.
NJDEP — New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
NJDOT — New Jersey Department of Transportation.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — A building or structure
the size, dimension or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption,
revision or amendment of this chapter, or prior to any of its predecessor
chapters, but fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in
which it is located by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot of record, the area, dimension or location
of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of this
chapter, or prior to any of its predecessor chapters, but fails to conform to
the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by reason of
such adoption, revision or amendment.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use or activity which was lawful prior to the
adoption, revision or amendment of a zoning ordinance, but which fails to
conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by
reasons of such adoption, revision or amendment.
NONPROFIT CHARTER MEMBERSHIP ORGANIZATION — Any
organization, whether incorporated or otherwise, which is not for profit and
which is organized for the benefit of its members or for the public or for
charitable purposes, but shall not include hospitals, clinics or outpatient
clinics or dispensaries whose principal function is the providing of nursing
or convalescent care, the furnishing of narcotic, drug or alcohol abuse
treatment, or performance of abortions.
NONRESIDENTIAL USE — A use which is designed or intended for any
purpose other than as a dwelling unit.
OCCUPANCY — The residing of a person or persons in a dwelling unit
overnight, or the installation, storage or use of equipment, merchandise
or machinery in any commercial, public or industrial building. Also, the
specific purpose for which land, building or structure is used, designed or
maintained.
§ 120-1.4 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-1.4
1:332
OFF-SITE — Located outside the lot lines of the lot in question, but within
the property of which the lot is a part, which is the subject of the
development application, or within a contiguous portion of a street or rightof-
way.
OFF-TRACT — Not located on the property which is the subject of a
development application, nor on a contiguous portion of a street or right-ofway.
OFFICIAL MAP — A map adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32 et seq., as
amended.
ON-SITE — Located on the lot in question and excluding any abutting street
or right-of-way.
ON-TRACT — Located on the property which is the subject of a development
application or on a contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way.
OPEN SPACE — Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved
and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public or private use
or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of
land adjoining or neighboring such open space. "Open space" shall include
the term "common open space" as herein defined. For the purpose of
determining the limits of open space area, it shall include any area exclusive
of buildings, paved surfaces, public rights-of-way and areas serving
individual dwelling units or intended for the use of occupants of individual
dwelling units, but inclusive of clubhouses, tennis courts, swimming pools
and similar recreation facilities, along with accessory parking facilities.
OPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE — A motor vehicle which in its then existing
condition can be moved under its own power from place to place on a
public highway without violating any provision of Title 39 of the New Jersey
statutes by doing so.
OUTDOOR STORAGE CONTAINERS — Portable or temporary storage units
intended to be utilized upon the exterior of residential premises for the
purpose of storing all types of items of personal and household property,
either for pure storage or to facilitate the moving of persons from household
unit to household unit, with the understanding that such items, after a
period of time (as defined in Part 3, Zoning) for loading, will be moved to a
commercial storage facility.
OWNER — Any person, individual, firm, association, legal entity, syndicate,
copartnership or corporation having sufficient proprietary interest in the
land sought to be subdivided or developed to commence and maintain
proceedings to subdivide or develop such property under Part 2.
PARAPET — A projection of a wall of a building above the roof.
PARKING AREA — An open area other than a street or other public road or
way used for the parking of motor vehicles, including access drives or aisles
for ingress and egress thereto and therefrom.
PARKING SPACE — A permanently surfaced off-street area of not less
than 162 square feet, exclusive of interior driveways or entrance and exit
§ 120-1.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-1.4
1:333
driveways, either within a structure or in the open, for the parking of one
automobile.
PARKING, LAND-BANKED — Required parking, or portion thereof, the
construction of which is permitted to be deferred until needed.
PATIO — A structure of wood, masonry, metal, stone, asphalt, or other
substance without a roof, the floor level for which is one foot or less
above average surrounding grade, used for recreational purposes and as an
accessory use.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE — Any security which may be accepted in
lieu of a requirement that certain improvements be made before the Board
approves a final plat or site plan, including performance bonds, escrow
agreements and other similar collateral or surety agreements, including
cash.
PERSON — Any person, individual, business entity, partnership, association,
corporation, company or organization of any kind or nature.
PERSONAL SERVICES — Services involving the care of a person or his or
her personal goods or apparel.
PILOT PLANT — Part of a research facility used to test out concepts and
ideas, to determine physical layouts, material flows, type of equipment
required and costs and to secure other information prior to full-scale
production.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT — Includes planned residential development,
residential cluster, planned commercial development, or planned industrial
development.[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
PLANNED COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area of a minimum
contiguous size, as specified by ordinance, to be developed according
to plan as a single entity containing one or more structures with
appurtenant common areas to accommodate commercial or office uses,
or both, and any other uses incidental to the predominant use as may
be permitted by this chapter.
A.
PLANNED INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area of a minimum
contiguous size, as specified by ordinance, to be developed according
to plan as a single entity containing one or more structures with
appurtenant common areas to accommodate industrial, manufacturing,
warehousing, office, retail, and commercial uses and any other uses
incidental to the predominant use as may be permitted by this chapter.
B.
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area of a minimum
contiguous size, as specified by ordinance, to be developed according
to plan as a single entity containing one or more residential clusters,
which may include appropriate commercial, public, or quasi-public uses
primarily for the benefit of the residential development and any other
uses incidental to the predominant use as may be permitted by this
chapter.
C.
§ 120-1.4 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-1.4
1:334
PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of the Borough of Kenilworth
established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23. The Planning Board also serves
as the Borough's Zoning Board of Adjustment when "D" variance
applications are heard.[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
PLANT NURSERY — The same as a garden center except with the added
feature that plants are grown on site.
PLAT — The map or maps of a subdivision or site plan.
PLOT PLAN — A plan submitted for review which shows the location of
a building or buildings, driveways, parking areas, provisions for drainage,
lighting and landscaping and whatever other information may be required.
PORCH — An above-grade open or enclosed structure attached to or
accessible from the principal building or structure, having a roof, and
having more than 35 square feet in area and is considered as part of the
principal building or structure.
PREEXISTING TOWERS and PREEXISTING ANTENNAS — Any tower or
antenna for which a building permit or conditional use permit has been
properly issued prior to the effective date of this chapter, including
permitted towers or antennas that have not yet been constructed, so long
as such approval is current and not expired.
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL — The conferral of certain rights pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-46, 40:55D-48, and 40:55D-49 prior to final approval after
specific elements of a development plan have been agreed upon by the
Board and the applicant.
PRELIMINARY SITE PLAN — The preliminary development plan indicating
the proposed layout of the site which is submitted to the Board for
consideration and preliminary approval meeting the requirements of the
appropriate sections of this chapter.
PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLAT — The map indicating the proposed
layout of a major subdivision which is submitted to the Board for
consideration and for preliminary approval and meeting the requirements
of the appropriate sections of this chapter.
PREMISES — The particular lot or lots being considered, including
everything thereon.75
PRIVATE OR QUASI-PUBLIC CLUB — An incorporated or unincorporated
association or organization for civic, social, cultural, religious, literary,
political, and recreational or like activities operated for the benefit of its
members and not open to the general public.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — The office or studio of a doctor or physician,
but not including medical clinics; dentist, but not including dental clinics;
75.Editor's Note: The original definitions of "principal building or structure" and "principal
use," which previously followed this definition, were deleted at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II). See the definitions of "building, principal" and
"use, principal," within this section.
§ 120-1.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-1.4
1:335
veterinarian, but not including animal hospitals; lawyer; minister; architect;
professional engineer; accountant; or teacher and such similar professions
which require a comparable degree of formal education and experience.
For the purposes of this definition, "teacher" shall be restricted to a person
giving individual instruction in a musical instrument, in voice or art, in
dancing or in academic or scientific subjects to a single pupil at a time.
When conducted in a home in a residential district, a professional office
shall be accessory to the principal use, shall be conducted by a member
of the family residing on the premises, shall employ or engage not more
than one person who is not a member of such resident family, and shall not
occupy more than the equivalent of 30% of the ground or first-floor area of
the principal building.
PUBLIC AREA — Such areas include:
PUBLIC PARK — A lot or land owned or operated by the Borough or a
department thereof or any other governmental agency, including any which
is open to use by the general public, whether free of charge or otherwise,
and which is primarily devoted to recreational or open space use.
PUBLIC UTILITY FACILITIES, RESIDENTIAL TYPE — Any use meeting the
general definition of "public utility" as set forth in the definition section of
N.J.S.A. 48:2-13 et seq., which is contained in a building no greater than
15 feet in height, and if not contained in a building, involving structures
no greater than 35 feet in height, and otherwise meeting the requirement
for lot size, coverage, setbacks, etc., provided for the zone in which it
is located, except where more stringent requirements are imposed herein
which shall control. Notwithstanding the above, the following uses shall
not be residential type public utility uses for purposes of administering this
chapter:
PUBLIC UTILITY FACILITY, INDUSTRIAL TYPE — Any use meeting the
general definition of "public utility" as set forth in the definition section
A. Public parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas;
B. Other public open spaces;
C. Scenic and historic sites; and
D. Sites for schools and other public buildings and structures.
Bus or autobus, trolley railroad, street, railway, traction railway,
charger bus, or special bus terminal, parking facility, storage or
maintenance facility, electric substation;
A.
Natural gas transmission pumping facility or pressure reduction
facility; and
B.
Any facility relating to the collection, transfer, processing, storage or
disposal of solid waste or vehicles engaged in the collection of solid
waste, except such facilities operated by the Borough as hazardous
waste sites or any facility relating to the storage, transfer, processing
or disposal of hazardous waste.
C.
§ 120-1.4 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-1.4
1:336
of N.J.S.A. 48:2-13 et seq., and which does not meet the definition of
"residential type public utility" herein.
RESEARCH FACILITIES — An office or facility for carrying on research,
engineering and development in the physical or biological sciences with
the objective of creating end products, including the administration office
associated therewith. Such activities shall be of a type that do not include
any activities that create noise, dust, smoke, odor, glare, flashes, vibration,
shock waves, heat, electronic or atomic radiation, objectionable effluent,
unusual risks of fire or explosion or activities otherwise prohibited by law
or ordinance and shall not cause electrical, visual, or audible interference
in any radio or television receivers or transmitters located off premises or
cause fluctuations in line voltage off premises.
RESTAURANT — An establishment where customers or patrons are served
food or drink for consumption within the confines of the building or
structure where the business is conducted, including taverns and other
places where alcoholic beverages are served on a commercial basis.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN — A restaurant or refreshment stand, commonly
called a snack bar, dairy bar, hamburger stand, hot dog stand or fast-food
establishment, where customers or patrons are served food, soft drinks, ice
cream and similar confections for the immediate consumption at counters,
stools or bars outside the confines of the building or structure in which
the business is conducted, or for consumption in automobiles parked upon
the premises, whether brought to such automobile by the customer or
patrons or by waiters or waitresses employed by the operator. The above
shall not include refreshment stands at parks, clubs, athletic fields or other
similar recreation areas, or the temporary operation of refreshment stands
at properly licensed circuses, bazaars and other similar functions.
RESTORATION GUARANTEE — In the form of cash, a bond or other
security satisfactory to the Board, which can be used by the Borough
to restore applicable property to a safe condition in the event that the
developer abandons the project, so as to ensure that the property in its
unfinished development state does not adversely affect the public safety or
adversely impact the environment.
RESUBDIVISION — The further division or relocation of lot lines of any
lot or lots within a subdivision previously made and approved or recorded
according to law, or the alteration of any streets or the establishment
of any new streets within any subdivision previously made and approved
or recorded according to law, but does not include conveyances so as to
combine existing lots by deed or other instrument which is exempt from
subdivision.
RETAIL SALES — The sale of goods or merchandise to the general public for
personal or household consumption and the rendering of services incidental
to the sale of such goods.[Amended 9-12-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-14]
RETAIL SERVICES — Establishment providing services or entertainment,
as opposed to products, to the general public for personal or household
use, including eating and drinking places, hotels and motels, personal
§ 120-1.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-1.4
1:337
service, motion pictures, amusement and recreation services, health, and
educational, and social services, museums, and galleries.
RSIS or SIS — New Jersey Residential Site Improvements Standards.76
SCHOOL — Any building or structure used for educational or instructional
purposes; such definition shall also include not only the physical building or
structure but also the organization conducting such education or instruction
therein, whether public or private, profit-making or nonprofit.
SCREENING — A method of visually shielding or obscuring one abutting or
nearby structure or use from another by fencing, walls, berms, or densely
planted vegetation.
SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY — A structure containing separate,
individual, or private storage spaces of varying sizes, leased or rented on
individual leases for varying periods of time.
SENIOR CITIZEN — A person at least 62 years of age.
SENIOR CITIZEN HOUSING — A building or buildings containing one or
more dwelling units restricted by deed or other instrument to occupancy
of each dwelling unit by a person or persons in any one of the following
categories: up to two individuals, both of whom are 62 years of age or
older; or a married couple, either one of whom is 62 years of age or
older.[Amended 9-12-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-14]
SENIOR SUITE — A dwelling area similar to those sometimes called a
"mother-daughter" apartment serving as a secondary living space for a
relative or relatives. At least one person living in the senior suite shall be
55 years of age or older. The living space shall be connected with a door to
the remainder of the residence and may have separate kitchen appliances
installed pursuant to all applicable codes. The accessory apartment must
share a common entrance and may not have a separate exterior entrance.
The dwelling area shall be considered as an accessory apartment.
SERVICE ORGANIZATION — Any nonprofit organization or institution
which:
SERVICE STATION OR GARAGE OPERATOR — Any person licensed under
New Jersey law to operate a service station or automobile facility or to
dispense gasoline, or any person who maintains or operates a facility to
repair, maintain, service or store motor vehicles, whether operable or
inoperable.
SETBACK — The shortest straight line distance between a building or
structure and the nearest property line.
A. Provides volunteer aid in times of disaster;
Provides any emergency or religious, social, physical or benevolent
services; or
B.
C. Is devoted entirely to the betterment of the community.
76.Editor's Note: See N.J.A.C. 5:21-1.1 et seq.
§ 120-1.4 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-1.4
1:338
SEWERAGE AUTHORITY — The Borough of Kenilworth or the Rahway
Valley Sewerage Authority.
SHED — An accessory structure not attached to the principal building and
utilized for storage, designed and intended for storage of items smaller in
size than an automobile, with a maximum floor area of 100 square feet
and a maximum height of 10 feet. Only one shed shall be allowed per
lot.[Amended 8-14-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-09]
SHOPPING CENTER — A group of commercial establishments planned,
constructed and managed as a total entity, with customer and employee
parking provided on site, provision for goods delivery separated from
customer access, aesthetic considerations and protection from the
elements, and landscaping and signage in accordance with an approved
plan.
SIGHT TRIANGLE — A triangular-shaped portion of land established at
street intersections or street and driveway intersections in which nothing is
erected or allowed to grow in such a manner as to limit or obstruct the sight
distance of motorists entering or leaving the intersection. In the absence of
any other applicable standard:
SIGN — Any visible device, structure, or object or part thereof or device
attached thereto or painted or represented thereon for attracting attention
and giving information, or for visual communication, which displays or
includes any letter, word, model, banner, pennant, insignia, mural, picture
or artwork, device, representation or advertisement. It shall also include
those typically affixed to trucks or other commercial vehicles for the
purpose of advertising or announcing ownership or the product or service
offered by the owner or operator, and lighting devices designed to attract
attention. For the purposes of this chapter, the term "sign" shall not include
the flag, pennant, or insignia of any nation, group of nations, state, city
or political unit standing or displayed or of any civic, charitable, religious,
fraternal or similar organization.
SIGN AREA — The total area, as measured in square feet, of a sign surface,
including all parts thereof devoted to the background, computed by
bounding the exterior of the sign structure or surface with a series of
straight or curved lines tangent thereto. The area of a sign painted directly
on a wall or awning and signs with letters attached directly to walls or
awnings shall be calculated by constructing an imaginary series of straight
lines or lines formed, bounded or characterized by curves around the
outside of all elements of the sign.
For street intersections, this triangle is created by establishing points
30 feet from the point of intersection of each of two intersecting rightof-
way lines and connecting these two points with a straight line to form
a triangle; and
A.
For driveway intersections, this triangle is created by establishing
points 10 feet from the point of intersection of a right-of-way line and
the line established by driveway edge and connecting those two points
with a straight line to form a triangle.
B.
§ 120-1.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-1.4
1:339
SIGN, ANIMATED — A sign which includes action, motion, or color changes,
or the optical illusion of action, motion, or color changes, including signs
set in motion by movement of the atmosphere, or made up of a series of
sections that turn.
SIGN, ANNOUNCEMENT — A sign identifying an occupant of premises and
his/her/its activity.
SIGN, BUSINESS — A sign which calls attention to a process, service,
profession, business or other activity conducted upon the premises or to a
product made or commodity sold on the premises upon which the sign is
located.
SIGN, CONSTRUCTION — A temporary on-premises sign identifying the
ongoing construction activity during the time that a building permit is
active and prior to completion of the work for which the permit was issued,
containing sign copy that is limited to the ongoing construction activity
and identifying the contractor and/or any subcontractor engaged to perform
construction activity on the site.
SIGN, DIRECTIONAL — A noncommercial on-site sign providing direction
or information to pedestrian or vehicular traffic that is related or reasonably
necessary to the movement of pedestrian or vehicular traffic on the
premises and not displaying a commercial message (e.g., "entrance," "exit,"
"caution," "no parking," "one way only," "no trespassing," and the like).
SIGN, EXTERIOR — Any sign located outside of a building or any sign
located within a building which is both visible from outside the building
and located within 12 feet of the window or door through which the sign is
visible.
SIGN, FREESTANDING — A sign supported by structures or supports that
are placed on or anchored in the ground or at ground level and which are
independent of any building or other structure.
SIGN, GARAGE OR YARD SALE (GARAGE-YARD SALE SIGN) — Any on-site
temporary sign pertaining to the sale of personal property in, at or upon
any residentially zoned property located in the Borough. Garage or yard
sales shall include but not be limited to all such sales, and shall include the
advertising of the holding of any such sale, or the offering to make any sale,
whether made under any name such as garage sale, lawn sale, yard sale,
front yard sale, back yard sale, home sale, attic sale, rummage sale, patio
sale, flea market sale, or any similar designation.
SIGN, ILLUMINATED — Any sign or portion thereof which is illuminated by
artificial light, either from an interior or exterior source, including outline,
reflective or phosphorescent light, whether or not the source of light is
directly affixed as part of the sign.
SIGN, INFORMATIONAL — A sign indicating the location of or designating
an institution or facility of a public or quasi-public nature or indicating the
opening of an event of public interest, but not including signs pertaining to
real estate.
§ 120-1.4 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-1.4
1:340
SIGN, INTERMITTENT — A sign which permits light to be turned on or
off intermittently more frequently than once every 12 hours or which is
operated in a way whereby light is turned on or off intermittently more
frequently than once every 12 hours, including any illuminated sign on
which such illumination is not kept stationary or constant in intensity and
color at all times when such sign is in use, including an LED (light emitting
diode) or digital sign, and which varies in intensity or color more frequently
than once every 12 hours.
SIGN, OFFICIAL — Any sign, symbol or device erected and maintained
by a federal, state, county, or local government agency for the purpose of
informing, guiding, or protecting the public.
SIGN, OUTDOOR ADVERTISING — A sign which calls attention to a service,
business enterprise or similar activity conducted elsewhere than on the
same premises upon which the sign is located or to a product or commodity
made, sold or offered elsewhere than on the same premises upon which the
sign is located, but does not include informational signs as hereinbefore
defined nor necessary directional signs in connection with advertising real
estate.
SIGN, POLITICAL — Any sign erected for the purpose of promoting the
candidacy of a person seeking public office, or promoting a position
regarding a matter of political interest, including pending legislation.
SIGN, PORTABLE — Any sign, banner, or poster that is not permanently
attached to the ground or structure. For purposes of this chapter, an
inflatable sign shall be considered a portable sign.
SIGN, REAL ESTATE — A sign advertising the sale, lease, rental or
development of any particular premises wherein such sign is located on
the premises or directing attention to the opening and location of a new
subdivision or land development project where such sign is not necessarily
located on the premises to which it draws attention.
SIGN, TEMPORARY — A sign which may be displayed for a limited period of
time, as hereinafter provided.
SIGN, WALL — A sign which is affixed to or painted on an exterior wall of a
building or structure.
SINGLE OWNERSHIP — Ownership of a single lot by one person or by
two or more persons owning such lot in any form of ownership. See also
"common ownership."
SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE — A building consisting of only one dwelling
unit within said building.
SIS — See "RSIS."
SITE — The lot in question.
SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots on which is shown:
§ 120-1.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-1.4
1:341
SKETCH PLAT — A concept, informal map of a proposed subdivision or site
plan of sufficient accuracy to be used for the purpose of discussion and
classification.
SOIL CONSERVATION DISTRICT — A governmental subdivision of the
State of New Jersey, organized in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
4:24-18 et seq., for the purpose of governing the use of lands within the
district in the interest of conserving soil and soil resources and preventing
and controlling soil erosion. The Borough is located within the Somerset-
Union Soil Conservation District.
STORY — That portion of a building or structure included between the
surface of any one floor, exclusive of any basement, and the surface of the
floor next above it, or if there is no floor above it, then that portion of the
building or structure included between the surface of any floor and the
ceiling next above it. In a "split level" building or structure, a story shall be
considered a second story only if its floor level is six feet or more above the
floor of the level next below it. A basement only shall be considered as a
story when the finished surface of the floor above the basement is more than
six feet above grade plane, more than six feet above the finished ground
level for more than 50% of the total building perimeter, or more than 12 feet
above the finished ground level at any point.
STORY, ATTIC — An attic having within its space possible floor area with
headroom of five feet or greater over 60% or more of the story directly
beneath or when the line of intersection of the roof decking and wall face is
more than three feet above the top floor level. An attic story should count
as a full story.
STORY, HALF — A partial story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall
plates of which on at least two opposite exterior walls are not more than two
feet above the floor of such partial story; provided, however, that no such
partial story may be used as a separate dwelling unit.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway, viaduct,
alley or other way which is an existing state, county or Borough roadway,
or a street or way shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law
or approved by official action as provided by this chapter, or a street or
way on a map or plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the county
recording officer prior to the appointment of a planning board and the
grant to such board of the power to review plats. "Street" also includes the
The existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including, but not
necessarily limited to, topography, vegetation, drainage, floodplains,
marshes and waterways.
A.
The locations of all existing and proposed buildings, means of ingress
and egress, drives, parking spaces, walkways, landscaping, signs,
lighting and screening devices and drainage facilities and utilities.
B.
Any other information that may be reasonably required in order to
make an informed determination pursuant to the provisions of Part 2
requiring review and approval of site plans.
C.
§ 120-1.4 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-1.4
1:342
land between the street lines, whether improved or unimproved, and may
comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, sidewalks, parking areas and other
areas within the street lines. For the purpose of Part 2 of this chapter, the
Planning Board, with the advice of the Borough Engineer, shall classify the
streets as follows:
STREET LINE — The outermost line of the whole area devoted to street
purposes on either side thereof and synonymous with street right-of-way
line. Front lot lines and side street lines are street lines.[Amended at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction for
occupancy, use or ornamentation, whether installed on, above or below
the surface of a parcel of land. For the purposes of interpreting Part 3,
"structure" shall not include sidewalks, driveways, street pavements, curbs
and essential services as hereinbefore defined. "Structure" includes the
word "building."77
SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two
or more lots, sites or other divisions of land for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of sale or development, except that the following
divisions shall not be considered subdivisions, provided that no new streets
or roads are involved:
ALLEYS — Minor ways which are used primarily for vehicular service
access to the back or the side of properties otherwise abutting on a
street.
A.
ARTERIAL STREETS — Those which are used primarily for fast or
heavy traffic of considerable continuity and used primarily as a traffic
artery for intercommunication among large areas.
B.
COLLECTOR STREETS — Those which carry traffic from minor streets
to the major system of arterial streets and highways, including the
principal entrance streets of a residential development and streets for
circulation within such a development.
C.
DEAD-END STREETS — Those used primarily for access to abutting
properties, having a length not to exceed 1,000 feet, with only one
outlet and a turnaround at the closed end.
D.
MINOR STREETS — Those streets which are used primarily for access
to the abutting properties.
E.
MARGINAL ACCESS STREETS — Those streets which are parallel to
and adjacent to arterial streets and highways and which provide access
to abutting properties and protection from through traffic.
F.
Divisions of land for agricultural purposes where the resulting parcels
are five acres or larger in size.
A.
77.Editor's Note: The original definition of "structure, accessory," which previously followed
this definition, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II). See the definition of "accessory building or structure" within this section.
§ 120-1.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-1.4
1:343
SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN COMMITTEE —
SWIMMING POOL — A structure located either above ground or below
ground and inside or outside of a building having a water depth at any point
greater than three feet and a water surface area when full greater than 100
square feet and designed and intended for recreational use for swimming
and/or diving. A minimum of 500 square feet and a maximum of 750 square
feet of any pool or 10% of total lot area, whichever is less, shall not count
towards impervious lot cover.
TOWER — Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for
the purpose of supporting one or more antennas for telephone, radio and
similar communication purposes, including self-supporting lattice towers,
guyed towers, or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television
transmission towers, microwave towers, common carrier towers, cellular
telephone towers, alternative tower structures and the like and includes the
structure and any support thereto.
TOWNHOUSE — More than two dwelling units each on separate lots
arranged with a common side line and side wall of the dwelling units within
the building.
TRACT — Lot or lots which are the subject of a development application,
including contiguous portions of the street right-of-way.
TRAILER (INCLUDING AUTOMOTIVE TRAILER and MOBILE HOME) —
Any vehicle or structure which at any time was mounted on wheels,
propelled or drawn by its own or other motive power, and designed and
constructed to provide living and/or sleeping quarters for one or more
persons or for the conduct of a business, profession, trade or occupation or
for use as a selling or advertising device.
TRAILER COACH PARK; MOBILE OR MANUFACTURED HOME PARK —
Any lot, parcel or tract of land used to accommodate two or more individual
trailers for living purposes, including all accessory buildings, tents and
other appurtenances, and regardless of whether or not a charge is made for
such accommodations.
TREE — Any deciduous or coniferous species which reaches a typical
mature height of 10 feet or more and a typical diameter at point of
B. Division of property by testamentary or intestate provisions.
Divisions of property upon court order, including but not limited to
judgments of foreclosure.
C.
D. Consolidation of existing lots by deed or other recorded instrument.
A committee of at least three Planning Board members appointed by the
Chairperson of the Board for the purpose of reviewing subdivisions and
site plans and performing such other duties relating to land subdivision
and site plans as may be conferred on this Committee by the Board.
A.
This Committee shall be appointed by the Chairperson as needed to
review major or complex projects.
B.
§ 120-1.4 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-1.4
1:344
measurement (DPM) of six inches or greater. Any species not qualifying as a
tree under this definition shall be considered a stem and shall not fall within
the purview of this chapter.
TRUCK TRAILER — A vehicle properly registered and licensed by any state
as a motor vehicle, provided that the parking, loading or unloading of said
vehicle complies with all provisions of New Jersey law and this chapter, and
is not considered a mobile storage structure.
TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL USE — A use characterized by and limited to
two dwelling units in a building on a single lot.
USDOT — United States Department of Transportation.78
USE, PRINCIPAL — The main or primary purpose for which a building or
lot is used or occupied. Except as specifically permitted, no lot shall contain
more than one principal use.
USED — Includes "arranged, designed, constructed, rented, leased, or
intended to be used."
VARIANCE — Permission to depart from the literal requirements of Part 3,
Zoning, pursuant to the provisions of the Municipal Land Use Law,79 and
permission granted by formal action of the Board after a hearing to depart
from said standards. There are two types of variances, "C" variances and
"D" variances, as defined herein.
VENDING MACHINE — Any apparatus designed to directly sell goods and
which receives coins, tokens, electromagnetic purchasing cards or other
commodity in return for such goods, or accepts credit for such goods.
WADING POOL — An aboveground or in-ground structure containing less
than three feet of water and intended to be used for recreational purposes.
WAIVER, COMPLETENESS AND PROCEDURAL — Permission granted by
formal action of the Board or its designee to which such power has been
delegated to depart from the requirements of this chapter with respect to
the submission of required documents for completeness purposes and relief
from other procedural requirements. Design waivers are defined elsewhere
herein.
WALL, FREESTANDING — An exterior, solid, upright structure which is selfsupported
on the ground directly below it on a foundation whose length is
much greater than its thickness and intended to enclose, protect, divide, or
screen a space.
WALL, RETAINING — An exterior, solid, upright self-supporting structure
having a higher ground on one side than the other and designed and
intended to create a vertical or near vertical change in grade.
78.Editor's Note: The original definition of "use, accessory," which previously followed this
definition, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
See the definition of "accessory use" within this section.
79.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 120-1.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-1.4
1:345
WAREHOUSE — A building for the storage and redistribution of commercial
or industrial products and materials, but shall not include truck terminals
where products or materials are directly transferred between trucks. If
direct sales to the public are made from such storage building, it shall be
classified as a warehouse outlet.
WAREHOUSE OUTLET — A combination of a storage facility for commercial
or industrial products and materials and sales to the public. This shall be
considered a retail use, except that retail parking requirements shall be
applied to the part of the building used by salespersons and for the handling
of goods for the customers, and warehouse parking requirements shall be
applied to the rest of the space in the building, if any, devoted to storage of
goods not for direct public sale.
WETLANDS, FRESHWATER — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to,
and under normal circumstances does, support a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, as defined by the
NJDEP Freshwater Wetland Protection Act regulations, N.J.A.C. 7:7A.
WHOLESALE SALES — Establishments or places of business primarily
engaged in selling merchandise to retailers; to industrial, commercial,
institutional, or professional business users; to other wholesalers; or acting
as agents or brokers and buying merchandise for, or selling merchandise to,
such individuals or companies.
YARD — A space located between a lot line and the nearest principal
building or structure on said lot. For purposes of compliance with this
chapter, dimensions of yards shall be measured perpendicular to the lot
line.
YARD, FRONT — An open, unoccupied space facing a street to which the
front door, or the majority of front doors if more than one building, faces
and is between the front line of the house as it is extended to the side lines
and the street line. In addition, when the lot lines at an intersection are
rounded, the front lot line shall be measured to the point of intersection of
the extension of the front lot line and street side lot line.
YARD, REAR — A space extending across the full width of any lot between
the rear of any principal building or structure on said lot and the rear lot
line.
YARD, SIDE — A space located between the front yard and the rear yard on
a lot, and between the side lot line(s) and the nearest principal building on
said lot. On a corner lot, there shall be one side yard and one street side
yard.
YARD, STREET SIDE — A space on a corner lot between the front yard and
rear yard on the lot, and between the property line and the nearest principal
building on said lot.
ZONE or ZONE DISTRICT — A geographical unit of the Borough specifically
set aside for a particular use or group of uses or requiring specific lot
dimensions or land area.
§ 120-1.4 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-1.4
1:346
ZONING APPROVAL — Approval by the Zoning Officer pursuant to an
application for development or use or utilization of property on the physical
dimension of the development.
ZONING MAP — The Zoning District Map of the Borough, as set forth in
this chapter, together with all amendments thereto subsequently adopted.
ZONING OFFICER — An officer and employee of the Borough, appointed by
the Mayor with the consent of Council to administer this chapter.
ZONING PERMIT — A document signed by the Zoning Officer which is
required by ordinance as a condition precedent to the commencement of a
use or the erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration or conversion of
a structure or building and which acknowledges that such use, structure or
building complies with the provisions of Part 3 or variance therefrom, duly
authorized by a municipal agency pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law,
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60 or 40:55D-70.
ZONING REGULATIONS — The regulations contained in Part 3 of this
chapter.
§ 120-1.5. Illustrations.
§ 120-1.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-1.5
1:347
§ 120-1.5 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-1.5
1:348
§ 120-1.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-1.5
1:349
§ 120-1.5 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-1.5
1:350
§ 120-1.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-1.5
1:351

ARTICLE 2
Organization and Establishment of Planning Board
§ 120-2.1. Membership; appointment.
There is hereby established in the Borough a Planning Board of nine
members with four alternates pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law,80 as
follows:
§ 120-2.2. Length of terms of office.
The terms of office for Board members shall be as follows:
A. Class I: The Mayor of the Borough, or the Mayor's designee in the
absence of the Mayor.
B. Class II: One of the officials of the Borough, other than a member of the
Borough Council, to be appointed by the Mayor. If the Zoning Officer is
appointed the Class II member, the Zoning Officer shall not participate
in the consideration of appeals of the Zoning Officer for development
which involve relief pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d.
C. Class III: A member of the Borough Council to be appointed by the
Borough Council.
D. Class IV: Six citizens of the Borough to be appointed by the Mayor.
(1) The members of Class IV shall hold no other Borough office,
position or employment, except that one such member may be a
member of the Board of Education.
(2) For the purpose of this qualification, membership on a Borough
board or commission whose function is advisory in nature, and the
establishment of which is discretionary and not required by statute,
shall not be considered as holding of Borough office.
(3) All members of the Board, except for the Class II member, shall be
municipal residents.
E. There shall be four alternate members of the Board appointed by the
Mayor who shall be municipal residents. Alternate members shall meet
the qualifications of Class IV members of the Board. Alternate members
shall be designated at the time of appointment by the Mayor as
"Alternate No. 1," "Alternate No. 2," "Alternate No. 3," and "Alternate
No. 4."
F. Neither the Class I member or his/her designated alternate nor the
Class III member shall participate in the consideration of applications
for development which involve relief pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d.
As it relates to such applications, only Class II and Class IV members of
the Board or alternates shall participate in such deliberations.
80.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 120-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-2.2
1:353
§ 120-2.3. Board committees.
The Board Chairperson may appoint from among the members of the Board
any such committees as the Chairperson may deem advisable in carrying
out the functions of the Board.
§ 120-2.4. Citizens Advisory Committee.
The Mayor may appoint one or more persons as a Citizens Advisory
Committee to assist or collaborate with the Board in its duties. Such
person(s) shall have no power to vote or take other action required of the
Board. Such person(s) shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor.
§ 120-2.5. Powers and duties of Board.
The Board shall follow the provisions of the Municipal Land Use Law81 and
this chapter, and accordingly shall have authority to:
A. The term of the Class I member shall correspond to his/her official
tenure in office.
B. The term of the Class II and Class III members shall be for one year or
terminate at the completion of their respective terms of office,
whichever occurs first.
C. The term of a Class IV member who is also a member of the Board of
Education shall terminate when he/she is no longer a member of such
other body or at the completion of his/her Class IV term, whichever
occurs first.
D. The term of all Class IV members shall be for four years, except as
provided otherwise herein.
E. The term of alternate members shall be for two years. The term of not
more than two alternate members shall expire in any one year.
F. All terms shall run from January 1 of the year in which the appointment
is made, except as otherwise provided under Subsection H.
G. Nothing contained herein shall affect the terms of any present members
of the Board, all of whom shall continue as members until the
completion of the terms for which they were appointed.
H. Vacancies. A vacancy in any Board position, including alternate
members, occurring otherwise than by expiration of the member's term
shall be filled for the unexpired term only. Appointment of members to
fill vacant positions shall be as provided in this Part 1.
I. Removal of members. Any member or alternate member, other than the
Class I member of the Board, after a public hearing if requested by the
member, may be removed by the governing body for cause.
81.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 120-2.2 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-2.5
1:354
§ 120-2.6. Transference of powers of Zoning Board of Adjustment to
Planning Board.
The Planning Board of the Borough of Kenilworth shall exercise, to the same
extent and subject to the same restrictions, all the powers of the former
Zoning Board of Adjustment.
§ 120-2.7. Specific powers now transferred to Planning Board.
The Planning Board shall have the power to:
A. Prepare, adopt, and amend a master plan or component part thereof.
B. Exercise control over and review and approve or disapprove in whole or
in part subdivisions, site plans and conditional uses, including all
variances and building permits.
C. Exercise control over and review and approve or disapprove all
variances, whether or not the development which is the subject of such
variance(s) requires subdivision, site plan or conditional use approval.
D. Exercise informal review of conceptual development plans.
E. Recommend to the governing body the adoption or amendment of
development regulations and an official map.
F. Direct the issuance of building permits for buildings or structures in
certain areas shown on an official map.
G. Direct the issuance of building permits for buildings or structures on a
lot not related to a street.
H. Recommend to the governing body concerning the relationship of
capital projects to the Master Plan.
I. Prepare a capital improvements program, if authorized by the
governing body.
J. Participate in the preparation and review of programs or plans required
by state or federal law or regulation.
K. Assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuous planning
process.
L. Make recommendations to the governing body and/or any housing,
parking, highway, special district or other authority, redevelopment
agency, school board or other similar public agency, state, county or
Borough, concerning the relationship of capital projects to the Master
Plan pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-31.
A. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there
is error in any order, requirement, decision, or refusal made by the
administrative officer based on or made in enforcement of this chapter.
§ 120-2.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-2.7
1:355
B. Hear and decide requests for interpretation of the Zoning Map or this
chapter, or for decisions upon other special questions upon which the
Planning Board is authorized to pass by this chapter. [Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
C. Grant a variance from the strict application of a regulation, upon an
application or an appeal, so as to relieve difficulties or hardships:
(1) Where, by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, or shape
of a specific piece of property; or by reason of exceptional
topographic conditions or physical features uniquely affecting a
specific piece of property; or by reason of an extraordinary and
exceptional situation uniquely affecting a specific piece of property
or the structures lawfully existing thereon, the strict application of
any zoning regulation would result in peculiar and exceptional
practical difficulties to, or exceptional and undue hardship upon,
the developer of such property; or
(2) Where in an application or appeal relating to a specific piece of
property the purposes of this chapter set forth in this Part 1 would
be advanced by deviation from the requirements of Part 3, Zoning,
and the benefits of the deviation would substantially outweigh any
detriment, grant a variance to allow the departure from zoning
regulations; provided, however, that no variance from those
departures enumerated in Subsection D shall be granted under this
subsection; and provided, further, that the proposed development
does not require approval by the Planning Board of a subdivision,
site plan, or conditional use in conjunction with which the Planning
Board has power to review a request for a variance pursuant to this
Part 1. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
D. Other variances.
(1) Grant a variance to allow a deviation from the requirements of this
chapter, in particular cases and for special reasons, to permit:
(a) A use or principal structure in a district restricted against such
use or principal structure;
(b) An expansion of a nonconforming use;
(c) Deviation from a specification or standard pertaining solely to
a conditional use;
(d) An increase in the permitted floor area ratio;
(e) An increase in the permitted density, except as applied to the
required lot area for a lot or lots for detached one- or twodwelling-
unit buildings which lot or lots are either an isolated
undersized lot or lots resulting from a minor subdivision; or
§ 120-2.7 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-2.7
1:356
(f) A height of a principal structure which exceeds by 10 feet or
10% the maximum height permitted in the district for a
principal structure.
(2) A variance under this Subsection D shall be granted only by the
affirmative vote of at least five members.
E. Report on variances. Prepare annually a report for the Mayor and
Borough Council based upon its review of its decisions on applications
and appeals for variances during the previous year. The report shall be
adopted by resolution of the Board not later than March 1 of each year,
and shall comment on the zoning regulations which were the subject of
variance requests, and shall make recommendations for any
amendments to the zoning regulations that the Board may deem
appropriate based upon prior variance applications.
§ 120-2.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-2.7
1:357

ARTICLE 3
Board Procedures
§ 120-3.1. Selection of officers.
The Planning Board shall elect a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson from the
members of Class IV, select a Secretary who may or may not be a member
or alternate member of the Planning Board or a municipal employee, and
create and fill such other offices as established by ordinance. An alternate
member shall not serve as Chairperson or Vice Chairperson of the Planning
Board.
§ 120-3.2. Attorney, other experts and staff.
§ 120-3.3. Funding of expenses.
The Mayor and Borough Council shall make provisions in their budget and
appropriate funds for the expenses of the Board as deemed appropriate.
§ 120-3.4. Rules and regulations.
The Board shall adopt, and may amend, reasonable rules and regulations
not inconsistent with this chapter, the Municipal Land Use Law82 or with
any applicable law, for the administration of its functions, powers and
duties. A copy of the rules shall be maintained in the office of the Secretary
of the Board, and shall be furnished to any person upon request. A
reasonable fee may be charged for providing a copy of the rules.
§ 120-3.5. Optional preapplication meeting.
The applicant may request from the administrative officer and, if requested,
shall be entitled to the holding of a preapplication conference.
A. There is hereby created the position of Attorney for the Board. The
Board may employ, or contract for, and fix the compensation of legal
counsel to fill such position, provided such compensation shall not
exceed the amount appropriated by the Mayor and Borough Council for
use by the Board for such purpose. Such attorney shall not be the
Borough Attorney.
B. The Board may also employ, or contract for, and fix the compensation of
a licensed professional engineer, planning consultant or such other
additional experts, staff and services as it may deem necessary, not
exceeding the amount appropriated by the Mayor and the Borough
Council for the Board's use.
A. The purpose of this conference is to:
(1) Acquaint the applicant with the substantive and procedural
requirements of this chapter;
82.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 120-3.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-3.5
1:359
(2) Provide for an exchange of information regarding the proposed
development plan and applicable elements of the Master Plan, this
chapter and other development requirements;
(3) Advise the applicant of any public sources of information that may
aid the applicant's prosecution of the application for development;
(4) Otherwise identify policies and regulations that create
opportunities for, or pose significant constraints on, the proposed
development;
(5) Review any proposed concept plans and consider opportunities to
increase development benefits and mitigate undesirable project
consequences;
(6) Permit input into the general design of the project; and
(7) Identify, to the extent practicable at this stage of the process, any
variances or design or submission waivers necessary for the
applicant to develop the proposed development.
B. The municipal representatives at the preapplication conference shall be
designated, except as otherwise indicated, by the Director of the
Department of Community Development administrative officer and
shall include the administrative officer, and may include a
representative of the Mayor as designated by the Mayor, and may
include:
(1) The Municipal Engineer.
(2) The Municipal Planner.
(3) The Municipal Construction Official.
(4) The Municipal Zoning Officer.
(5) Designated representative(s) from the Planning Board.
(6) Representatives from any other designated commissions or boards.
C. A request for a preapplication conference shall be made in writing and
shall include a project description, a tax lot and block designation of the
site in question, a concept plan and such additional information as may
be reasonably requested by the administrative officer. The
administrative officer shall schedule a preapplication conference within
30 days of receipt of such request.
D. The applicant shall not be required to pay a fee for the preapplication
conference; provided, however, that the applicant shall post an escrow
fee pursuant to this chapter to cover the costs of attendance at the
preapplication conference of professional consultants not employed by
the Borough. If requested and paid for by the applicant, a brief written
summary of the preapplication conference shall be prepared by the
administrative officer and provided to the applicant within 15 working
§ 120-3.5 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-3.5
1:360
§ 120-3.6. Concept plan review.
§ 120-3.7. Meetings.
The following provisions shall apply to the meetings of the Board:
days after the final meeting. The fee for such summary shall be that set
forth in Article 6 of this chapter.
E. Neither the Planning Board, the applicant, nor any other participant in
the preapplication meeting shall be bound by the determination of the
preapplication process. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
A. In addition, or as an alternative, to the preapplication meeting, at the
request of the applicant, the Planning Board, or a subcommittee
thereof, shall meet with the applicant for an informal review of a
concept plan for development for which the applicant intends to
prepare and submit an application for development to the Planning
Board. The purpose of the concept plan is to provide Planning Board
input in the formative stages of subdivision and site plan design.
B. A request to meet with the Planning Board for an informal concept plan
review shall be made in writing and shall include a project description,
a tax lot and block designation of the site in question, the concept plan
and such additional information as may be reasonably requested by the
administrative officer.
C. A brief written summary of the concept plan review shall be prepared
by the administrative officer and provided to the Planning Board
members and the applicant.
D. The applicant shall be charged the fee for concept plan review set forth
in Article 6 hereof. The amount of such fee shall be a credit towards fees
or charges otherwise payable under Article 6 for the review of the
application for development.
E. The applicant shall not be bound by any conceptual plan for which
review is requested, nor shall the Planning Board, or any subcommittee
thereof, be bound by any such review.
A. Schedule of meetings; special meetings.
(1) The Board shall by its rules fix the time and place for holding its
regular meetings. Regular meetings of the Board shall be
scheduled not less than once a month and shall be held as
scheduled unless canceled for lack of applications for development
to process. The schedule of meetings shall be filed with the
Borough Clerk, posted upon the Borough bulletin board, and sent
to two newspapers with circulation in the Borough, one of which
shall be the official newspaper of the Borough.
§ 120-3.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-3.7
1:361
(2) The Board may provide for special meetings, at the call of the
Chairperson, or at the request of any two of its members.
B. Meetings open to public; executive sessions.
(1) All regular meetings and special meetings shall be open to the
public, except to the extent that the public may be excluded from
any such meeting or portion thereof in accordance with
requirements of the Open Public Meetings Act.83
(2) Meetings shall be held on notice to the Board members and the
public in accordance with this chapter and the Open Public
Meetings Act.
(3) Executive sessions within the meaning of the Open Public Meetings
Act and for the purpose of that Act are permitted.
(4) The "executive sessions" as set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-9b, for the
purpose of discussing and studying any matters to come before the
Board, shall take place at an agenda meeting and shall be open to
the public.
(5) No formal action can be taken in an executive or agenda session
unless formal notice has been given in accordance with the Open
Public Meetings Act.
C. Quorum; conflict of interest. No action shall be taken at any meeting
without a quorum being present. No regular, alternate or temporary
member shall be permitted to act on any matter in which he or she has,
either directly or indirectly, any personal or financial interest.
D. Majority vote required. All actions shall be taken by a majority vote of
the members of the Board present at the meeting, except as otherwise
provided by this chapter and the Municipal Land Use Law.84 For actions
requiring an affirmative vote of five or more, see N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70.
E. Participation of alternate members. Alternate members may participate
in all matters but may not vote except in the absence or disqualification
of a regular member of any class. A vote shall not be delayed in order
that a regular member may vote instead of an alternate member. In the
event that a choice must be made as to which alternate member is to
vote, Alternate No. 1, No. 2, No. 3 and No. 4 shall vote in that order.
Participation of alternate members shall not be deemed to increase the
size of the Board established by this chapter.
F. Minutes.
(1) Minutes of every meeting of the Board shall be kept and shall
include the names of the persons appearing and addressing the
Board and of the person appearing by attorney, the action taken by
83.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
84.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 120-3.7 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-3.7
1:362
§ 120-3.8. Advisory members.
the Board, the findings, if any, made by it and reasons therefor, and
any other resolutions or business to come before the Board. The
minutes shall thereafter be available for public inspection during
normal business hours in the administrative offices of the Borough
after their approval by the Board.
(2) Any interested party shall have the right to compel production of
the minutes for use as evidence in any legal proceedings
concerning the subject matter of such minutes. Such interested
party may be charged a reasonable fee for reproduction of the
minutes for his or her use. All actions taken by the Board shall
require a formal written resolution of memorialization which shall
be part of the minutes of that meeting.
(3) A copy of all minutes shall be filed at the Kenilworth Library to
facilitate public inspection during those hours when the Kenilworth
Municipal Building is closed.
G. Transcripts of hearings. Pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law,85 the
Board shall provide one of the following for each hearing:
(1) An electronic recording of the hearing and any discussions relating
to the application leading to a decision by the Board. This recording
shall be reduced to typewritten form.
(2) A stenographic court reporter who shall transcribe verbatim the
hearing and any discussion relating to the application leading to a
decision by the Board. This transcript shall not be reduced to
typewritten form unless requested. The cost of reducing the
transcript to typewritten form shall be borne by the applicant and
shall be ordered directly from the court reporter and the cost paid
directly to the court reporter.
A. The Fire Chief and the Police Chief of the Borough, or their designees,
shall be ex officio advisory members of the Planning Board for the
purpose of advising the Board on any application that may come before
it on the impact the granting of such application may have upon the
furnishing of police or fire protection services, or any requirements that
may be advisable in that regard.
B. Neither the Fire Chief nor the Police Chief shall vote on any matter
coming before such Board, nor shall they be considered "regular"
members of such Board as that term is used in the appropriate New
Jersey statutes.
C. Both the Fire Chief and the Police Chief may, from time to time, appoint
a member of their respective departments to attend any Board meeting
in their place.
85.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 120-3.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-3.9
1:363
§ 120-3.9. Conflicts of interest.
No member of the Planning Board shall act on any matter in which he/she
has either directly or indirectly any personal or financial interest. Whenever
any such member shall disqualify himself/herself from acting on a particular
matter, he/she shall not continue to sit with the Board on the hearing of such
matter, nor participate in any discussion or decision relating thereto.
§ 120-3.10. List of property owners.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12c, the administrative officer
shall, within seven days of receipt of a request therefor and upon receipt of
payment of a fee as specified in § 120-6.2, provide a list certified by the Tax
Assessor from the current tax duplicate of names and addresses of owners
in the Borough to whom the applicant is required to give notice, pursuant
to this Part 1.
§ 120-3.11. Payment of taxes. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-39 and 40:55D-65, every
application for development submitted to the Planning Board shall be
accompanied by proof that no taxes or assessments for local improvements
are due or delinquent on the property which is the subject of such
application, or, if it is shown that taxes or assessments are delinquent on
the property, any approvals or other relief granted by the Planning Board
shall be conditioned upon either the prompt payment of such taxes or
assessments or the making of adequate provision for the payment thereof
in such manner that the Borough shall be adequately protected. All other
municipal fees, including application fees and escrow payments, shall be
paid in full prior to the certification of any application for development as
complete.
§ 120-3.12. Copy to be filed with County Planning Board.
Immediately upon adoption of this Land Use Ordinance, the Borough Clerk
shall file a copy with the County Planning Board, as required by law. The
Clerk shall also file with the County Planning Board copies of all other
Borough land use ordinances.
§ 120-3.13. Expiration of variance.
Any variance hereafter granted by the Planning Board permitting the
erection or alteration of any structure or structures or permitting a
specified use of any property shall expire by limitation unless such
construction or alteration shall have been actually commenced on each and
every structure permitted by the variance, or unless such permitted use has
actually been commenced, within one year from the date of entry of the
approval of the variance, except that the running of the period of limitation
herein provided shall be tolled from the date of filing an appeal from the
decision of the Planning Board to the Borough Council, or to a court of
§ 120-3.9 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-3.13
1:364
competent jurisdiction, until the termination in any manner of such appeal
or proceeding.
§ 120-3.14. Exclusive authority of Board.
Any power expressly authorized by this chapter or the Municipal Land Use
Law86 to the Board shall not be exercised by any other body, except as
otherwise provided by the Municipal Land Use Law.
86.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 120-3.13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-3.14
1:365

ARTICLE 4
Hearings
§ 120-4.1. Hearings; when required.
§ 120-4.2. Rules; hearing dates.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10, the Board shall adopt rules governing its
hearings. Upon the determination that an appeal or application is complete
pursuant to Article 9, the Board shall schedule a hearing date in accordance
with its rules.
§ 120-4.3. Notice of hearing; when required.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12, public notice as specified herein shall be
given for all hearings involving the following:
A. Public hearings by the Board shall be required for the following:
(1) On each application for development, except when such application
is specifically exempted from public hearing by this chapter.
(2) On any adoption, revision or amendment of the Master Plan.
(3) On appeal from the action of the Zoning Officer or other
administrative appeal within its jurisdiction.
(4) On an application for an interpretation of the zoning regulations
pursuant to Part 3, or an application for certification of a
nonconforming use or structure pursuant to Part 3, Article 29.
B. The Mayor and Borough Council shall hold a hearing on any adoption,
revision, or amendment of this chapter or of any development
regulation.
C. The Board or Mayor and Borough Council, as applicable, shall hold a
hearing on any adoption, revision or amendment of a capital
improvement program.
A. Any application for development which involves a request for a
variance;
B. An application for interpretation of the zoning regulations or decisions
upon special questions; provided, however, that such notice shall be
both published and served as set forth in Articles 4 and 5 if the
application involves a specific property, and further provided that such
notice shall be limited to publication as set forth in Article 5 if the
application does not involve a specific property;
C. An application for preliminary major site plan approval;
D. An application for preliminary major subdivision approval;
E. An application for certification of a nonconforming use or structure;
§ 120-4.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-4.3
1:367
§ 120-4.4. Notice of hearings for development applications.
The following provisions shall apply to public notice of hearings for
development applications, as mandated by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12, including but
not limited to:
F. An application for conditional use approval;
G. The adoption, revision or amendment of the Master Plan;
H. The adoption, revision or amendment of this chapter or any other
development regulation;
I. The adoption, revision or amendment of a capital improvement
program; and
J. Preliminary review of the Zoning Officer’s decision with regard to a
resident homeowner’s dwelling shall not require any additional notice
other than appearing on the Planning Board’s published agenda no less
than two business days prior to the scheduled meeting. All other
interpretations and appeals of any administrative officer shall comply
with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70b. [Amended 11-8-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-04]
A. Content. Public notice of hearings for development applications,
including variance applications, shall state the following:
(1) The date, time and place of the hearing;
(2) The nature of the matters to be considered, provided that when
conditional use approval, variance relief or direction for the
issuance of a permit pursuant to this chapter is requested, the
notice shall include reference to the request for conditional use
approval, variance or direction for issuance of a permit, as the case
may be;
(3) An identification of the property proposed for development by
street address, if any, or by reference to lot and block numbers as
shown on the current tax duplicate in the Tax Assessor's office; and
(4) The location and times at which any maps and documents for which
approval is sought are available for inspection in the office of the
Board Secretary.
B. Service of notice; parties entitled to notice. Public notice shall be given
by the applicant. Notice shall be given at least 10 days prior to the date
of the hearing. The date of the hearing shall not count as one of the 10
days. Public notice shall be given by publication in the official
newspaper of the Borough, if there is one, or in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Borough.
(1) Notice shall also be given to members of the public as follows:
§ 120-4.3 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-4.4
1:368
(a) Notice of hearing shall be given to the owners, including
owners of condominium units as shown on the current tax
duplicates, of all real property within 200 feet in all directions
of the property which is the subject of such hearing. Notice
shall be given as follows:
[1] Notice shall be given by serving a copy thereof on the
property owner as shown on the current tax duplicate, or
his/her agent in charge of the property, or mailing a copy
thereof by certified mail to the property owner at his/her
address as shown on the current tax duplicate.
[2] Notice to a partnership owner or limited liability company
owner may be made upon any partner or as otherwise
permitted by law.
[3] Notice to a corporate owner or professional corporation
owner may be made by service upon its president, a vice
president, secretary or other person authorized by
appointment or by law to accept service on behalf of the
corporation.
(2) Notice of hearings on applications for development involving
property located within 200 feet of an adjoining municipality shall
be given by personal service or certified mail to the clerk of such
municipality.
(3) Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Union County Planning Board ("County Planning Board") of
hearings on applications for development involving property
adjacent to an existing county road or proposed road shown on the
Official County Map or on the Union County Master Plan, adjoining
other county land or situated within 200 feet of a municipal
boundary. Notice shall not be given for applications on a singlefamily
house.
(4) Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Commissioner of Transportation of a hearing on an application for
development involving property adjacent to a state highway.
(5) Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
State Planning Commission of a hearing on an application for
development of property which exceeds 150 acres or 500 dwelling
units. The notice shall include a copy of any maps or documents
required to be on file with the Board Secretary pursuant to Article
4.
(6) Notice of hearings on an application for development involving a
major subdivision or preliminary site plan, excluding minor site
plans, shall be given to a public utility, cable television company or
local utility which possesses a right-of-way or easement within the
Borough and which has registered with the Borough in accordance
§ 120-4.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-4.4
1:369
§ 120-4.5. Notice of hearings for the Master Plan.
The following provisions shall apply to public notice of hearings for
adoption, revision or amendment of the Master Plan:
with the Municipal Land Use Law87 by serving a copy of the notice
on the person whose name appears on the registration form on
behalf of the public utility, cable television company or local utility,
or mailing a copy thereof by certified mail to the person whose
name appears on the registration form at the address shown on
that form.
C. Request for certified list of property owners within 200 feet. Upon
written request of an applicant, the administrative officer shall, within
seven days of the date the application is deemed complete, make and
certify a list from the current tax duplicates of the names and addresses
of owners to whom the applicant is required to give notice. In addition,
the administrative officer shall include on the list the names, addresses
and positions of those persons who, not less than seven days prior to the
date on which the applicant requested the list, have registered to
receive notice as a public utility, cable television company or local
utility. The applicant shall be entitled to rely upon the information
contained in such list, and failure to give notice to any owner or to any
public utility, cable television company or local utility not on the list
shall not invalidate any hearing or proceeding.
D. Effect of mailing notice. Any notice made by certified mail as stipulated
above shall be deemed complete upon mailing.
E. Proof of service of notice. The applicant for development shall file an
affidavit of proof of service with the Board.
A. Content. Public notice of hearings for adoption, revision or amendment
of the Master Plan shall state the following:
(1) The date, time and place of the hearing.
(2) The nature of the matters to be considered.
B. Notice of hearings for the Master Plan. Notice shall be given by the
Board at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing. The date of the
hearing shall not count as one of the 10 days. Public notice shall be
given by publication in the official newspaper of the Borough, if there is
one, or in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough. Notice
shall also be given to the following parties as specified below:
(1) Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
clerk of an adjoining municipality of all hearings on adoption,
revision or amendment of the Borough Master Plan involving
property situated within 200 feet of such adjoining municipality.
87.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 120-4.4 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-4.5
1:370
§ 120-4.6. Notice of hearings for development regulations or
Capital Improvement Program.
The following provisions shall apply to public notice of hearings for
adoption, revision or amendment of this chapter, other development
regulations or the Capital Improvement Program:
(2) Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
County Planning Board of all hearings on the adoption, revision or
amendment of the Borough Master Plan. Such notice shall include
a copy of any such proposed Master Plan, or any revision or
amendment thereto.
(3) Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
County Planning Board of the adoption, revision or amendment of
the Borough Master Plan. Such notice shall be given not more than
30 days after the date of such adoption, revision or amendment and
shall include a copy of the Master Plan, or revision or amendment
thereto.
C. Effect of mailing notice. Any notice made by certified mail as stipulated
above shall be deemed complete upon mailing.
A. Content. Public notice of hearings for adoption, revision or amendment
of this chapter, other development regulations, or the Capital
Improvement Program shall provide the following:
(1) A statement of the date, time and place of the hearing;
(2) A statement of the nature of the matters to be considered;
(3) The location and times at which any maps and documents which
are the subject of said adoption, revision or amendment are
available for inspection in the office of the Borough Clerk;
(4) In the case of zone district classification or boundary changes with
enhanced notice requirements pursuant to Subsection B(3), the
notice shall also provide an identification of the affected zoning
districts and proposed boundary changes, if any, by street names,
common names or other identifiable landmarks, and by reference
to lot and block numbers as shown on the current tax duplicates in
the Tax Assessor's office; and
(5) In the case of notice to the County Planning Board, a copy of the
proposed or adopted development regulation, Official Map, Capital
Improvement Program, or any proposed or adopted revision or
amendment thereto, as the case may be, shall be included with the
notice.
B. Service of notice; parties entitled to notice. Notice shall be given by the
governing body at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing. The
§ 120-4.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-4.6
1:371
date of the hearing shall not count as one of the 10 days. Notice shall
be given to the following parties as specified below:
(1) Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
clerk of an adjoining municipality of all hearings on adoption,
revision or amendment of any development regulation involving
property situated within 200 feet of such adjoining municipality.
(2) Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
County Planning Board of all hearings on the adoption, revision or
amendment of any development regulation.
(3) Notice of a hearing on an amendment to the zoning regulations,
which amendment proposes a change to the classification or
boundaries of a zoning district, exclusive of classification or
boundary changes recommended in a periodic general
reexamination of the Master Plan by the Board pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-89, shall be given in the following manner:
(a) Notice shall be given by serving a copy thereof on the property
owner as shown on the current tax duplicate, or his or her
agent in charge of the property, or mailing a copy thereof by
certified mail and regular mail to the property owner at his
address as shown on the said current tax duplicate.
(b) Notice to a partnership owner may be made by service upon
any partner.
(c) Notice to a corporate owner, including cooperatives, may be
made by service upon its president, a vice president, secretary
or other person authorized by appointment or by law to accept
service on behalf of the corporation.
(d) Notice to a condominium association, horizontal property
regime, community trust or homeowners' association, because
of its ownership of common elements or areas located within
200 feet of the boundaries of the district which is the subject of
the hearing, may be made in the same manner as to a
corporation in addition to notice to unit owners, co-owners or
homeowners on account of such common elements or areas.
(e) The Borough Clerk shall execute affidavits of proof of service of
the notices required for the hearings on zoning district
classification or boundary changes and shall keep the affidavits
on file along with the proof of publication of the notice of the
required public hearing on the proposed zoning regulation
change. Costs of the notice provision shall be the responsibility
of the proponent of the amendment.
(4) Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
County Planning Board of the adoption, revision or amendment of
the Borough Capital Improvement Program or Official Map. Such
§ 120-4.6 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-4.6
1:372
§ 120-4.7. Filing of maps and documents; deadline.
§ 120-4.8. Witnesses; evidence.
The following provisions shall govern the testimony of witnesses and
production of evidence at hearings conducted pursuant to this chapter:
§ 120-4.9. Public comment.
In addition to receiving testimony, the Board shall afford members of the
public the right to comment upon any application for development pending
before the Board. Such comments may be presented in written form, as
well as orally. The Chairperson of the Board or a majority of the Board may
vote to limit the time allowed for oral public comment, to be reasonably
determined under the circumstances.
notice shall be given not more than 30 days after the date of such
adoption, revision or amendment.
C. Effect of mailing notice. Any notice made by certified mail as stipulated
above shall be deemed complete upon mailing.
A. Any maps and documents for which approval is sought at a hearing
shall be on file and available for public inspection at least 10 days
before the date of the hearing, during normal business hours in the
office of the Board Secretary. The applicant may produce other
documents, records, or testimony at the hearing to substantiate or
clarify or supplement the previously filed maps and documents.
B. Applicants are encouraged to file electronic copies of completed
applications to facilitate public review.
A. The officer presiding at the hearing or such person as he/she may
designate shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to
compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant
evidence, including witnesses and documents presented by the parties.
The provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law shall
apply.88
B. The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application for
development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the presiding
officer. The right of cross-examination shall be permitted to all
interested parties through their attorneys, or themselves.
C. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the hearing, but
the Board may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious
evidence. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
88.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq.
§ 120-4.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-4.10
1:373
§ 120-4.10. Voting procedures.
The following voting procedures shall apply for public hearings held
pursuant to this chapter. Nothing herein shall be construed to contravene
any act providing for procedures for governing bodies.
§ 120-4.11. Decisions.
A. All actions shall be taken by a majority vote of the members present at
the hearing. In the case of a use variance pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55-70d, affirmative votes are required by at least five members.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
B. A member of the Board who was absent for one or more of the meetings
at which a hearing was held or was not a member of the Board at that
time shall be eligible to vote on the matter upon which the hearing was
conducted if such member has available to him/her the transcript or
recording of all of the hearings from which he/she was absent or was
not a member, and certified in writing to the Board that he/she has read
such transcript or listened to such recording. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
C. Failure of a motion to receive the number of votes required to approve
an application for development shall be deemed an action denying the
application. A tie vote shall be deemed a failure to receive the number
of votes required.
A. Findings of fact and conclusions. The Board shall include findings of
fact and conclusions based thereon in each decision on any application
for development and shall reduce the decision to writing. Failure of a
motion to receive the number of votes required to approve an
application for development pursuant to the exceptional vote
requirements of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 or § 120-4.10A shall be deemed an
action denying the application. The Board shall provide the findings and
conclusions through:
(1) A resolution adopted at a meeting held within the time period
provided in N.J.S.A. 40:55D for action by the Board on the
application for development; or
(2) A memorializing resolution adopted at a meeting held not later
than 45 days after the date of the meeting at which the Board voted
to grant or deny approval. Only the members of the Board who
voted for the action taken may vote on the memorializing
resolution, and the vote of a majority of such members present at
the meeting at which the resolution is presented for adoption shall
be sufficient to adopt the resolution. An action pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-9, resulting from the failure of a motion to approve an
application, shall be memorialized by resolution as provided above,
with those members voting against the motion for approval being
§ 120-4.10 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-4.11
1:374
§ 120-4.12. Record of decisions.
The Board shall include findings of fact and conclusions based thereon
in each decision on any application for development and shall reduce the
decision to writing. The Board shall provide the findings and conclusions
through either resolution adopted at a meeting held within the time period
provided in the Act89 for action by the Board on the application for
development or a memorializing resolution adopted at a meeting held not
later than 45 days after the date of the meeting at which the Board voted
the members eligible to vote on the memorializing resolution. The
vote on any such resolution shall be deemed to be a
memorialization of the action of the Board and not to be an action
of the Board. However, the date of the adoption of the resolution
shall constitute the date of the decision for purposes of the
mailings, filings and publication required by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10h
and i.
B. Conditional decisions; County Planning Board approval. Where
required by law, N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.6, the application shall be submitted to
the County Planning Board for review or approval, and in such cases,
the Borough Planning Board shall condition any approval that it grants
upon timely receipt of a favorable report from the County Planning
Board or upon the County Planning Board's failure to report within the
required time period. Decisions may also be conditioned on approval by
other governmental agencies.
C. Mailing. A copy of the decision shall be mailed by the Board within 10
days of the date of decision to the applicant or, if represented, then to
his/her attorney, without separate charge. A copy of the decision shall
also be mailed to all persons who request it and who have paid the
prescribed fee. A copy of the decision shall also be filed in the office of
the administrative officer, who shall make a copy of such filed decision
available for public inspection during his/her office hours and a copy
available to any interested party upon payment of a fee, calculated in
the same manner as those established for copies of the other public
documents in the Borough.
D. Publication. A brief notice of every final decision on an application for a
variance or development shall be published in the official newspaper of
the Borough. Such publication shall be arranged by and be the
responsibility of the applicant. Notice shall be sent to the official
newspaper for publication within 10 days of the date of any such
decision. The applicant shall file an affidavit of publication with the
Planning Board on the application for development. [Amended at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
E. Time for appeal. The period of time in which an appeal of the decision
may be made shall run from the date of publication of the decision.
89.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 e seq.
§ 120-4.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-4.12
1:375
to grant or deny approval. The following provisions shall apply to
memorializing resolutions:
§ 120-4.13. Mailing, filing and publication of decisions.
Following adoption of a resolution on a development application by the
Board, the resolution shall be mailed, filed and published as follows:
A. Only the members of the Board who voted for the action taken may vote
on the memorializing resolution, and the vote of a majority of such
members present at the meeting at which the resolution is presented
for adoption shall be sufficient to adopt the resolution. If only one
member who voted for the action attends the meeting at which the
resolution is presented for adoption, the resolution may be adopted
upon the vote of that member.
B. An action to deny, resulting from the failure of a motion to approve an
application, shall be memorialized by resolution as provided above,
with those members voting against the motion for approval being the
members eligible to vote on the memorializing resolution.
C. The vote of any memorializing resolution shall be deemed to be a
memorialization of the action of the Board; however, the date of the
adoption of the resolution shall constitute the date of the decision for
purposes of the mailings, filings and publications required by this Part
1.
D. If the Board fails to adopt a resolution or memorializing resolution as
hereinabove specified, any interested party may apply to the Superior
Court in a summary manner for an order compelling the Board to
reduce its findings and conclusions to writing within a stated time, and
the cost of the application, including attorney's fees, shall be assessed
against the Borough.
A. A copy of the decision shall be mailed by the Board within 10 days of the
date of decision to the applicant, or if represented to his attorney,
without separate charge. A copy of the decision shall also be mailed to
all persons who have requested it and who paid the fee prescribed by
the Board for such service.
B. A copy of the decision shall also be filed in the office of the Borough
Clerk, who shall make a copy of such filed decision available to any
interested party upon payment of a fee calculated in the same manner
as those established for copies of other public documents in the
municipality.
C. A brief notice of every final decision shall be published in the official
newspaper of the Borough. Such publication shall be arranged by the
Secretary of the Board and the applicant shall be obligated to pay for
the cost of such publication. Said notice shall be sent to the official
newspaper for publication within 10 days of the date of any such
decision.
§ 120-4.12 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-4.14
1:376
§ 120-4.14. Record of hearings.
The Board shall provide for the verbatim recording of the proceedings
by either stenographer, mechanical or electronic means. The Board shall
furnish a transcript, or duplicate recording in lieu thereof, on request to
any interested party at his/her expense at the actual cost of preparing the
transcript or duplicate recording. Transcript shall be certified in writing by
the transcriber to be accurate.90
90.Editor's Note: Original § 255-141, Minutes, which previously followed this section, was
repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II). See
§ 120-3.7F, Minutes.
§ 120-4.14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-4.14
1:377

ARTICLE 5
Procedures for Variance Applications, Appeals, Requests for
Interpretations or Other Special Questions
§ 120-5.1. Applications for variances or for issuance of certain
permits.
A. General. It is the intent of this section to set forth the procedures for
applications to the Board for variances and for the direction of the
issuance of certain permits as permitted by this chapter. In addition to
the procedures set forth in the following subsections for each type of
application, the procedures set forth for processing and review of site
plan and subdivision applications in this chapter shall apply, unless the
context clearly indicates otherwise or unless contrary to law, including
but not necessarily limited to the following:
(1) The filing procedures in Article 5;
(2) The procedures for filing simultaneous applications in this Part 1;
(3) The completeness review procedures in Articles 4 and 5;
(4) The general review procedures in Article 5;
(5) The conditional approval provisions in this Part 1;
(6) The provisions for extensions and tolling of approvals in this Part 1;
and
(7) The provisions for reservation of public areas, payment of taxes and
assessments, disclosure of ownership and binding nature of
approvals in Articles 5 and 6.
B. Review of existing nonconforming conditions in connection with
applications for variances or for the direction of the issuance of certain
permits. In reviewing applications for variances or for the direction of
the issuance of certain permits, the Board shall determine whether any
existing nonconforming conditions involving the subject property will
exacerbate, intensify, alter, affect or in some way result in a significant
impact on the proposed use, structure or land. If the Board finds that no
substantial impact or detriment will result, the Board shall so state in
its findings of fact in the resolution for the application, without the need
for such existing nonconforming conditions to meet the criteria
established by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34, 40:55D-36, 40:55D-51a and b and
40:55D-70c and d and this chapter for variances or exceptions. If the
Board finds that substantial impacts or detriments will result, however,
the application shall not be approved unless and until the applicant
agrees to mitigate or eliminate such impacts or detriments to the
maximum extent feasible. The above shall not be construed to alter the
review procedures nor the criteria for granting variances or exceptions
for violations proposed by the development or existing illegally on the
subject property.
§ 120-5.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-5.1
1:379
C. "C" variance applications. Subject to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
et seq., applications to the Board may be taken for relief from the
zoning regulations, Articles 20 through 33 of this chapter. The following
provisions shall apply to "C" variance applications:
(1) When subdivision, site plan or conditional use approval is required,
the developer may elect to submit a separate application with the
Board requesting approval of the variance and a subsequent
application for any such other required approval. Any separate
approval of the variance shall be conditioned upon the granting of
all required subsequent approvals by the Board.
(2) Any application pursuant to this section shall be required to submit
the information required by this chapter and shall be reviewed for
completeness in accordance with the procedures set forth in
Articles 4 and 5.
(3) A public hearing shall be held in accordance with the provisions for
hearings in Article 4.
(4) The applicant shall give public notice of the hearing in the manner
specified for development applications in Articles 4 and 5.
Affidavits of proof of service of notice shall be submitted at least
seven business days prior to the hearing.
(5) There must be a showing by the applicant and the Board must find
all of the following:
(a) By reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of a
specific piece of property, or by reason of exceptional
topographic conditions or physical features uniquely affecting
a specific piece of property, or by reason of an extraordinary
and exceptional situation uniquely affecting a specific piece of
property or the structures lawfully existing thereon, the strict
application of any regulation pursuant to Part 3 of this chapter
would result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties
to, or exceptional and undue hardship upon, the developer of
such property; [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
(b) In an application or appeal relating to a specific piece of
property, the purposes of this chapter would be advanced by a
deviation from the requirements of Part 3, Zoning, and the
benefits of the deviation would substantially outweigh any
detriment; provided, however, that the fact that a proposed use
is an inherently beneficial use shall not be dispositive of a
decision on a variance under this subsection, and provided that
no variance from those departures enumerated in § 120-2.7D
shall be granted under this subsection; and provided further
that the proposed development does not require approval by
the Board of a subdivision, site plan or conditional use, in
§ 120-5.1 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-5.1
1:380
conjunction with which the Board has power to review a
request for a variance pursuant to this Part 1; [Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. II)]
(c) The variance can be granted without substantial detriment to
the public good; and
(d) The grant of the variance will not substantially impair the
intent of the zone plan and zoning regulations.
(6) The Board shall render a decision not later than 120 days after the
date the application is certified to be complete pursuant to Article
5, or within such further time as may be consented to by the
applicant.
(7) The Board may refer an application pursuant to this section to any
appropriate person or agency for its report, provided that such
reference shall not extend the period of time within which the
Board shall act.
D. "D" variance applications. Subject to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
et seq., and in particular cases, applications to the Board may be taken
for relief from the zoning regulations, Articles 20 through 33 of this
chapter, involving "D" variance requests. A developer may file an
application for a "D" variance with the Board without prior application
to the Zoning Officer or Construction Official. The following provisions
shall apply to "D" variance applications:
(1) Any application pursuant to this subsection shall be required to
submit the information required by Articles 4 and 5, and shall be
reviewed for completeness in accordance with the procedures set
forth in Articles 4 and 5.
(2) A public hearing shall be held in accordance with the provisions for
hearings in Article 4.
(3) The applicant shall give public notice of the hearing in the manner
specified for development applications in Article 4 and 5. Affidavits
of proof of service of notice shall be submitted at least seven
business days prior to the hearing.
(4) In particular cases, for special reasons, the Board may grant a
variance to allow departure from regulations pursuant to Articles
20 through 33 of this chapter to permit:
(a) A use or principal structure in a district restricted against such
use or principal structure;
(b) An expansion of a nonconforming use;
(c) Deviation from a specification or standard pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-67 pertaining solely to a conditional use;
§ 120-5.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-5.1
1:381
(d) An increase in the permitted floor area ratio as defined in
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-4;
(e) An increase in the permitted density as defined in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-4, except as applied to the required lot area for a lot or
lots for detached one- or two-dwelling-unit buildings, which lot
or lots are either an isolated undersized lot or lots resulting
from a minor subdivision; or
(f) A height of a principal structure which exceeds by 10 feet or
10% the maximum height permitted in the zone for a principal
structure.
(5) A variance under this subsection shall be granted only by
affirmative vote of at least five members.
(6) If an applicant requests one or more variances but not a variance
for a purpose enumerated in this Part 1, the decision on the
requested variance or variances shall be rendered under this Part
1.
(7) No variance or other relief may be granted under the terms of this
Part 1, including a variance or other relief involving an inherently
beneficial use and/or special reasons, without a showing that such
variance or other relief can be granted without substantial
detriment to the public good and will not substantially impair the
intent and the purpose of the zone plan and this chapter.
(8) An application under this Part 1 may be referred to any appropriate
person or agency for its report, provided that such reference shall
not extend the period of time within which the Board shall act.
(9) The Board shall render a decision not later than 120 days after the
date the application is certified to be complete pursuant to Article
5, or within such further time as may be consented to by the
applicant.
E. Application for issuance of permits for areas on Official Map.
Applications to the Board may be taken for relief necessary to issue a
permit for any building or structure in the bed of any street or public
drainage way, flood control basin or public area reserved on the Official
Map. A developer may file an application for development with the
Board under this subsection without prior application to the
Construction Official. The following provisions shall apply to such
applications:
(1) When subdivision, site plan or conditional use approval is required,
the developer may submit an application with the Board requesting
direction for the issuance of a permit and a subsequent application
for any such other required approval. Any such separate direction
for the issuance of a permit shall be conditioned upon the granting
of all required subsequent approvals by the Board.
§ 120-5.1 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-5.1
1:382
(2) Any application pursuant to this subsection shall consist of a
completed application form and a map showing the property in
question and the location of the proposed building and/or structure
in relation to the bed of the mapped street or public drainage way,
flood control basin or public area reserved on the Official Map. The
following number of copies shall be submitted:
(a) One signed original application, and five copies of the map and
the application.
(b) In addition, fees required by Article 6 shall be submitted, as
well as proof of payment of taxes and assessments.
(3) An application pursuant to this subsection shall stay all
proceedings in the same manner as specified in this Part 1.
(4) A public hearing shall be held in accordance with the provisions for
a hearing set in Article 4.
(5) The applicant shall give public notice of the hearing in the manner
specified for development applications in Article 4 and 5. Affidavits
of proof of service of notice shall be submitted at least seven
business days prior to the hearing.
(6) There must be a showing by the applicant and the Board must find
that the subject property cannot yield a reasonable return to the
owner unless a building permit is granted.
(7) Any decision of the Board to direct the issuance of a permit
pursuant to this subsection shall be by an affirmative vote of a
majority of the full authorized membership of the Board and shall
be in accordance with terms and conditions which will as little as
practicable increase the cost of opening such street, or tend to
cause a minimum change of the Official Map, and the Board shall
impose reasonable requirements as a condition of granting the
permit so as to promote the health, morals, safety and general
welfare of the public.
(8) The Board shall render a decision not later than 120 days after the
date the application is certified to be complete pursuant to this
article or within such further time as may be consented to by the
applicant.
(9) The Board may refer an application pursuant to this subsection to
any appropriate person or agency for his/her/its report, provided
that such reference shall not extend the period of time within which
the Board shall act.
F. Application for permits for lot not abutting a street. Applications to the
Board may be taken for relief necessary to issue a permit for any
building or structure on a lot which does not abut a street giving access
to such building or structure. A developer may file an application for
§ 120-5.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-5.1
1:383
development with the Board under this subsection without prior
application to the Construction Official. The following provisions shall
apply to such applications:
(1) When subdivision, site plan or conditional use approval is required,
the developer may elect to submit an application with the Board
requesting direction for the issuance of a permit and a subsequent
application for any such other required approvals. The separate
direction for the issuance of a permit shall be conditioned upon the
granting of all required subsequent approvals by the Board.
(2) Any applicant, pursuant to this subsection, shall be required to
submit a completed application form and a map showing the
property in question and the manner by which access will be
provided to the building and/or structure, including the location of
the nearest street from which access may be obtained. The
following number of copies shall be submitted:
(a) One signed original application and five copies of the map and
the application.
(b) In addition, fees required by Article 6 shall be submitted as
well as proof of payment of taxes and assessments.
(3) A public hearing shall be held in accordance with the provisions for
hearings in Article 4.
(4) The applicant shall give public notice of the hearing in the manner
specified for development applications in Article 4 and 5. Affidavits
of proof of service of notice shall be submitted at least seven
business days prior to the hearing.
(5) There must be a showing by the applicant and the Board must find
that the refusal to issue a permit would entail practical difficulty or
hardship, or that the circumstances of the case do not require the
building or structure to be related to a street.
(6) Any decision of the Board to direct the issuance of a permit
pursuant to this subsection shall be in accordance with terms and
conditions which will provide adequate access for firefighting
equipment, ambulances and other emergency vehicles necessary
for the protection of health and safety and that will protect any
future street layout shown on the Official Map or on the circulation
plan element of the Borough Master Plan.
(7) The Board shall render a decision not later than 120 days after the
date the application is certified to be complete pursuant to Article
5, or within such further time as may be consented to by the
applicant.
(8) The Board may refer an application pursuant to this subsection to
any appropriate person or agency for its report, provided that such
§ 120-5.1 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-5.1
1:384
§ 120-5.2. Procedure for appeals, requests for interpretations or
other special questions.
reference shall not extend the period of time within which the
Board shall act.
A. General. It is the intent of this section to set forth the procedure for
appeals, interpretations and requests concerning special questions to
the Board as permitted by this chapter. In addition to the procedures
set forth in the following subsections for each type of application, the
procedures set forth for processing and review of site plan and
subdivision applications in this chapter shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates otherwise or unless contrary to law, including the
following:
(1) The filing procedures in this chapter;
(2) The procedures for filing simultaneous applications in this chapter;
(3) The completeness review procedures in Articles 4 and 5;
(4) The general review procedures in Articles 4 and 5;
(5) The conditional approval provisions in Articles 4 and 5;
(6) The default approval provisions in this chapter;
(7) The provisions for extensions and tolling approvals in this chapter;
and
(8) The provisions for reservation of public areas, payment of taxes and
assessments, disclosure of ownership and binding nature of
approvals in Articles 4, 5 and 6.
B. Resident homeowner’s review of Zoning Officer’s decision and appeals
alleging erroneous Zoning Officer’s decision for all other properties.
Appeals to the Board may be taken by an interested party when it is
alleged by the appellant that there is error in any order, requirement,
decision or refusal made by the Zoning Officer based on or made in the
enforcement of the zoning regulations of this chapter. The following
provisions shall apply to such appeals: [Amended 11-8-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-04]
(1) Appeals must be taken within 20 days of the decision of the Zoning
Officer.
(2) A notice of appeal shall be filed with the Zoning Officer, specifying
the grounds of the appeal. The Zoning Officer shall immediately
transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the record upon
which the action appealed from was taken.
(3) Upon proof of payment of taxes and assessments, the fee required
to appeal the Zoning Officer’s decision or interpretation is included
§ 120-5.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-5.2
1:385
in the schedule of fees. The fee for the review of the Zoning
Officer’s decision for the residence of a homeowner regarding
zoning regulations or interpretations is $250.
(4) An appeal to the Board shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of
the action in respect to which the decision appealed from was made
unless the Zoning Officer certifies to the Board, after the notice of
appeal shall have been filed with him or her, that by reason of facts
stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his/her opinion, cause
imminent peril to life or property. In such case proceedings shall
not be stayed other than by an order of the Superior Court upon
notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due
cause shown.
(5) A public hearing for a appeal before the Planning Board shall be
held in accordance with Article 4. The appellant shall give public
notice of the hearing in the manner specified for development
application in this chapter, provided that the parties entitled to
notice shall be limited to those specified in Article 4. If the appeal is
made by an interested party other than the owner of the property
which was the subject of the decision by the Zoning Officer, notice
shall also be sent to said property owner in addition to the parties
specified in Article 4. Affidavits of proof of service of notice shall be
submitted to the Planning Board’s Secretary no less than seven
days prior to the scheduled hearing.
(6) The Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify
the action, order, requirement, decision, interpretation or
determination appealed from, and to that end shall have all the
powers of the Zoning Officer.
(7) The Board shall render a decision not later than 120 days after the
date the appeal is taken from the Zoning Officer, or within such
further time as may be consented to by the applicant.
(8) The Board may refer an application pursuant to this subsection to
any appropriate person or agency for its report, provided that such
reference shall not extend the period of time within which the
Board shall act.
(9) The Zoning Officer shall not participate as a member of the Board
in the consideration of the appeal, including but not limited to the
deliberations and voting. Notwithstanding the foregoing sentence,
nothing shall prohibit the Zoning Officer from testifying at the
hearing.
(10) Reviews of the Zoning Officer’s decision as requested by a resident
homeowner for his/her dwelling shall occur at a public hearing
before the Planning Board and it shall occur at the next regularly
scheduled meeting. The review by the Planning Board shall be
placed on the agenda and published on the Borough’s website no
less than two full business days prior to the scheduled meeting.
§ 120-5.2 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-5.2
1:386
(11) The Planning Board's review of a resident homeowner’s application
for their dwelling based upon an erroneous decision of the Zoning
Officer shall result in one of the following decisions:
(a) Uphold the Zoning Officer’s decision without prejudice; or
(b) Reverse the Zoning Officer’s decision in whole or in part; or
(c) With the applicant’s consent on the record, the Board may
refer the matter to a Board professional for further comments
and recommendations. The Board professional shall provide
written comments and recommendations, as may be required,
at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning Board,
provided the applicant has provided $1,5000 to the Borough to
guarantee said review. No further application fee shall be
required of the applicant; or
(d) If the $1,500 is not deposited by the eleventh business day
after the meeting, the Zoning Officer’s decision shall be
deemed upheld and a resolution finding same shall be entered
by the Board.
C. Request for interpretation or other special questions. The Board shall
hear and decide requests for interpretation of the Zoning Map or zoning
regulations, or for decisions upon other special questions upon which
the Board is specifically authorized to pass by this chapter. The
following provisions shall apply to such requests:
(1) An application form shall be completed and shall be accompanied
by a specific written request which outlines that part of the Zoning
Map, zoning regulations or Official Map for which an interpretation
is sought, or outlines the special question that the Board is asked to
consider.
(2) One signed original and 15 copies of the application form and all
accompanying documentation shall be submitted to the Secretary
of the Board.
(3) Fees required by Article 6 shall be submitted with the request, as
well as proof of payment of taxes and assessments.
(4) A public hearing shall be held in accordance with the provisions for
hearings in Article 4.
(5) The applicant shall publish notice of the hearing on the request in
the official newspaper of the Borough, if there is one, or in the
newspaper of general circulation in the Borough. If the request for
interpretation or special question concerns a specific property, the
applicant shall also give public notice of the hearing in the manner
specified for development applications in Article 4, provided that
the parties entitled to notice shall be limited to those specified. If
the request is made by a person other than the owner of the
§ 120-5.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-5.2
1:387
§ 120-5.3. Appeals from final decision of Board.
Appeals in a "D" variance case may only be made to the Superior Court of
New Jersey in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal Land Use
Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 120-5.4. Appeal by public utilities.
If a public utility, as defined by N.J.S.A. 48:2-13, is aggrieved by the action
of a Borough agency through said agency's exercise of its powers under
this chapter or the Municipal Land Use Law91 with respect to any action
in which the public utility has an interest, an appeal to the Board of Public
Utilities of the State of New Jersey (BPU) may be taken pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-19.
§ 120-5.5. Protest requiring an enhanced vote.
A protest against any proposed amendment or revision of the zoning
regulations may be filed with the Borough Clerk, signed by the owners of
20% or more either of the area of the lots or land included in such proposed
change, or of the lots or land extending 200 feet in all directions from
there, inclusive of street space, whether within or without the Borough.
Such amendment or revision shall not become effective following the filing
of such protest, except by the favorable vote of 2/3 of all the members of the
Borough Council.
§ 120-5.6. Completeness of application; checklist.
specific property which is the concern of the interpretation or
special question, notice shall also be sent to said property owner,
in addition to the parties specified in Article 4. Affidavits of proof
of service of notice shall be submitted at least seven business days
prior to the hearing.
(6) The Board may refer an application pursuant to this subsection to
any appropriate person or agency for its report.
A. Authority. This section is adopted pursuant to the authority granted to
the Borough under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.3.
B. Applicability. This checklist shall apply to all applications for
development in all zones within the Borough.
C. Determination of completeness; no bearing on merits. A determination
of completeness, pursuant to the terms and conditions hereof, is in no
way to be interpreted or understood as an evaluation of the adequacy or
acceptability of the information submitted and shall not be construed as
diminishing the applicant's obligation to prove in the application
process that he/she is entitled to approval of the application.
91.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 120-5.2 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-5.6
1:388
D. Additional information. The Planning Board may subsequently require
correction of any information found to be in error and submission of any
additional information not specified in this Part 1 or any other
ordinance of the Borough, or any revisions thereof, as is or may be
reasonably necessary to make an informed decision as to whether the
requirements necessary for approval of the application for development
have been met. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
E. Checklist. For the purposes of determining that an application for any
development within the Borough is complete, pursuant to the terms of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.3, an applicant shall be required to furnish the
following information, documents and fees:
(1) A completed application form, as supplied by the Secretary of the
Board, containing full and complete responses and answers to all
requirements and questions contained thereon.
(2) All required fees and charges pursuant to a schedule of fees to be
supplied to the applicant by the Secretary of the Board.
(3) Certificate of Tax Collector that taxes have been paid.
(4) An appropriate sketch plat, subdivision map or site plan, prepared
in accordance with the terms and conditions of the appropriate
Borough ordinances as follows:
(a) Subdivisions, minor and major; preliminary and final. Any
application for a minor subdivision or a major subdivision,
either preliminary or final, presented to the Planning Board
shall comply with all of the terms and conditions of Part 2,
Subdivision and Site Plan Review, and subsequent
amendments thereto and, if necessary, all of the terms and
conditions of Article 17, General Design Standards, and all of
the terms and conditions of any other applicable ordinance of
the Borough.
(b) Site plans, preliminary and final. Any application for a
preliminary or final site plan presented to the Planning Board
shall comply with all of the terms and conditions of Part 2,
Subdivision and Site Plan Review, dealing with site plans, and
amendments thereto, and all of the terms and conditions of any
other applicable ordinance of the Borough.
(c) Variances; use variances; conditional uses. All applications for
variances, use variances and/or conditional uses shall comply
with the various and miscellaneous sections of Part 3, Zoning,
and amendments thereto, as may be required, depending upon
the nature of the variance, use variance or conditional use
requested, and all of the terms and conditions of any other
applicable ordinance of the Borough.
§ 120-5.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-5.6
1:389
(d) Site plan or plan of survey. The site plan or plan of survey shall
contain an area map and shall include the following:
[1] Lot lines, with dimension.
[2] Tax block and lot numbers.
[3] Zoning district.
[4] Name of road or roads on which the property fronts.
[5] Easements, rights-of-way, if any, and zone boundaries.
[6] Location of streams, if any.
[7] Location of all existing buildings, if any, and of proposed
structures or changes showing front, rear and side yard
dimensions and distance from buildings to property lines.
[8] Building area allowed; draw lines showing required front,
rear and side yard setbacks.
[9] Location, arrangement and dimensions of parking area,
driveway, patios, etc.
[10] Names of adjoining property owners.
[11] Location of all buildings on all adjoining properties,
including setbacks. The area map may be copied from the
Tax Maps in the assessment office. It must show the
applicant's plot and the properties within 200 feet in
outline, including properties outside the Borough, where
necessary. It must indicate lot and block numbers on each
plot within the two-hundred-foot area within or without
the Borough.
F. Additional requirements. In addition to the above, any application for
development shall be subject to any rules and regulations as adopted,
from time to time, by the Planning Board, copies of which shall be
supplied to the applicant along with the application form.
G. Electronic filing. In addition to the above requirements, applicants are
encouraged to provide an electronic copy of the application after it has
been deemed complete. This copy may be used for distribution to Board
members. It may also be used for review purposes by members of the
public.
§ 120-5.6 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-5.6
1:390
ARTICLE 6
Fees, Deposits, Guarantees and Other Payments
§ 120-6.1. Filing fees for development applications.
§ 120-6.2. Schedule of fees.
There is hereby established in connection with the various applications
for development and other matters which are the subject of this chapter
the following schedule of fees. Every applicant for development shall file
with his/her application a filing fee as indicated in the following schedule.
Requests for more than one of the items listed below shall require the
payment of separate fees for each item, the sum of which shall be the total
fees to be paid. In the event a government record is requested, the fees shall
be as established in the Borough Code.
A. All filing fees for development applications as hereinafter required shall
be payable to the administrative officer at the time of filing the
application. All permits, determinations, resolutions or certifications of
approval are subject to the payment of all fees provided for in this
article, and no approvals shall be given by the Board until proof has
been submitted to it that the requisite fees have, in fact, been paid to
the administrative officer. Unless otherwise specified, the Zoning
Officer shall be the administrative officer.
B. Notwithstanding anything herein contained to the contrary in this
chapter, no disabled person, or a parent or sibling of a disabled person,
shall be charged any fee under this article related directly to any
application for development which permits accessibility to the disabled
person's own living unit.
C. For purposes of this section, a disabled person shall be as defined in
§ 120-1.4.
A. All "C" variances and exceptions, taken together as a group regardless
of number: single family uses, $380; other residential and commercial
uses, $750; industrial uses, $1,750.
B. Each "D" variance: $750.
C. Request for the issuance of permits for structures in areas reserved on
the Official Map or for lots not fronting upon a street: $150.
D. Review or appeal of a decision of the Zoning Officer regarding a
regulation and/or interpretation shall be $250. [Amended 11-8-2017
by Ord. No. 2017-04]
E. Interpretation of the zoning regulations, Zoning Map or Official Map:
$100.
F. Conditional use review: $750.
G. Informal review of concept plan: $100.
§ 120-6.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-6.2
1:391
H. Minor site plan: $250.
I. Minor subdivision: $250.
J. Preliminary major site plan: $1,250.
K. Final major site plan: $600.
L. Preliminary major subdivision: $1,250.
M. Final major subdivision: $600, plus $100 for each lot over two in the
proposed subdivision.
N. List of property owners within 200 feet of applicant's property from
current tax duplicates: a sum not to exceed $0.25 per name or $10,
whichever is greater (per N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12c). [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
O. Transcripts of Board hearings: as set forth in the Borough Code.
P. Building permits: as specified by the Uniform Construction Code, to be
paid to the Borough Construction Official.
Q. Certificates of occupancy: as specified by the Uniform Construction
Code, to be paid to the Borough Construction Official.
R. Duplicate copies of permits or certificates: as required by the Borough
Code.
S. For engineering inspection of site plans or subdivision plats submitted
for approval: $100 per hour of time spent by the Borough Engineer.
T. Mobile storage structure permit: $100 per permit per year. A permit
shall be obtained for each mobile storage structure by application to the
Zoning Officer who shall issue such permit if the mobile storage
structure satisfies the requirements of this chapter, recognizing it is the
intent of the Borough to prohibit all mobile storage structures, except
as otherwise set forth in the definition of "mobile storage structures" in
§ 120-1.4. The fee shall be paid annually at the time an application is
submitted. Should a mobile storage structure be replaced by another
such structure during the year for which a permit fee has already been
paid, no additional fee shall be exacted. Upon the permit's expiration,
the mobile storage structure shall be removed unless a new permit is
issued at least 30 days prior to the existing permit's expiration. No new
permit shall be issued for more than one additional year.
U. Signs: $100 for each commercial sign.
V. Mobile storage structures at construction sites. A permit is required for
use in excess of 48 hours of each mobile storage structure at a
construction site, at a charge of $50, which use and placement shall be
limited to a maximum period of six months. The permit may be
extended for up to a maximum of three additional six-month extensions
upon payment of an additional fee for each extension.
§ 120-6.2 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-6.2
1:392
§ 120-6.3. Payment for professional and other expert services.
W. Zoning approval for change in tenancy, i.e., approval of a site plan
waiver request: $150. [Amended 9-12-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-14]
X. Permit for the temporary use of a trailer for residency or business
during reconstruction as a result of an emergency, in compliance with
§ 120-22.2F(3): $300. [Amended 9-12-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-14]
Y. The fee for an outdoor storage container, for 30 days or portion thereof,
in compliance with § 120-22.4: $50 for each storage container.
[Amended 9-12-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-14]
Z. Clothing donation bins; see § 120-32.1. [Amended 9-12-2018 by Ord.
No. 2018-14]
(1) Permit for a clothing donation bin: $150.
(2) Renewal of a clothing donation bin permit: $100.
AA. Change to Tax Map: $150. [Added 8-14-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-09]
A. At the time of filing of an application for development, appeal, or other
matters pursuant to this chapter, the applicant shall pay to the Board
Secretary a deposit, in accordance with the schedule below, to be used
to reimburse the Borough for said professional services. Deposits shall
be placed in the Borough escrow account if required pursuant to this
chapter or the Municipal Land Use Law.92 In the case of proposals
requiring a combination of approvals, such as a subdivision, site plan
and/or variance(s), the applicant shall deposit an amount equal to the
sum of the deposits required for each application.
(1) The Chief Financial Officer of the Borough shall make all payments
to professionals for services rendered to the Borough or the Board
for review of applications for development, review and preparation
of documents, inspection of improvements or other purposes under
the provisions of the Municipal Land Use Law or this chapter. Such
payments shall be made pursuant to vouchers for charges,
described below.
(2) Notwithstanding the above, if the Board determines that
professional services are not required in order to process and
review the application, no deposit shall be required.
Notwithstanding such determination, the Board may, at any time
thereafter, determine that professional services are required and
require that the applicant provide a deposit to the Board within 10
days of the date thereof.
B. Schedule of escrow deposits. The initial deposit for payment of
professional services shall be as set forth on the following schedule,
92.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 120-6.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-6.3
1:393
provided that if the Board Secretary determines that a greater initial
deposit than indicated on the following schedule is necessary to
reimburse the anticipated cost of professional services on a particular
application, such as, but not limited to, circulation-intensive sites
requiring the services of a traffic engineering consultant, the applicant
shall be required to deposit said greater amount. All payments from
such deposits shall be made in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.2.
(1) Appeal for "C" variance:
(a) If part of site plan or subdivision: none.
(b) If not part of site plan or subdivision, or if bifurcated: $600 for
the first variance, $100 for each additional variance.
(2) Appeal for "D" variance: one- or two-family residential use: $600;
other residential use: $1,000; commercial/industrial use: $4,000 for
each variance.
(3) Request for the issuance of permits for structures in areas reserved
on the Official Map or for lots not fronting upon a street:
(a) If part of site plan or subdivision: none.
(b) If not part of site plan or subdivision, or if bifurcated: $2,000.
(4) Appeals of the decision of the Zoning Officer shall be $1,000 and
the Board shall not require an escrow deposit, nor shall the Board
professional be permitted to charge for any service for a review of
the Zoning Officer’s decisions with regard to resident homeowner’s
dwellings. [Amended 11-8-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-04]
(5) Interpretation of the zoning regulations, Zoning Map or Official
Map: $1,000.
(6) Conditional use review: $600.
(7) Informal review of concept plan: $1,000.
(8) Minor site plan: $500.
(9) Minor subdivision: $1,000 plus $250 per each lot.
(10) Preliminary major site plans: $1,000.
(11) Preliminary major subdivisions: $2,000 plus $150 per each lot.
(12) Final major site plans:
(a) If reviewed at same time as preliminary major site plan: none.
(b) If reviewed subsequent to preliminary major site plan: $1,000.
(13) Final major subdivisions: $1,000 per lot.
§ 120-6.3 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-6.3
1:394
C. Depletion of deposits. If an escrow account or deposit contains
insufficient funds, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4055D-53.1 et seq., to enable the
Borough or the Board to perform required application reviews or
inspections of improvements, the Chief Financial Officer shall provide
the applicant with a notice of the insufficient escrow or deposit balance.
In order for work to continue on the development or the application, the
applicant shall within a reasonable time period, not to exceed 10 days,
post a deposit to the account in an amount to be determined by the
Board. In the interim, any required health and safety inspections shall
be made and charged back against the replenishment of funds.
D. Failure to provide or maintain adequate deposit. No application shall be
deemed complete and no action shall be taken by the Board until the
initial deposit required by Subsection B above has been submitted. If
the funds required by Subsection B above for professional services are
not deposited in a timely manner, the Board Secretary shall notify the
Board. No further action shall be taken on the application unless the
deposits have been made by the applicant as required above. In the
event that a delay in the payment or maintenance of the required
deposits results in a substantial reduction in the available time for
action by the Board, or any extension thereof as provided by this
chapter, the Board may, at its discretion, dismiss the application.
E. Eligible charges against deposit. All professional charges for review of
an application for development, review and preparation of documents,
or inspection of improvements shall be reasonable and necessary, given
the status and progress of the application or construction. The
following provisions shall apply:
(1) Professional charges may include the services of a duly licensed
engineer, surveyor, planner, architect, landscape architect, court
reporter, traffic expert (can be unlicensed), attorney, realtor,
appraiser or other expert providing professional services and their
staff to ensure that an application complies with the standards set
forth in this chapter, and other experts whose testimony is in an
area of expertise introduced by any of the applicant's experts or in
areas where the Board requires further information, provided that
such charges shall not include time expended by the Zoning Officer.
(2) Application review and inspection charges shall be limited only to
professional charges for review of applications, review and
preparation of documents and inspections of developments under
construction and review by outside consultants when an
application is of a nature beyond the scope of the expertise of the
professionals normally utilized by the Borough. The charges shall
be for the following services:
(a) Reviews by professional personnel of applications and
accompanying documents;
§ 120-6.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-6.3
1:395
(b) Issuance of reports by professional personnel to the Board
setting forth recommendations;
(c) Charges for any telephone conferences or meetings requested
or initiated by the applicant, his or her attorney or any of his or
her experts or by the Board or any of its professionals;
(d) Review of documents submitted by the applicant not required
by this chapter and issuance of reports relating thereto;
(e) Review or preparation of easement documents, developer's
agreements, deeds or the like;
(f) Preparation for attendance at special meetings; and
(g) The preparation of resolutions, including without limitation
resolutions pertaining to an application concerning which the
resolution must contain a summary of two or more witnesses,
including experts, testifying on behalf of the applicant in order
for the resolution to contain adequate findings of fact and
conclusions based thereon pursuant to this chapter or the
Municipal Land Use Law.93
(3) Professional charges may also include the costs of expert advice
and/or testimony obtained by the Board for the purpose of
corroborating testimony of the applicant's experts, or providing a
separate review which the Board deems necessary to make an
informed decision, provided that:
(a) This provision shall not entitle the Borough to reimbursement
for the cost of expert advice and/or testimony at a regularly
scheduled meeting of the Board, when such advice and/or
testimony is provided in the expert's capacity as a full-time or
part-time Borough employee; and
(b) The Board shall give prior notice to the applicant of its
intention to obtain such additional expert advice or testimony
and afford the applicant an opportunity to be heard as to the
necessity for such additional advice or testimony and as to the
definition of the limitations on the nature and extent thereof.
F. Exceptions and limitations. The following limitations shall apply to the
charges for professional services:
(1) Review fees shall be charged only in connection with an application
for development presently pending before the Board, or review of
compliance with conditions of approval, or review of requests for
modification or amendment made by the applicant. A professional
shall not review items which are subject to approval by any state
governmental agency and not under Borough jurisdiction, except to
93.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 120-6.3 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-6.3
1:396
the extent consultation with a state agency is necessary due to the
effect of state approvals upon the subdivision or site plan.
(2) Inspection fees shall be charged only for actual work shown on a
subdivision or site plan required by an approving resolution.
Professionals shall make inspections of improvements that are
reasonably necessary to check the progress and quality of the
work, and such inspections shall be reasonably based on the
approved development plans and documents. [Amended at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
(3) The only costs that shall be added to any such charges shall be
actual out-of-pocket expenses of any such professionals or
consultants, including normal and typical expenses incurred in
processing applications and inspecting improvements.
(a) The Borough or Board shall not bill the applicant or charge any
escrow account or deposit authorized herein for any Borough
clerical or administrative functions, overhead expenses,
meeting room charges, or any other Borough costs and
expenses except as provided for in this section, nor shall a
Borough professional add any such charges to his or her bill.
(b) If the Borough retains a different professional or consultant in
the place of the professional originally responsible for
development application review, or inspection of
improvements, the Borough shall be responsible for all time
and expenses of the new professional to become familiar with
the application or the project, and the Borough or the Board
shall not bill the applicant or charge the deposit or the escrow
account for any such services.
G. Rates of payment for professional services. If the salary, staff support
and overhead for a professional are provided by the Borough, the
hourly rate charged to the deposit from said professional shall be at
200% of the sum of the products resulting from multiplying the hourly
base salary, which shall be established annually by ordinance, of each of
the professionals by the number of hours spent by the respective
professional upon review of the application for development or
inspection of the developer's improvements, as the case may be. For
other professionals, the charge shall be at the same rate as all other
work of the same nature by the professional for the Borough when fees
are not reimbursed or otherwise imposed on applicants or developers.
Rates for professional services shall be in accordance with a schedule
of professional fees filed annually with the Board Secretary and
maintained in the office of the Borough Clerk for public inspection.
H. Vouchers for payment of professional services. Each payment charged
to a deposit for the review of applications, review and preparation of
documents and inspection of improvements shall be pursuant to a
§ 120-6.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-6.3
1:397
voucher from the professional. The processing of vouchers shall be in
accordance with the following:
(1) The voucher shall describe the services provided, identify the
personnel performing the service, and for each date the services
are performed, the hours spent to one-quarter-hour increments,
the hourly rate and the expenses incurred.
(2) All professionals shall submit vouchers to the Chief Financial
Officer of the Borough on a monthly basis in accordance with the
schedules and procedures established by the Chief Financial
Officer of the Borough.
(3) If the services are provided by a Borough employee, the Borough
employee shall prepare and submit to the Chief Financial Officer of
the Borough a statement containing the same information as
required on a voucher, on a monthly basis.
(4) The professional shall send an informational copy of all vouchers or
statements submitted to the Chief Financial Officer simultaneously
to the applicant.
(5) The Chief Financial Officer shall prepare and send to the applicant
a statement which shall include an accounting of funds listing all
deposits, interest earnings, disbursements, and the cumulative
balance of the escrow account. This information shall be provided
on a quarterly basis, if monthly charges are $1,000 or less, or on a
monthly basis if monthly charges exceed $1,000.
I. Appeals of charges. An applicant shall notify in writing the governing
body, with copies to the Chief Financial Officer, the Board and the
professional, whenever the applicant disputes the charges made by a
professional for services rendered to the Borough in reviewing
applications for development, review and preparation of documents,
inspection of improvements, or other charges made pursuant to the
Municipal Land Use Law.94 The following shall apply:
(1) An applicant shall file an appeal within 45 days from receipt of the
information copy of the professional's voucher required by
Subsection H, except that if the professional has not supplied the
applicant with an informational copy of the voucher, then the
applicant shall file his or her appeal within 60 days from receipt of
the Borough statement of activity against the deposit or escrow
account required by this Part 1.
(2) The governing body or its designee(s) shall within a reasonable
time period attempt to mediate any disputed charges.
(3) If the matter is not resolved to the satisfaction of the applicant, the
applicant may appeal to the Union County Construction Board of
94.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 120-6.3 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-6.3
1:398
§ 120-6.4. Inspection fees; deposit required.
The developer shall reimburse the Borough for all reasonable inspection
fees paid to the Borough Engineer for the inspection of improvements
required pursuant to this chapter. Prior to the initiation of any construction
approved pursuant to this chapter, the developer shall deposit with the
Board Secretary sufficient funds to reimburse the Borough for inspection
fees paid to the Borough Engineer. The Borough Engineer shall not perform
any inspection if sufficient funds to pay for those inspections are not on
deposit. Deposits shall be as follows:
Appeals established under N.J.S.A. 52:27D-127. An applicant or his
or her authorized agent shall submit the appeal in writing to the
County Construction Board of Appeals. The applicant or his or her
authorized agent shall simultaneously send a copy of the appeal
to the Borough, the Board, and any professional whose charge is
the subject of the appeal. The procedures followed by the County
Construction Board of Appeals shall be as set forth in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.2b and c.
(4) An applicant may file an appeal for an ongoing series of charges by
a professional during a period not exceeding six months to
demonstrate that they represent a pattern of excessive or
inaccurate charges. An applicant making use of this provision need
not appeal each charge individually.
(5) During the pendency of any appeal, the Borough or approving
authority shall continue to process, hear, and decide the application
for development and to inspect the development in the normal
course, and shall not withhold, delay, or deny reviews, inspections,
signing of subdivision plats or site plans, the reduction or the
release of performance and maintenance guarantees, the issuance
of building permits or certificates of occupancy, or any other
approval or permit because an appeal has been filed or is pending
under this subsection. The Chief Financial Officer may pay charges
out of the appropriate escrow account or deposit for which an
appeal has been filed. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
(6) If a charge is disallowed after payment, the Chief Financial Officer
shall reimburse the deposit or escrow account in the amount of any
such disallowed charge or refund the amount to the applicant. If a
charge is disallowed after payment to a professional or consultant
who is not an employee of the Borough, the professional or
consultant shall reimburse the Borough in the amount of any such
disallowed charge.
A. The developer shall deposit for the inspection fees an amount with the
Borough not to exceed, except for extraordinary circumstances, the
greater of $500 or 5% of the cost of improvements, which cost shall be
determined pursuant to this chapter.
§ 120-6.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-6.4
1:399
§ 120-6.5. Performance and maintenance guarantees.
B. For those developments for which the reasonably anticipated inspection
fees are less than $10,000, inspection fee deposits may, at the option of
the developer, be paid in two installments. The initial amount deposited
by a developer shall be 50% of the reasonably anticipated inspection
fees. When the balance on deposit drops to 10% of the reasonable
anticipated inspection fees because the amount deposited by the
developer has been reduced by the amount paid to the Borough
Engineer for inspection, the developer shall deposit the remaining 50%
of the anticipated inspection fees.
C. For those developments for which the reasonably anticipated inspection
fees are $10,000 or greater, inspection fee deposits may, at the option of
the developer, be paid in four installments. The initial amount deposited
by a developer shall be 25% of the reasonably anticipated fees. When
the balance on deposit drops to 10% of the reasonably anticipated fees
because the amount deposited by the developer has been reduced by
the amount paid to the Borough Engineer for inspection, the developer
shall make additional deposits of 25% of the reasonably anticipated
fees.
D. Appeals of the amount required to be deposited for the payment of
inspection fees or the amount charged for the inspection of
improvements shall follow the procedures in § 120-6.3I.
A. Before recording of final subdivision plats or as a condition of final site
plan approval or as a condition to the issuance of a zoning approval
pursuant to this chapter, the Board may require and shall accept
performance and maintenance guarantees for the purpose of assuring
the installation and maintenance of on tract improvements. Such
performance and maintenance guarantees shall be in accordance with
the following standards:
(1) Performance guarantees. The following standards shall apply to the
administration of performance guarantees:
(a) Amount of performance guarantee. The performance
guarantee for the installation of those improvements required
shall be in favor of the Borough in an amount equal to 120% of
the cost of such improvements. The cost of said improvements
shall be determined by the Borough Engineer based on
documented construction costs for improvements prevailing in
the general area of the Borough. The Borough Engineer shall
prepare an itemized cost estimate of the improvements
covered by the performance guarantee, which estimate shall
be appended to each performance guarantee posted by the
obligor.
(b) Appeal of disputed performance guarantee amounts. The
developer may appeal the Borough Engineer's estimate of the
§ 120-6.4 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-6.5
1:400
cost of improvements for purposes of furnishing a performance
guarantee. Such appeal shall be made in accordance with the
procedures set forth in Part 3.
(2) Form of guarantee. At least 10% of the performance guarantee
shall be in the form of cash or a certified check made payable to the
Borough. The balance of the performance guarantee shall be in the
form of any security issued by an institution authorized to issue
such securities in the State of New Jersey and which may be
accepted by the Borough and approved by the Borough Attorney,
including but not limited to surety bonds, cash and letters of credit,
provided that the Borough shall only accept an irrevocable letter of
credit if it:
(a) Constitutes an unconditional payment obligation of the issuer
running solely to the Borough for an express initial period of
time of at least one year but not more than two years from the
date of final approval;
(b) Is in the amount determined by the Borough Engineer or the
governing body, as applicable, as provided herein, less the
amount of any other forms of guarantee furnished;
(c) Is issued by a banking or savings institution authorized to do
and doing business in the State of New Jersey; and
(d) Permits the Borough to draw upon the letter of credit if the
obligor fails to furnish another letter of credit which complies
with the provisions of this section 30 days or more in advance
of the expiration date of the letter of credit or such longer
period in advance thereof as is stated in the letter of credit.
(3) Time allowed for completion of improvements. The performance
guarantee shall state the time period within which all
improvements are to be installed by the developer. No performance
guarantee shall run for a term longer than two years, except as
provided otherwise by this chapter.
(4) Extension of time allowed for completion of improvements. The
time allowed for installation of the improvements for which the
performance guarantee has been provided may be extended by the
governing body by resolution. As a condition or as part of any such
extension, the amount of any performance guarantee shall be
increased or reduced, as the case may be, to an amount not to
exceed 120% of the cost of the installation at the time of the
resolution. The cost of the installation shall be determined by the
Borough Engineer as provided herein for the initial cost
determination.
(5) Failure to complete improvements within time specified. If the
required improvements are not completed or corrected in
accordance with the performance guarantee, the obligor and
§ 120-6.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-6.5
1:401
surety, if any, shall be liable thereon to the Borough for the
reasonable cost of the improvement not completed or corrected.
The Borough may, either prior to or after receipt of the proceeds
thereof, complete such improvements or use said funds to restore
the property to a safe condition so that the subject property in its
unfinished development state does not adversely affect the public
safety or adversely impact the environment. Such completion or
correction of improvements shall be subject to the public bidding
requirements of the Local Public Contracts Law.95
(6) Release of performance guarantee. Release of performance
guarantees shall be in accordance with the following procedure:
(a) Upon substantial completion of all required street
improvements (except for the top course) and appurtenant
utility improvements, and the connection of same to the public
system, the obligor may request of the governing body that the
Borough Engineer prepare a list of all uncompleted or
unsatisfactorily completed improvements. The request to the
Mayor and Council shall be made in writing by certified mail
addressed to the Borough Clerk, with a copy of the request to
be sent to the Borough Engineer. The request shall indicate
which improvements have been completed and which
improvements remain uncompleted in the judgment of the
obligor.
(b) Upon receiving the obligor's request, the Borough Engineer
shall inspect all improvements covered by the obligor's request
and shall file a detailed list and report, in writing, to the
governing body, and shall simultaneously send a copy thereof
to the obligor not later than 45 days after receipt of the
obligor's request.
(c) The detailed list prepared by the Borough Engineer shall be in
accordance with the itemized cost estimate prepared by the
Borough Engineer, which estimate shall have been appended
to the performance guarantee as required herein. The list
prepared by the Borough Engineer shall state, in detail, with
respect to each improvement determined to be incomplete or
unsatisfactory, the nature and extent of the incompleteness of
each incomplete improvement or the nature and extent of, and
remedy for, the unsatisfactory state of each completed
improvement determined to be unsatisfactory.
(d) The report prepared by the Borough Engineer shall identify
each improvement determined to be complete and satisfactory
together with a recommendation as to the amount of reduction
to be made in the performance guarantee relating to the
completed and satisfactory improvement. The recommended
95.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.
§ 120-6.5 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-6.5
1:402
reduction shall be in accordance with the itemized cost
estimate prepared by the Borough Engineer, which cost
estimate shall have been appended to the performance
guarantee as required herein.
(e) The governing body, by resolution, shall either approve the
improvements determined to be complete and satisfactory by
the Borough Engineer or reject any or all of these
improvements. The cause for any rejection shall be stated in
the resolution. If any portion of the required improvements is
rejected, the approving authority may require the obligor to
complete or correct such improvements and, upon completion
or correction, the same procedure of notification as required
herein shall be followed.
(f) For accepted improvements, the governing body shall approve
and authorize the amount of reduction to be made in the
performance guarantee relating to the improvements
accepted. Any authorized reduction shall be in accordance
with itemized cost estimate prepared by the Borough Engineer,
which cost estimate shall have been appended to the
performance guarantee as required herein. The resolution
shall be adopted not later than 45 days after receipt of the list
and report prepared by the Borough Engineer.
(g) Any partial reduction granted in the performance guarantee as
provided shall be applied to the cash deposit in the same
proportion as the original cash deposit bears to the full amount
of the performance guarantee.
(7) Failure of the Borough Engineer or the governing body to act.
(a) If the Borough Engineer or the governing body fails to act on
the request for release of a performance guarantee within the
time required, the obligor may apply to the court in the manner
provided below, provided that nothing herein shall be
construed to limit the right of the obligor to contest by legal
proceedings any determination of the governing body or the
Borough Engineer.
(b) If the Borough Engineer fails to send or provide the list and
report as requested by the obligor as required herein within 45
days from receipt of the request, the obligor may apply to the
court in a summary manner for an order compelling the
Borough Engineer to provide the list and report within a stated
time. The cost of applying to the court, including reasonable
attorney's fees, may be awarded to the prevailing party.
(c) If the governing body fails to approve or reject the
improvements determined by the Borough Engineer to be
complete and satisfactory or reduce the performance
guarantee for the complete and satisfactory improvements
§ 120-6.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-6.5
1:403
§ 120-6.6. Administration of deposits and escrows.
Deposits received for professional services employed by the Borough to
review applications for development, for Borough inspections fees in
within 45 days from the receipt of the Borough Engineer's
report, the obligor may apply to the court in a summary
manner for an order compelling, within a stated time, approval
of the complete and satisfactory improvements and approval
of a reduction in the performance guarantee for the approvals
complete and satisfactory improvements in accordance with
the itemized cost estimate prepared by the Borough Engineer,
which cost estimate shall have been appended to the
performance guarantee as required herein. The cost of
applying to the court, including reasonable attorney's fees,
may be awarded to the prevailing party.
B. Maintenance guarantee. After final acceptance of required
improvements, a maintenance guarantee shall be required to be posted
with the Borough. Except as specifically provided otherwise below,
maintenance guarantees shall be administered in the same manner as
performance guarantees, as provided by this chapter.
(1) Amount of maintenance guarantee. The maintenance guarantee
shall be in favor of the Borough in an amount equal to 10% of the
cost of such improvements. The cost of said improvements shall be
determined by the Borough Engineer in the same manner as
provided herein for performance guarantees.
(2) Form of guarantee. The maintenance guarantee shall be in the form
accepted by the Borough and approved by the Borough Attorney,
including but not limited to surety bonds, cash and/or letter of
credit; provided that acceptance of irrevocable letters of credit
shall be subject to the same conditions as provided herein for
performance guarantees.
(3) Time required for maintenance guarantee. The maintenance
guarantee shall be required to run for a period of two years after
final acceptance, which shall be stated in the guarantee.
C. Exception for improvements related to other jurisdictions. In the event
that other governmental agencies or public utilities automatically will
own the utilities to be installed or the improvements are covered by a
performance or maintenance guarantee to another governmental
agency, no performance or maintenance guarantee, as the case may be,
shall be required by the Borough for such utilities or improvements.
D. Final approval by stages or sections of development. In the event that
final approval is by stages or sections of development as provided by
this article, the provisions of this section shall be applied by stage or
section of development.
§ 120-6.5 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-6.6
1:404
accordance with this article, or to satisfy the guarantee requirements of this
article shall be administered in accordance with the following procedures:
§ 120-6.7. Payment of fees required prior to approval.
No subdivision plat or deed or site plan shall be signed, nor shall any zoning
approval, building permit, certificate of occupancy or any other type of
permit be issued with respect to any approval application for development
until:
A. Collection, processing and maintenance of deposits. All funds shall be
collected by the Board Secretary. The Secretary of the Board shall
maintain account records, process invoices, etc. for the Board. The
actual escrow deposit shall be maintained by the Borough Chief
Financial Officer (CFO).
B. Deposits to be held in escrow. Whenever an amount of money shall be
deposited by an applicant with the Borough, the money, until repaid or
applied to the purposes for which it is deposited, including the
applicant's portion of the interest earned thereon, except as otherwise
provided in this article, shall continue to be the property of the
applicant and shall be held in trust by the Borough. Deposits received
pursuant to this article shall be held in escrow and deposited in a
banking institution or savings and loan association in New Jersey
insured by an agency of the federal government, or any other fund or
depository approved for such deposits by the State of New Jersey. Such
deposits shall be placed in an account bearing interest at the maximum
rate currently paid by the institution or depository on time or savings
deposits. The Borough shall notify the applicant in writing of the name
and address of the institution or depository in which the deposit is made
and the amount of deposit.
C. Refund of deposits; interest. Any of the funds remaining in the deposit,
excluding interest, upon completion of the purpose for which the
deposit was made shall be returned to the applicant and the account
shall be terminated. For deposits over $5,000 placed in an interest
bearing account pursuant to this article, refunds of interest shall be
made as follows:
(1) The Borough shall not be required to refund an amount of interest
paid on a deposit which does not exceed $100 for the year.
(2) If the amount of interest exceeds $100 for the year, that entire
amount shall belong to the applicant and shall be refunded to him
or her by the Borough annually or at the time the deposit is repaid
or applied to the purposes for which it was deposited, as the case
may be, except that the Borough may retain for administrative
expenses a sum equivalent to no more than 1/3 of that entire
amount, which shall be in lieu of all other administrative and
custodial expenses.
§ 120-6.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-6.7
1:405
A. All applicable fees have been paid.
B. All bills for reimbursable services have been received by the Borough
from professional personnel rendering services in connection with such
application, and the payment of such bills has been approved by the
Borough.
C. The applicant has reimbursed the Borough for the excess of all bills for
professional services over the escrow amount otherwise herein
provided for.
§ 120-6.7 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-6.7
1:406
ARTICLE 7
Administration and Enforcement
§ 120-7.1. Interpretation of zoning provisions.
In interpreting and applying Part 3, Zoning, the requirements contained
herein and therein are declared to be the minimum requirements for the
protection of the health, safety and general welfare of the public and for the
preservation and improvement of the value and aesthetics of the land.
§ 120-7.2. Enforcement.
A. Grant of authority; responsibility. The administrative officer is hereby
authorized to and shall administer and enforce the provisions of this
Part 1.
B. Issuance of permits and certificates. In no case shall a building permit
or certificate of occupancy be issued by the Construction Official for
any construction, erection, alteration or use of any building, other
structure, lot or area of land that would be in violation of any provision
of this Part 1.
C. Inspection of premises. The Construction Official or his/her duly
authorized agent and, in the case of excavations for or demolition of
commercial properties, the Health Officer shall have the right to enter
and inspect any building, other structure, lot or area of land at all
reasonable times, whether already constructed, erected, altered or put
into use, or during the course of construction, erection, alteration,
excavation, demolition or putting into use, for the purpose of
determining whether or not the provisions of Part 3, Zoning, are being
complied with.
D. Records and reports. The Construction Official shall keep a record of all
applications for building permits and certificates of occupancy and a
record of all permits issued, together with all notations of all special
conditions involved. The Construction Official shall file and safely keep
copies of all plans submitted, and the same shall form a part of the
records of his/her office and shall be available for the use of the
Borough Council, the Planning Board and other officials of the Borough.
The Construction Official shall prepare a monthly report for the
Borough Council summarizing, for the period since his/her last previous
report, all permits issued and all complaints of violations and the action
taken by him/her consequent thereon. A copy of each such report shall
be filed with the Borough Tax Assessor at the same time it is filed with
the Borough Council.
E. Cases of doubt. Should the administrative officer be in doubt as to the
meaning or intent of any provision of Part 3, Zoning, as to the location
of a district boundary line on the Zoning Map, or as to the propriety of
issuing any permit in a particular case, he/she shall appeal the matter
to the Planning Board for interpretation and decision. Any proposed use
§ 120-7.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-7.2
1:407
which is not clearly identified in Part 3, Zoning, as being a permitted
use in a district shall be prohibited, subject to clarification by the
Planning Board, and no permit shall be issued by the administrative
officer authorizing the proposed use.
§ 120-7.2 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-7.2
1:408
Part 2
Subdivision And Site Plan Review
ARTICLE 8
General Provisions
§ 120-8.1. Short title. [Amended 9-12-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-14]
This Part 2 shall be known and may be cited as the "Subdivision and Site
Plan Review Ordinance of the Borough of Kenilworth."
§ 120-8.2. Purpose.
A. The purpose of this Part 2 shall be to provide rules, regulations and
standards to guide land subdivision and site plan review in the Borough
in order to promote the public health, safety, convenience and general
welfare of the Borough.
B. This Part 2 adopts all of the applicable mandatory provisions of the
Municipal Land Use Law of 1975, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
C. This Part 2 shall be administered to ensure the orderly growth and
development of the community, with emphasis on the protection and
proper use of land, and to provide adequate provisions for circulation,
utilities and services. The conservation of land through the preservation
of trees, natural vegetative areas and appropriate landscaping will
enhance soil stability and will improve water quality.
§ 120-8.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-8.2
1:409

ARTICLE 9
Administrative Procedures
§ 120-9.1. Zoning permits.
A. Applicability. A zoning permit shall be required to be approved by the
Zoning Officer prior to the commencement of any of the following:
(1) The use or additional use or expansion of use of any land, structure
or building, whether improved or unimproved, for any purpose.
(2) The erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion
or installation of any structure or building, including signs and
fences.
(3) The occupancy or use or the change of occupancy or use of any
land, structure or building.
B. Denial. If a zoning permit is denied by the Zoning Officer, an applicant
may do one of the following:
(1) Modify the proposed use or development so that it complies with all
applicable provisions of this Part 2, if possible, and reapply for
zoning permit approval.
(2) File the appropriate application for interpretation, appeal,
development and/or relief, pursuant to Subsection D.
(3) Take no action towards the commencement of the proposed use or
development.
C. Exemptions.
(1) All applications which involve a change in tenancy, but not a
change in use, as herein defined, and/or minor alterations to the
site or to one or more of the building elevations shall not be
required to obtain site plan approval. The Zoning Officer shall issue
a zoning permit. If the Zoning Officer desires further consultation,
the Borough Planner and/or Borough Engineer may be consulted to
verify and confirm that no variances are required and that the
signage, site improvements and/or facade changes conform to
applicable Borough standards. [Amended 9-12-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-14; 7-10-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-08]
(a) A change of use from one permitted commercial use to another
permitted commercial use in the B-D Boulevard Downtown
Zone shall be exempt from site plan approval, provided that the
gross square footage of the proposed establishment is equal to
or less than 1,200 square feet and that all required parking is
provided. Restaurants are not eligible for this exemption.
[Added 9-12-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-15]
§ 120-9.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-9.1
1:411
§ 120-9.2. Administration.
(2) An applicant may request an exemption upon application for a
zoning permit by submitting a statement setting forth reasons for
the exemption and providing sufficient plan information for the
Zoning Officer to verify that the exemptions can be granted.
(3) The applicant shall pay a fee for the exemption review in an amount
established by ordinance from time to time.
D. Application for development filing procedure.
(1) Submission. The applicant shall submit to the Board Secretary the
specified number of copies of the following items:
(a) Five copies of the completed application for development form,
development plans and other documents related to the
application.
(b) Five copies of the applicable completed application checklist.
(c) Five copies of any requests for waivers.
(d) A check payable to the Borough of Kenilworth for the
appropriate application fee.
(2) Administrative review. Upon submission of an application for
development in compliance with Subsection D(1), the Secretary
shall forward one copy of all submitted items to the administrative
officer, who shall act as the duly constituted administrative officer
in reviewing the application for compliance and appropriate action.
A. Authority of Board. The provisions of this Part 2 shall be administered
by the Borough Planning Board in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et
seq.
B. Scope of regulations. These rules, regulations and standards
established by this Part 2 shall be considered the minimum
requirements for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare
of the citizens of the Borough.
C. Matters to be considered by Board. Any action taken by the Board
under the terms of this Part 2 shall give primary consideration to the
matters mentioned above and to the welfare of the entire community.
D. Exceptions. If the developer can clearly demonstrate that, because of
peculiar conditions pertaining to his/her land, the literal enforcement of
one or more of these regulations is impracticable or will exact undue
hardship, the Board may permit such exception as may be reasonable
and within the general purpose and intent of the rules, regulations and
standards established by this Part 2 and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-51.
§ 120-9.1 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-9.3
1:412
§ 120-9.3. Transfer of land prior to final approval.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-55, no person, as owner or agent, shall transfer,
sell or agree to sell, except pursuant to an agreement expressly conditioned
upon final subdivision approval, any land which forms a part of a subdivision
on which the Planning Board is required to act before final approval has
been obtained.
§ 120-9.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-9.3
1:413

ARTICLE 10
Minor Subdivisions
§ 120-10.1. Application; fee.
§ 120-10.2. Classification; approval.
If the subdivision is classified as a minor subdivision and requires no
variances or waivers, and no cause is found for review by the entire Board
or for unfavorable action upon the subdivision, such finding shall be
reported to the Board by the administrative officer. The Borough Planner
and Borough Engineer shall review the application and make reasonable
conditions. The administrative officer shall then forward the reviewed
application as revised to the Board. In such event, the Board is hereby
empowered, as provided for in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-47, to waive the
requirements for full notice and hearing, and thereupon, such finding shall
be deemed to be a favorable approval by a vote of the Board; no further
approval shall be required, and the plat shall be signed by the Chairperson
of the Board and the Board Secretary and returned to the developer within
45 days of the date of submission of a completed application. Should the
Board deny the application, the applicant may appeal that decision to the
Board in a noticed public hearing.
§ 120-10.3. Filing of plat; expiration of approval. [Amended at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
A. Before any minor subdivision of land takes place, an application shall be
submitted and approved. The application shall be submitted to the
administrative officer in the appropriate form provided by the Board.
The number and type of copies of the application form and maps shall
be as specified in the application form, as prepared, approved and from
time to time revised by the Planning Board. The applicant shall
simultaneously apply to the County Planning Board for a review under
the land development standards of the county.
B. An application fee, as set forth in Article 6, shall be submitted at the
time application is made.
A. Approval of a minor subdivision shall expire 190 days from the date of
Borough approval unless, within such period, a plat in conformity with
such approval and the provisions of the Map Filing Law, N.J.S.A.
46:26B-1 et seq., or a deed clearly describing the approved minor
subdivision is filed by the developer with the county recording officer,
the Borough Engineer and the Borough Tax Assessor. Any such plat or
deed accepted for such filing shall have been signed by the Chairperson
and Secretary of the Planning Board.
B. The developer shall furnish the Borough Engineer a filed map, showing
the date of filing and the county filing information, and an electronic
copy in a form acceptable to the Borough Engineer.
§ 120-10.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-10.4
1:415
§ 120-10.4. Change of conditions of approval.
The zoning requirements and general terms and conditions, whether
conditional or otherwise, upon which minor subdivision approval is granted
shall not be changed for a period of two years after the date of minor
subdivision approval, provided that the approved minor subdivision shall
have been duly recorded as provided in this Part 2.
§ 120-10.4 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-10.4
1:416
ARTICLE 11
Major Subdivisions
§ 120-11.1. Preliminary approval.
A. Application; fee.
(1) Before any major subdivision of land takes place, an application
shall be submitted and approved. The application shall be
submitted to the Secretary of the Board, on the appropriate form
provided by the Board, with the appropriate copies of a preliminary
plat of the proposed subdivision. The number and type of copies of
the application form and maps shall be as specified in the
procedure manual for subdivisions, as prepared, approved and
from time to time revised by the Planning Board.
(2) An application fee as set forth in Article 6 shall be submitted with
the application.
B. Revision; amendment.
(1) Following the public hearing and prior to adoption of a resolution of
approval or disapproval of a subdivision application, the developer
may request and the Board may grant permission to revise the
preliminary plat.
(2) The Board shall also have the discretion to permit the applicant to
submit an amendment application in appropriate instances.
C. Action by Borough Engineer. Prior to consideration of the application by
the Board, the Borough Engineer shall examine the preliminary plans
for conformance with the engineering requirements of the Borough.
The Borough Engineer shall submit his/her comments to the Board
prior to the date set for consideration of the application by the Board.
D. Approval.
(1) Notation. Where the Board acts favorably on an application, the
Chairperson and the Secretary of the Board shall affix their
signatures to the plat, with a notation that it has now received
approval, and it shall be returned to the developer for compliance
with final approval requirements.
(2) Effect. Approval of the preliminary plat shall constitute approval of
the subdivision as to form only; that is, as to the arrangement and
approximate dimensions of streets, lots and other planned features.
(3) Rights of applicant. Preliminary approval shall confer upon the
applicant the following rights for a three-year period from the date
of approval:
(a) That the general terms and conditions under which the
approval was granted will not be changed.
§ 120-11.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-11.1
1:417
§ 120-11.2. Final approval.
(b) That the applicant may submit, on or before the expiration
date, the whole or part of the plat for final approval.
A. Application; informal meeting; fee.
(1) An applicant for the subdivision of land shall submit to the
Secretary of the Board an application, on the appropriate form
provided by the Board, and appropriate copies of a final plat of the
proposed subdivision. The number and type of copies of the
application form and map shall be as specified in the application
form, as prepared, approved and from time to time revised by the
Planning Board.
(2) An application fee as set forth in Article 6 shall be submitted at the
time of application.
B. Requirements. Before submission of the final subdivision plat, the
following improvements must be installed, or bonded to the Borough, in
accordance with the requirements of the Planning Board, Borough
Engineer, ordinances of the Borough and conditions of preliminary
subdivision approval applicable thereto: [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
(1) Street grading.
(2) Road subbase and road base, all required pavement courses.
(3) Gutters.
(4) Curbs.
(5) Water mains.
(6) Culverts.
(7) Storm sewers.
(8) Sanitary sewers, including lateral connections to an area beyond
the roadway curbline.
(9) Drainage structures and stormwater detention facilities.
C. Board action.
(1) The Board shall act to approve or disapprove the plat submitted for
final approval with revisions, if any, within 45 days after it is
submitted. The action of the County Planning Board, if any, shall be
noted on the plat, and, if disapproved, a copy of the plat and the
reasons for disapproval shall be returned to the applicant/
developer.
§ 120-11.1 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-11.2
1:418
(2) If the Board approves the final plat, a notation to that effect shall be
made on each plat and shall be signed by the Chairperson of the
Board and the Board Secretary.
D. Filing; expiration of approval. Upon final approval, copies of the final
plat, signed by the Chairperson and the Secretary of the Board, shall be
filed by the applicant with the County Recording Officer and the County
Planning Board. If the plat has not been filed with the County Recording
Officer within 95 days from the date of signing, the approval shall
expire. The Board, for good cause shown, may extend this period to no
more than 190 days from the date of the signing of the plat.
§ 120-11.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-11.2
1:419

ARTICLE 12
Minor Site Plans
§ 120-12.1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to supplement the site plan review process by
the addition of a category referred to as a "minor site plan." Minor site plans
accommodate inconsequential changes to an existing site, which may be
permitted without a full site plan review in order to facilitate development
within the Borough.
§ 120-12.2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MINOR SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots which:
§ 120-12.3. Waiver of formal notice and public hearing
requirements. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
The Planning Board shall waive formal notice and public hearing
requirements for development if the Planning Board finds that the
application for development conforms to the definition of a "minor site plan"
as set forth herein.
Is limited to the following where no new variances are required:
(1) Freestanding sign;
(2) Alteration of a facade of the building;
Increase or decrease in floor area (either gross or habitable) of less
than 500 square feet;
(3)
Addition of a permitted accessory building, structure or use no
larger than 500 square feet in floor area;
(4)
(5) Modification of utilization not involving any of the above; or
Change from one conforming use to another conforming use, or one
office use to another office use, for which there is no other variance
required;
(6)
A.
Does not involve planned development, any new street or extension of
any off-tract improvement which is to be prorated pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-42; and
B.
Contains the information reasonably required in order to make an
informed determination as to whether the requirements established by
this chapter for approval of a minor site plan have been met.
C.
§ 120-12.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-12.4
1:421
§ 120-12.4. Application.
§ 120-12.5. Review of application.
Upon receipt of the requested escrow fees, the minor site plan application
shall be reviewed by one or more of the following Borough officials: Building
Inspector, Zoning Officer, Borough Planner, Borough Engineer, Fire Chief,
Police Chief, and/or Health Officer. Once deemed complete, the application
shall be forwarded to the Planning Board for review and action.
§ 120-12.6. Additional requirements.
Minor site plan applications shall be approved and permits issued subject
to receipt of applicable outside agency approvals and/or permits and the
establishment of applicable performance guarantees and payment of
inspection fees.
§ 120-12.7. Decision by Board. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
Minor site plan applications shall be granted or denied within 45 days of
the date of submission of a complete application to the Secretary of the
Board or within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant.
Failure of the Planning Board to act within the prescribed time period shall
constitute minor site plan approval. A public hearing is not required for a
minor site plan application.
§ 120-12.8. Final approval. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
Minor site plan approval shall be deemed to be final approval of the site plan
application by the Planning Board, provided that the Board or subcommittee
may condition such approval on terms ensuring the provision of
improvements pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-38, 40:55D-39, 40:55D-41 and
40:55D-53.
A. An application for approval of a minor site plan shall consist of the
following:
(1) A completed minor site plan application.
(2) A key map of the site plan as originally approved, showing the zone
district in which the property being further developed is located
and existing streets within 200 feet of the property. A marked-up
copy of a Tax Map may be suitable for this purpose.
(3) A sufficient plan based upon a current survey identifying the
location and information to describe the proposed development.
B. The application shall be in conformity with the provisions of this article
(i.e., no new variances or waivers are associated with the minor site
plan approval).
§ 120-12.4 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-12.8
1:422
ARTICLE 13
Performance Guarantees
§ 120-13.1. Guarantees required.
§ 120-13.2. Amount.
The amount of the performance guarantee is in accordance with § 120-6.5.
§ 120-13.3. Partial release.
The Board, upon application by the developer, may recommend to the
Borough Council the reduction of the amount of the performance guarantee
up to 70% upon certification, in writing, by the Borough Engineer that
certain portions of the required improvements and Planning Board
conditions have been properly completed and upon the posting of proper
guarantees and maintenance bonds, provided that the remaining
performance guarantees and maintenance bonds are adequate to insure
completion of the remaining improvements.
A. Performance guarantees shall be provided in accordance with this
chapter.
B. In addition, 10% thereof shall be deposited in cash or by certified check
with the Borough Clerk, conditioned upon the developer providing
streetlighting, sidewalks, shade trees, surveyors monuments, iron pipe
lot markers and such other subdivision improvements as the Borough
Council and Board may find necessary or appropriate in the public
interest. The deposit, or a portion thereof, in an amount as certified in
writing by the Borough Engineer and approved by the Council, may be
expended by the Borough if, within 30 days after written notice from
the Borough Engineer, the developer shall fail to provide a stated
improvement of a type necessary or appropriate for the public interest.
The Borough shall be obligated to return only the unexpended portion
of the deposit to the developer, which condition shall be agreed to in
writing by the developer prior to consideration of the final approval.
§ 120-13.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-13.3
1:423

ARTICLE 14
Subdivision Plat Details
§ 120-14.1. Minor subdivisions. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
The plat shall be drawn by a licensed New Jersey land surveyor and shall
be based on Tax Map information or some other similarly accurate base,
at a scale of not less than 40 feet to the inch. It shall comply with N.J.S.A.
46:26B-1 et seq., and shall show or include the following information:
§ 120-14.2. Preliminary plat for major subdivisions.
A. The name of the land surveyor who has drawn the sketch plat.
B. The location of that portion which is to be subdivided in relation to the
entire tract.
C. All existing structures and wooded areas within the portion to be
subdivided and within 200 feet thereof.
D. The name of the owner and of all adjoining property owners, as
disclosed by the most recent Borough tax records.
E. The Tax Map sheet, block and lot numbers and a key map.
F. All streets or roads and streams within 500 feet of the subdivision,
including the extent of paving of all such streets.
G. The proposed lot layout, lot dimensions and total area of each lot.
H. Proposed use of the requested subdivision.
I. Location of any proposed building or buildings.
J. Any other pertinent information deemed necessary by the Planning
Board in the consideration of the proposed subdivision.
K. All existing storm and sanitary sewers within 200 feet of the
subdivision, with all invert and surface elevations included.
L. Sufficient elevations and contours at two-foot intervals to determine the
general slope and natural drainage of land and high and low points if
required by the Borough Engineer.
M. Any portion of the site within a flood hazard area and proposed
treatment of such portion under the requirements of Chapter 98, Flood
Damage Prevention.
A. Preliminary plat.
(1) The preliminary plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn or
reproduced at a scale of not less than 40 feet to the inch, subject to
the Borough Engineer's recommendation. The preliminary plat
§ 120-14.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-14.2
1:425
shall be designed and drawn by a licensed New Jersey professional
land surveyor, planner or engineer and shall comply with N.J.S.A.
46:26B-1 et seq. Plans that include civil engineering design, such
as grading, pavement and drainage, must be drawn by a
professional engineer. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
(2) The plat shall be designed in compliance with the provisions of
Article 11 and shall show or be accompanied by the following
information:
(a) An adequate key map showing the entire subdivision and its
relation to surrounding areas, lot layout, lot dimensions and lot
area in square feet.
(b) The tract name, Tax Map sheet, block and lot number, date,
reference meridian, graphic scale and the following names and
addresses:
[1] Record owner or owners.
[2] Developer.
[3] Person who prepared map.
(c) Acreage of tract to be subdivided, to the nearest 10th of an
acre.
(d) Contours, at two-foot intervals, of the land to be subdivided,
both existing and proposed, together with adequate contours
of any surrounding areas which, in the opinion of the Borough
Engineer, may affect the development and the proposed
improvements within the subdivision so as to determine the
general slope and natural drainage of the land and the high
and low points and center-line grades for all proposed new
streets.
(e) Location of existing and proposed property lines, streets,
buildings, monuments, watercourses, railroads, bridges,
culverts, drainpipes, and any natural features, such as large
trees or wooded areas and rock formations.
(f) Plans and profiles of all proposed streets within the
subdivision, with complete horizontal and vertical alignment
data and profiles of existing or future continuing streets a
minimum distance of 200 feet beyond the subdivision
boundaries.
(g) Plans of proposed utility layouts, such as sewers, storm drains,
water, gas and electricity, showing feasible connections to
existing or any proposed utility systems. When a private
sewage disposal system is proposed, the location, dates and
results of all percolation tests shall be shown.
§ 120-14.2 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-14.2
1:426
(h) Plans and profiles of all proposed and existing sanitary sewers,
storm drains, drainage ditches and streams within the
subdivision, together with locations, sizes, elevations, grades
and capacities of any existing sanitary sewer, storm drain,
drainage ditch or stream to which the proposed facility shall be
connected. Any portion of a site within a flood hazard area
shall be shown, and its proposed treatment indicated, under
the requirements of Chapter 98, Flood Damage Prevention.
(i) When the development of the subdivision or improvements
within the subdivision is contingent upon information outside
the boundaries of such subdivision, such information shall be
supplied by the developer.
(j) Minimum building setback line on all lots and other sites.
(k) A copy of any protective covenants or deed restrictions
applying to the land being subdivided shall be submitted with
the preliminary plat.
(l) A statement from the applicant certifying that all proposed and
existing streets, drainage rights-of-way, easements and other
areas of public use are free and clear of any liens and
encumbrances.
(m) With the preliminary plat, the Planning Board shall be
provided, by the developer, with the topographic information
and storm drainage studies on any water disposal problem in
accordance with the requirements of the Borough Engineer.
(n) A soil erosion and sediment control plan prepared by a licensed
New Jersey professional engineer in accordance with
specifications for soil erosion and sediment control of the
Somerset-Union County Soil Conservation District, certified
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq. The Planning Board shall
not give unconditional approval to the preliminary plat until
receipt of the Soil Conservation District certification. Any fees
or expenses involved in the review by the district shall be the
applicant's responsibility. Upon receipt of a report from the
Somerset-Union County Soil Conservation District, the
Planning Board shall require incorporation of such soil erosion
and sediment control measures as it deems appropriate as a
condition of tentative approval of the preliminary plat.
(o) All work shall be done in accordance with the requirements of
the Borough Engineer.
B. Water and sewage systems. All proposed development shall be
connected to public water and sanitary sewer systems.
C. Drainage. When storm drains, drainage ditches or brook channel
improvements are proposed or required, the plan for such improvement
§ 120-14.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-14.2
1:427
§ 120-14.3. Final plat for major subdivisions. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
The final plat shall be drawn in ink on Mylar by a New Jersey licensed
land surveyor at a scale of not less than one inch equals 40 feet and in
compliance with N.J.S.A. 46:26B-1 et seq., and in accordance with the terms
of this Part 2. The final plat shall show or be accompanied by the following:
must be approved by the NJDEP if such improvement is of sufficient size
as to so warrant. Drainage areas tributary to all catch basins shall be
clearly indicated.
D. Special escrows. Special escrows may be required by the Planning
Board in connection with any subdivision that may create or contribute
to a drainage problem in its immediate area or abutting properties.
A. Date, name and location of the subdivision, name of owner, graphic
scale and reference meridian and a key map.
B. Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, street names,
easements and other rights-of-way, land to be reserved or dedicated to
public use, all lot lines and other site lines, all with accurate
dimensions, bearings or deflection angles, and radii, arcs and central
angles of all curves and all other information required by the State of
New Jersey Map Filing Law, N.J.S.A. 46:26B-1 et seq.
C. The purpose of any easement or land reserved or dedicated to public
use shall be designated, and the proposed use of sites other than
residential shall be noted.
D. Each block shall be numbered, and the lots within each block shall be
numbered consecutively and shall coincide with the Tax Atlas in
accordance with the instructions of the Borough Engineer.
E. Minimum building setback lines on all lots and other sites.
F. Location and description of all monuments, as required by the Borough
Engineer and Planning Board.
G. Names of owners of adjoining properties and those located across any
existing or proposed street.
H. Certification by a licensed engineer or surveyor as to accuracy of
details of plat.
I. Certification that the developer is the owner or agent of the owner of
the land or that the owner has given consent under an option
agreement.
J. When approval of a plat is required by any officer or body of the
Borough, county or state, such approval shall be certified on the plat.
K. Certificate from the Tax Collector that all taxes are paid to date.
§ 120-14.2 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-14.3
1:428
L. All work shall be done in accordance with the requirements of the
Borough Engineer.
§ 120-14.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-14.3
1:429

ARTICLE 15
Site Plans
§ 120-15.1. Applicability.
For the purposes of this Part 2, "site development" shall consist of the
construction of any building, other than a detached one-family dwelling or
a detached two-family dwelling, if such is permitted by zoning ordinance or
variance, involving a floor area of over 100 square feet or under 100 square
feet in the case of commercial or industrial buildings. "Site development"
shall also include the construction of parking areas and driveways for more
than two vehicles, except in connection with a detached one- or two-family
dwelling, and the regrading, removal of vegetation or displacement of soil
in an area of over 5,000 feet. Repaving of existing parking areas shall not
be considered site development requiring site plan approval.96
§ 120-15.2. (Reserved)
§ 120-15.3. Submission of preliminary site plan.
§ 120-15.4. Approval of preliminary site plan.
The Planning Board shall, if the proposed development complies with this
Part 2 and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., grant preliminary site plan approval. A
public hearing shall be required.
A. Application. Any owner of land within the Borough, prior to developing
a site, shall submit to the Planning Board Secretary or his/her designee
such number of copies, as specified in the Planning Board's application
form, of a preliminary site plan and such other information as is
required below in tentative form for preliminary approval. The
applicant may, however, submit such site plan and accompanying
information in final form and may request final approval concurrently
with preliminary approval, which request may be granted by the Board
if the data required for final approval under § 120-15.9 hereunder is
found to be complete and satisfactory.
B. Determination of completeness. The administrative officer shall review
the application for development, and if it is found to be incomplete, the
developer shall be notified thereof within 45 days of the submission of
such application, or it shall be deemed to be complete.
C. Amendments. If the Planning Board requires any substantial
amendment in the layout of improvements proposed by the developer
that have been the subject of a hearing, an amended application for
development shall be submitted and proceeded upon, as in the case of
the original application for development.
96.Editor's Note: Original § 255-227, Administration, which previously followed this section,
was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II). See
§ 120-9.2, Administration.
§ 120-15.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-15.5
1:431
§ 120-15.5. Approval by county.
Whenever review or approval of the application by the County Planning
Board is required by N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.6, the Borough Planning Board shall
condition any approval that it grants upon timely receipt of a favorable
report on the application by the County Planning Board or approval by the
Planning Board by its failure to report thereon within the required time
period.
§ 120-15.6. Changes to preliminary site plan; duration of approval;
extensions.
§ 120-15.7. Submission of final site plan.
§ 120-15.8. Changes to final site plan; duration of approval;
extensions.
A. Change of requirements. Preliminary approval of a site plan shall
protect the applicant, for a three-year period from the date of the
preliminary approval, from changes in the general terms and conditions
on which preliminary approval was granted, including, but not limited
to, use requirements; layout and design standards for streets, curbs and
sidewalks; lot size; yard dimensions; off-tract improvements; and any
requirements peculiar to such preliminary site plan approval. However,
nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the Borough from
modifying by ordinance such general terms and conditions of
preliminary approval as relate to public health and safety.
B. Extensions of approval period; conditions. The applicant may apply for
and the Planning Board may grant extensions on such preliminary
approval for additional periods of at least one year, but not to exceed a
total extension of two years, provided that if the design standards have
been revised by ordinance, such revised standards may govern.
A. Approval by whole or by section. The applicant may submit for final
approval, on or before the expiration date of preliminary approval, the
whole or a section or sections of the preliminary site plan.
B. Submission to administrative officer and Board. The final site plan shall
be submitted to the administrative officer, in the number of copies
requested by the Planning Board's application form, for forwarding to
the Planning Board for final approval. The administrative officer shall
immediately notify the Secretary of the Planning Board upon receipt of
the final site plan application.
C. Public hearing. A public hearing shall not be required, except that if any
substantial amendment in the layout of improvements proposed by the
developer that have been the subject of a hearing is made or is
required, the site plan shall again go through the procedure required
for preliminary site plans as an amended preliminary site plan.
§ 120-15.5 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-15.8
1:432
§ 120-15.9. Plan details.
Site plans shall be drawn on a map or maps to a scale not smaller than
one inch equals 40 feet and not larger than one inch equals 10 feet and
shall include and show the following information with respect to the subject
property, except that preliminary site plans may be submitted without grade
elevations and engineering designs and may include only preliminary
architectural floor plans and typical elevations:
A. Changes from approved plan. The site plan, as approved by the
Planning Board, shall be binding upon the applicant. Any changes from
the approved site plan shall require resubmission and reapproval by the
Planning Board, with appropriate fees.
B. Expiration of approval. The approved site plan shall remain effective for
a period of two years from the date of approval, and all improvements
shall be installed within that time period.
A. The name and address of the applicant and the owner.
B. The name, address and title of the person preparing the site plan, maps
and accompanying data.
C. The date of preparation and the dates of each revision, where
applicable.
D. A signature and certification by a registered engineer, land surveyor or
architect, with property survey data to be based on current survey.
E. An appropriate place for the signatures of the Chairperson and
Secretary of the Planning Board and the Borough Engineer. [Amended
at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II)]
F. The lot and block number or numbers from the Borough Tax Maps.
G. The length and bearings of the lot lines of the proposed project.
H. A scale, North sign and key map relating the site to the streets in the
surrounding area.
I. The zone district in which the lot or lots are located and the zone
district or districts of all the immediately adjoining lots.
J. The location, size and nature of all existing and proposed rights-of-way,
easements and other encumbrances which may affect the lot or lots in
question.
K. The location, size and nature of the entire lot or lots in question, and
any contiguous lots owned by the applicant or in which the applicant
has a direct or indirect interest, even though only a portion of the entire
property is involved in the site plan for which approval is sought,
provided that where it is physically impossible to show the entire lot or
§ 120-15.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-15.9
1:433
lots or contiguous lot or lots on one map, a key map thereof shall be
submitted.
L. The location, names and pavement and right-of-way widths of all
existing and proposed streets abutting the lot or lots in question.
M. The property lines of all abutting properties, together with the names
and addresses of the owners as disclosed on the Borough Tax Map and
tax rolls as of the date of the site plan application.
N. The location of the nearest portions of existing buildings on properties
abutting the site in question.
O. The existing and proposed principal building or structure and all
accessory buildings or structures, if any, with dimensions showing
present and finished grade elevations at all corners and entrances of
such buildings or structures, first-floor elevations and the complete
floor plans and elevation plans thereof.
P. Present and proposed topography, based on New Jersey Geodetic
Control Survey Datum, at one-foot contour intervals, including
sufficient distance outside the site to show the relationship to adjoining
properties.
Q. All existing and proposed setback dimensions.
R. Landscaped areas, trees over six-inch caliper on the part of the site
affected by the proposed development, fencing, size and type of
planting and plant material upon the subject lot or lots, including a
planting plan drawn by a qualified landscape architect or landscape
designer and signed by him/her.
S. The location, type and size of all existing and proposed curbs,
sidewalks, driveways, street pavement widening, fences, retaining
walls and parking space areas, together with the dimensions of all the
foregoing, for the site and the nearest portions of properties abutting
the site.
T. The number of employees, total and maximum on one shift.
U. The location, type and size of existing and proposed catch basins, storm
drainage facilities and all utilities, both above and below ground.
Drainage calculations shall be submitted to show stormwater detention
in conformance with Subchapter 7, Stormwater Management (N.J.A.C.
5:21-7.1 et seq.), of the Residential Site Improvement Standards,
N.J.A.C. 5:21-1.1 et seq., and the adequacy of proposed storm drainage
facilities and security against flooding.
V. Evidence of approval by the State Department of Environmental
Protection, where applicable, including encroachment permits. A
showing shall be made of how the requirements of Part 4, Stormwater
Control, are complied with in regard to flood protection and control of
stormwater runoff.
§ 120-15.9 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-15.9
1:434
§ 120-15.10. Review criteria.
In the course of its review, the Board may consider the following:
W. All existing and proposed signs and their size, nature of construction
and location.
X. All existing and proposed exterior lighting, including size, nature of
construction, location, height, the area and direction of illumination and
the lumen power.
Y. Soil erosion and sediment control plan, as described in this Part 2, for
sites where over 5,000 square feet of ground area is being disturbed.
Z. Cost estimates and proposed construction and maintenance bonds and
construction time schedules related to building construction for any
required improvements under Part 2 not proposed to be completed
before the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
AA. Plans for any off-tract improvements, including cost estimates and
calculations of the share to be borne by the developer, under the
standards described in this Part 2.
BB. Any and all other information and data necessary to meet any of the
requirements of this Part 2 not listed above, and any information and
data required by the county or state.
A. The layout of the site with respect to the arrangement and widths of
driveways on the site and giving access thereto.
B. The amount of space required for automobile parking and for the
loading and unloading of goods and materials, the location of such
space and access thereto.
C. The improvement of roadways and automobile parking areas by
grading, surfacing and the installation of drainage structures.
D. Lighting.
E. The installation of waterlines and facilities for sanitary sewerage.
F. The display of signs.
G. The appropriateness of the site plan and of the design of the buildings
in relation to the physical characteristics of the site, the character of
the neighborhood and the most beneficial prospective use of land in the
neighborhood.
H. Conformance with the objectives of the Master Plan, Part 3, Zoning, and
this Part 2. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
I. The location, design and adequacy of screening and landscaping.
§ 120-15.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-15.11
1:435
§ 120-15.11. Inspection and completion of improvements.
The installation of improvements as approved in the final site plan, other
than buildings, shall be subject to inspection by the Borough Engineer.
Approval shall be revoked if there is a significant deviation from the site
plan as approved. Performance and maintenance bonds may be required
and shall be released subject to approval by the Borough Council upon
recommendation by the Borough Engineer. All improvements shall be
completed in a timely manner so as not to leave the site in an unfinished
or unsightly condition, as determined by the Borough Engineer. If this
is not done, the final approval shall be deemed to be revoked, and the
performance and maintenance bonds may be used by the Borough to restore
the site to an acceptable condition.
§ 120-15.11 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-15.11
1:436
ARTICLE 16
Improvements
§ 120-16.1. Improvement standards. [Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
Prior to the granting of final approval of subdivisions or site plans, the
developer shall have installed all improvements specified in this Part 2 or
shall have furnished performance guarantees for the ultimate installation
of those improvements. Improvements for residential uses shall conform to
the Residential Site Improvements Standards (RSIS), N.J.A.C. 5:21-1.1 et
seq. These standards shall be considered the minimum for all nonresidential
uses, with modifications or additions as required by the Borough Engineer
and the Planning Board or as modified elsewhere in this Part 2.
A. Streets. All streets shall be paved from curbline to curbline.
B. Street signs. Appropriate street signs shall be installed at all street
intersections and shall be of a type specified by the Borough Engineer.
Street signs shall be installed prior to the issuance of certificates of
occupancy, and the cost of signs and installation of same shall be borne
by the developer.
C. Clear view at intersections.
(1) No fence, structure, planting or shrubbery over 30 inches in height
above the level of the pavement at the center of the street, opposite
the point in question, shall be erected, planted or maintained on
any corner lot, in any zone, within 25 feet of the intersection
formed by the projection of the two street side lines at the corner.
(2) No fence, structure, planting or shrubbery shall be permitted
within three feet of any street side line, on any lot, in any zone. The
branches of all trees and shrubs projecting beyond such street side
line must be trimmed at all times in order to ensure unobstructed
vision and clearance eight feet above the ground or sidewalk level.
D. Topsoil protection. No topsoil shall be removed from the site or used as
spoil unless permission is first obtained from the Borough Engineer and
the Planning Board. Topsoil moved during the course of construction
shall be redistributed so as to provide at least four inches of cover to all
areas of the subdivision and shall be stabilized by seeding or planting.
E. Monuments. Monuments shall be of the size and shape required by
N.J.S.A. 46:26B-3, Monumentation, and shall be placed in accordance
with such statute.
F. Catch basins. Catch basins shall be constructed as directed and located
by the Borough Engineer.
G. Soil or earth moving. No change shall be made in the elevation or
contour of any lot or site, except as approved by the Borough Engineer
§ 120-16.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-16.1
1:437
§ 120-16.2. Inspections; costs.
All improvements, except electric, gas and water lines, shall be installed
with the inspection and approval of the Borough Engineer. The inspection
costs are to be borne by the developer. Such cost shall be determined by the
Borough Engineer. The estimate of the costs of the improvements shall be
made by the Borough Engineer prior to final approval. (See also Article 6,
Fees, Deposits, Guarantees and Other Payments.)
§ 120-16.3. Completion of required improvements; performance
guarantee; maintenance bond.
and the Planning Board. All changes in elevation and contours approved
by the Borough Engineer and the Planning Board shall be shown on the
preliminary and final plat and profiles.
H. Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be installed in locations approved by
the Fire Department.
I. Construction stakes and grades. All construction stakes and grades
thereon shall be set by a licensed land surveyor in the employ of the
developer or his/her contractor, and a duplicate copy of the notes made
therefrom shall be filed with the Borough Engineer.
J. Commencement of site work. No site work shall commence without the
Borough Engineer being properly notified. Such notice shall be given at
least one week before the commencement of work.
K. Debris. All stumps, litter, rubbish, brush, weeds, dead and dying trees,
roots and debris shall be removed from the site to the satisfaction of the
Borough Engineer. None of the above shall be buried or covered.
L. Construction standards and specifications. The construction standards
and specifications of the Borough, as now or hereafter adopted, shall
govern the construction and installation of all of the above
improvements. Failure of the developer or his/her contractor or agent
to conform to such specifications shall be just cause for the suspension
of the work being performed and all permits being revoked, and no
person shall have the right to demand or claim damages from the
Borough, its officers, agents or servants by reason of such suspension
or revocation.
M. Inspection. No underground installation shall be covered until
inspection has been made and is approved by the Borough Engineer.
N. As-built improvement plans. The developer shall provide and file with
the Borough Engineer one complete set of as-built improvement plans
and profiles showing actual construction as approved prior to the
release of the performance guarantees. Same shall be submitted in both
paper (signed and sealed) and electronic format in a format acceptable
to the Borough Engineer.
§ 120-16.1 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-16.3
1:438
A. No final plat shall be approved by the Planning Board until the
completion of all required improvements specified in this Part 2 have
been certified to the Planning Board by the Borough Engineer. In
addition, no final plat shall be approved by the Planning Board unless
the developer or owner shall have filed with the Borough Clerk a
performance guarantee sufficient in amount to cover the cost of all
improvements or uncompleted portions thereof, specified in this Part 2,
as estimated by the Borough Engineer, and assuring the installation of
such uncompleted improvements on or before an agreed date, not to
exceed three years from the date of execution of the performance
guarantee. An additional amount of 20% of the estimate of the Borough
Engineer shall be included in the total amount of the performance
guarantee to cover legal, engineering and other costs in the event that
the developer shall fail to complete the required improvements and the
Borough is required to install the improvements. Such performance
guarantee may be in the form of an irrevocable performance bond,
which shall be issued by a bonding or surety company and approved by
the Borough Council and by the Borough Attorney as to form,
sufficiency and execution; or a certified check in the sum specified by
the Borough Engineer, which check shall be deposited to the trust
account for the Borough or a bank account with the bank book in
Borough custody. Such money or other surety shall be returned to the
depositor after full compliance. The Borough may require up to 10% of
the performance guarantee to be deposited in cash.
B. The performance guarantee shall run for a period to be fixed by the
Planning Board, but in no case for a term of more than three years.
However, with the consent of the owner and the surety, if there is one,
the Borough Council, by resolution, may extend the term of such
performance guarantee for an additional period, not to exceed three
years. The amount of a performance guarantee may be reduced by the
Council by resolution when portions of the required improvements have
been installed and accepted for maintenance.
C. If the required improvements have not been installed in accordance
with the performance guarantee, the obligor and surety shall be liable
thereon to the Borough for the reasonable cost of the improvements not
installed or improperly installed and the expenses involved thereto.
Upon receipt of the proceeds of the bond or guarantee, the Borough
shall install such improvements or shall correct any such defective
installations. The Borough may use such portions of the performance
guarantee as have been deposited in cash with the Borough Clerk in
accordance with the terms of this Part 2 and any applicable agreement
to assure the completion or correction of such improvements.
D. Upon completion and approval of a portion or section, the developer
shall be required to file a maintenance bond sufficient in amount to
guarantee that the completed section will be maintained by the
developer until completion of improvements in the remaining portions
§ 120-16.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-16.3
1:439
§ 120-16.4. Off-tract improvements.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-39 and 40:55D-42,
construction of, or contributions for, off-tract water, sewer, drainage and
street improvements may be required in accordance with the following
criteria:
or sections of the subdivision and for a stated period of time thereafter,
not to exceed three years from date of completion of all improvements.
E. The Borough Engineer shall determine the amount of the maintenance
bond, and it shall be approved by the Borough Attorney as to form and
sufficiency.
A. Improvements at sole expense of applicant. In cases where reasonable
and necessary need for an off-tract improvement or improvements is
necessitated or required by the proposed development application, and
where no other property owners receive a special benefit thereby, the
Board may require the applicant, as a condition of subdivision or site
plan approval, at the applicant's sole expense, to provide for and
construct such improvements as if such were on-tract improvements, in
the manner provided hereafter and as otherwise provided by law.
B. Contributions by developer.
(1) In cases where the need for any off-tract improvement is
necessitated by the proposed development application, and where
the Board determines, in writing, that properties outside the
development will also be benefited by the improvements, the Board
shall require such contribution from the developer towards the cost
of such improvement or improvements as the Board determines is
fair and equitable, considering the benefit to the development and
the creation in acceleration of the need by the development. The
resolution or determination of the Board shall specify the off-tract
improvements which are necessary and the terms and conditions
which shall be imposed upon the applicant to insure the successful
and reasonable implementation of same. In its deliberation as to
whether off-tract improvements are required, the Board shall be
guided by the rules and regulations specified in Part 3, Zoning, this
Part 2 and the Borough Master Plan. The Board may also be guided
by counsel from the Board Attorney, Engineer and other qualified
experts and Borough officials.
(2) In the event that the Board determines that one or more
improvements constitute an off-tract improvement, the Board shall
notify the Borough Council of same, specifying the Board's
recommendation relative to the estimated cost, the applicant's
prorated share of the cost and possible methods or means to
implement same, including, but not limited to, performance and
maintenance guarantees, cash contributions, development
agreements and other forms of surety.
§ 120-16.3 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-16.4
1:440
(3) The Board shall not grant final approval of the subdivision until all
aspects of such conditions have been mutually agreed to by both
the applicant and the Borough Council, and a written resolution to
that effect by the Council has been transmitted to the Board.
C. Methods of implementation.
(1) Performance and maintenance guarantees. Where a performance
or maintenance guarantee or other surety is required in connection
with an off-tract improvement, the applicant shall be required to
follow the same procedures and requirements as specified in this
Part 2 for other improvements.
(2) Development agreement. A development agreement governing offtract
improvements or other conditions as may be required by this
Part 2 or by the Board shall be approved as to form, sufficiency and
execution by the Board Attorney and Borough Attorney. Such
agreement shall specify the amount of cash contributions, if any,
the method of payment of same, the relative timing of such
payment and the obligation or obligations to be undertaken by the
Borough.
(3) Cash contributions; exceptions. Cash contributions for off-tract
improvements shall not be required under the following conditions:
(a) Where another county or state agency has jurisdiction over the
subject improvement and requires a cash contribution,
guarantee or other surety of the applicant in lieu of such
conditions imposed by the Borough;
(b) Where a benefit assessment or other similar tax levy is
imposed upon the applicant for the off-site improvement
provided; or
(c) Where the applicant, where legally permissible, can undertake
the improvements in lieu of the Borough, subject to standards
and other conditions as may be imposed by the Borough.
(4) Cash contributions; payment. Where a cash contribution is
required by this Part 2, such contribution shall be deposited with
the Chief Financial Officer (CFO) of the Borough, with a copy of the
applicant's transmittal letter forwarded to the Borough Council, the
Borough Engineer and the Board. Any and all monies received by
the Treasurer shall be deposited in an escrow account for the
purpose of undertaking the improvements specified. Where such
improvements are not undertaken or initiated for a period of 10
years, the funds may be retained by the Borough and may be used
for general Borough purposes, but in such event, neither the
applicant nor any of his/her heirs, successors, executors,
administrators or grantees shall be liable to the Borough for any
assessment for the purpose of installing any of the improvements
for which such cash contribution was made.
§ 120-16.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-16.4
1:441
D. Formula for determining applicant's share of off-tract improvements.
Where an off-tract improvement is required, the following criteria shall
be utilized in determining the proportionate share of such improvement
to the applicant:
(1) Streets and accessories. Street widening, alignment, corrections,
channelization of intersections, construction of barriers, new or
improved traffic signalization, signs, curbs, sidewalks, trees, utility
improvements not covered elsewhere and the construction of new
streets and other similar street or traffic improvements. The
applicant's proportionate share shall be calculated by the Borough
Engineer in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42.
(2) Water facilities. Any Borough expense for water distribution
facilities, including the installation of new water mains, the
relocation of such facilities and the installation of other
appurtenances associated therewith. The applicant's proportionate
cost shall be in the ratio of the estimated daily use of water from
the property or properties in gallons to the sum of the deficiency in
gallons per day for the existing system or subsystem and the
estimated daily use of water for the proposed development. The
ratio thus calculated shall be increased by 10% for contingencies.
(3) Sewers. Sanitary sewage distribution facilities, including the
installation, relocation or replacement of collector and interceptor
sewers and the installation, relocation or replacement of other
appurtenances associated therewith. The applicant's proportionate
cost shall be in the ratio of the estimated daily flow in gallons to the
sum of the present deficient capacity for the existing system or
subsystem and the estimated daily flow from the proposed project
or development. In the case where the peak flow for the proposed
development may occur during the peak-flow period for the
existing system, the ratio shall be the estimated peak-flow rate
from the proposed development in gallons per minute to the sum of
the present peak-flow deficiency in the existing system or
subsystem and the estimated peak-flow rate from the proposed
development. The greater of the two ratios thus calculated shall be
increased by 10% for contingencies and shall be the ratio used to
determine the cost to the applicant.
(4) Drainage facilities. Stormwater and drainage improvements,
including installation, relocation or replacement of transmission
lines, culverts, catch basins and the installation, relocation or
replacement of other appurtenances associated therewith. The
applicant's proportionate cost shall be in the ratio of the estimated
peak surface runoff as proposed to be delivered into the existing
system measured in cubic feet per second to the sum of the existing
peak flow in cubic feet per second deficient for the existing system
and the estimated peak flow as proposed to be delivered. The ratio
thus calculated shall be increased by 10% for contingencies. The
applicant's engineer shall compute the drainage basin area, the
§ 120-16.4 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-16.4
1:442
area of the development and the percent of the total drainage basin
area occupied by the development. Where no drainage system
exists which will receive the flow of surface water from the
applicant's development, the applicant shall furnish all drainage
rights-of-way deemed to be necessary by the Board.
(5) General considerations. In calculating the proportionate or pro rata
amount of the cost of any required off-tract facilities which shall be
borne by the applicant, the Board shall also determine the pro rata
amount of cost to be borne by other owners of lands which will be
benefited by the proposed improvements.
§ 120-16.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-16.4
1:443

ARTICLE 17
General Design Standards
§ 120-17.1. Applicability.
This article provides design guidelines, design standards and construction
specifications which shall apply to applications for site plan or subdivision
approval. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the RSIS97 shall supersede the
standards in this article according to law.
§ 120-17.2. Applicability of RSIS.
The RSIS98 are incorporated herein by reference. A copy of the standards
are available for inspection in the office of the Zoning Officer. The following
provisions shall govern the application of the RSIS:
A. Any project for which preliminary subdivision or site plan approval has
been given prior to June 3, 1997, shall continue to be subject to the
RSIS and provisions of the applicable chapters of the Borough Code in
effect prior to June 3, 1997.
B. Any project for which application is made after June 3, 1997, shall be
governed by the RSIS.
C. The RSIS shall apply to all applications for residential subdivision and
site plan approval, and shall apply to all site improvement work and
appurtenant construction, including streets, roads, parking facilities,
sidewalks, drainage structures, grading and utilities.
D. The RSIS shall not apply to driveways on private property held in fee
simple as individual residential lots outside of the public right-of-way,
including common driveways established by easements shared by more
than one dwelling unit on private property.
E. Where both residential and commercial development are planned in a
mixed-use development, the RSIS shall apply to the residential part or
parts of such development where such residential part or parts are
discrete and separate from planned commercial parts as evidenced by,
for example, separate building(s), separate parking, and separate
access features.
F. The RSIS shall supersede and replace all technical requirements of this
article with regard to streets, parking, water supply, sanitary sewers
and stormwater management in residential development.
G. The RSIS shall not supersede and shall not replace standards in this
article or in any other article concerning:
97.Editor's Note: See N.J.A.C. 5:21-1.1 et seq.
98.Editor's Note: See N.J.A.C. 5:21-1.1 et seq.
§ 120-17.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-17.2
1:445
§ 120-17.3. Design principles.
(1) Layout, arrangement, and location of improvements, shade trees,
landscaping, or reservation of areas for public use, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-38.
(2) Preservation of existing natural resources; arrangement of physical
elements for safe and efficient vehicular and pedestrian circulation
by, for example, traffic calming measures, parking and loading;
screening, landscaping, and location of structures; or conservation
of energy and use of renewable resources, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-41; or
(3) Use, bulk, height, number of stories, orientation and size of
buildings and other structures; the percentage of lot or
development area that may be occupied by structures; lot sizes and
dimensions, floor area ratios, or other measures to control
development intensity; or the provision of adequate light and air
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65.
H. Choice among options contained in the RSIS shall be the applicant's
unless otherwise specified in the RSIS.
I. Administration, approval, waivers and exceptions, enforcement and
violations concerning the RSIS shall be as set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:21.
J. Those provisions of this chapter containing standards which may be
superseded by the RSIS are designated with the letters "SIS" at the end
of the provision. The final determination of applicability shall be made
by the Zoning Officer.
A. All site plans, plot plans and subdivision plats shall conform to design
standards that will encourage desirable development patterns within
the Borough.
(1) Where either or both an Official Map or Master Plan has been
adopted, the plot, site and subdivision plans shall conform to the
proposals and conditions shown thereon.
(2) The streets, drainage rights-of-way, school sites, public parks and
playgrounds and other municipal facilities shown on an adopted
Master Plan or Official Map shall be considered in the review of
plot, site and subdivision plans.
(3) Where no Master Plan or Official Map exists, or makes no
provisions therefor, streets and drainage rights-of-way shall be
shown on the final plat in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-38 and
shall be such as to lend themselves to the harmonious development
of the Borough and the enhancement of the public welfare.
B. Within the criteria established by and subject to the review and
approval of the reviewing agency, all design of a plot, site or subdivision
§ 120-17.2 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-17.3
1:446
§ 120-17.4. General improvement standards.
plan is the responsibility of the developer, and he shall be responsible
for and bear the entire cost of any and all investigations, tests, reports,
surveys, samples, calculations, environmental assessments, designs,
researches or any other activity necessary to the completion of the
design.
(1) The standards set forth in this article shall be taken to be the
minimum necessary to meet its purposes as set forth elsewhere
herein.
(2) The responsibility of the reviewing agency shall be to see that these
minimum standards are followed and, in those cases not covered by
these standards, sufficient precautions are taken to assure that the
eventual design is conducive to the implementation of the purposes
of this Part 2 and the Borough Master Plan.
(3) The reviewing agency may employ professionals in various
disciplines to advise and assist it in its determinations.
(4) Any decisions of the reviewing agency regarding the suitability or
sufficiency of any design proposal, taken upon advice of its
professionals and subject to the provisions of this Part 2 shall be
deemed conclusive.
C. When a developer determines that it will be necessary to utilize design
standards in addition to or other than those minimum requirements
established herein, he is advised to consult with the Borough Engineer
prior to beginning his detailed design for review and approval of his
proposed design standards.
(1) Standards utilized should generally be nationally recognized and in
common use in this area.
(2) Design standards may not be utilized if they do not have the
approval of the Borough Engineer.
(3) The design standard change shall be approved by the reviewing
agency upon a report from the Borough Engineer.
D. It is recognized that, in certain instances, preexisting conditions or the
uniqueness of a particular proposal may require the waiver of some of
the standards presented herein.
(1) The reviewing agency may consider and, for cause shown, may
waive strict conformance with such of these detailed design
standards as it sees fit.
(2) Any developer desiring such action shall present with his
application for development a listing of all such waivers desired,
together with the reasons therefor.
§ 120-17.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-17.4
1:447
§ 120-17.5. Building site design standards.
A. All improvements shall be installed in complete accordance with the
standards of this Part 2, with other particular specifications approved
by the reviewing agency and Borough Engineer, and with all other
applicable municipal, county, state and federal regulations, including
the Residential Site Improvement Standards (N.J.A.C. 5:21).
(1) Should improvements be required which are not provided for
within the particular sections of this Part 2, they shall be designed
and constructed in accordance with good engineering practice and
recognized design standards.
(2) The developer (or his engineer) shall submit calculations and
construction specifications in each instance.
(3) Prior to initiation of such specialized design, the particular
standards to be utilized shall be submitted for review by the
reviewing agency and Borough Engineer.
B. The Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction of the
New Jersey Department of Transportation (latest edition), including all
addenda, and the Standard Construction Details of the New Jersey
Department of Transportation (latest revision), as modified,
supplemented, amended or superseded by the requirements of this Part
2, by the approved final plat, by particular agreement among the
reviewing agency, Borough Council and subdivider or by other
applicable Borough, county, state or federal regulations, shall govern
the completion of the required improvements. Such Standard
Specifications and Standard Construction Details (Standards) are made
a part of this Part 2 by reference and will not be repeated herein. The
requirements of this Part 2, of an approved final plat or of particular
agreements and conditions of approval and of applicable Borough,
county, state or federal regulations shall govern and prevail in the case
of conflict between them and the Standard Specifications or Standard
Construction Details. Should the Borough adopt, subsequent to the
effective date of this Part 2, particular and specific Standard
Construction Details for the Borough, they shall govern and prevail over
the Standard Construction Details of the New Jersey Department of
Transportation previously referred to.
A. The following standards and guidelines contained herein shall apply to
all development applications submitted for approval containing
proposed new buildings and structures or alterations or modifications
to existing structures.
B. These building design objectives are intended to assist the reviewing
agency in the review of specific development proposals:
(1) All buildings should be located with proper consideration of their
orientation and relationship to other buildings, both existing and
§ 120-17.4 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-17.5
1:448
proposed, in terms of light, air and usable open space; access
to public rights-of-way and off-street parking; height and bulk;
drainage and existing topography; trees and vegetation;
watercourses; solar access and energy conservation.
(2) Groups of related buildings shall be designed to present a
harmonious appearance in terms of architectural style and exterior
materials.
(3) Buildings should be designed to be attractive from all vantage
points, including fences, storage areas and rear entrances.
(4) Building setbacks should be varied to the extent practicable in
order to provide an interesting interplay of buildings and open
spaces.
(5) Accessory buildings and structures should be architecturally
treated in the same manner as principal structures.
(6) All exterior storage and service yards, loading docks and ramps,
electrical and mechanical equipment and enclosures, storage tanks
and the like shall be screened from the public view, within and from
the outside of the development, by a fence, wall or mature
landscape materials, consistent with the exterior design of the
building within the development.
(7) Colors, materials and finishes shall be coordinated in all exterior
elevations of buildings to achieve continuity of expression. All roof
and wall projections, such as gutters, flues, louvers, utility boxes,
vents, grills, downspouts, exposed flashing and overhead doors,
shall be painted or installed with an anodized or acrylic finish, in a
color to match adjacent surfaces.
(8) Buildings of a traditional design should have steeper roofs.
Overhangs should be consistent in the front and rear.
(9) All openings in the wall of a structure, such as windows and doors,
should relate to each other on each elevation, vertically and
horizontally, in a clearly defined order, and should take into account
orientation to the sun, in terms of architectural elements for sun
shading and consideration of the efficiencies of heat loss and gain
through such openings.
(10) Buildings and parking areas should be designed to relate to
existing grade conditions. Exposed basement walls are not
acceptable as an architectural treatment. All exposed basement
walls must be covered to relate properly to the side of the building.
(11) Landscape elements shall relate to architectural design elements
and shall be considered a strong unifying component of the overall
site design, reflecting the natural and man-made (architectural and
aesthetic) qualities of the development.
§ 120-17.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-17.5
1:449
§ 120-17.6. Clearing and grading.
C. These residential design standards and guidelines are intended to
assist in the review of specific proposals:
(1) Residential design should create the appearance of individuality of
housing units and avoid the appearance of a large, undifferentiated
project.
(2) Dwelling units should have adequate interior living space, using
low-maintenance, high-quality and aesthetically attractive
materials.
(3) Easy access to outdoor space and parking from all residential units
should be provided.
(4) The design should provide a safe, well-lighted residential
environment, free of through traffic and congestion.
D. Dwelling units in a development which are designed for the possible
use by physically handicapped persons shall meet or exceed the New
Jersey Uniform Construction Code minimum property standards and
the additional requirements contained in N.J.A.C. 5:23-1 et seq.,
pertaining to barrier-free regulations.
E. The commercial office and industrial design standards contained below
are intended to assist in the review of specific proposals:
(1) Exterior materials may include brick, stone, anodized aluminum
and baked enamel metal panels, precast concrete and similar
materials, with appropriate texture and trim to prevent large,
undifferentiated facade of the same material.
(2) All roof planes or caps meeting the exterior facade shall have
overhangs or appropriate cornice and trim details.
(3) All major entrances to buildings shall be properly identified with
architectural elements, such as recessed entranceways, projected
overhangs and porticos.
(4) Flat roof canopies on metal pipe columns shall not be used on
commercial buildings.
(5) Window and door openings shall include appropriate trim and
either recesses or overhangs to promote a harmonious variety of
light and shade on the facade of the building.
(6) Buildings and structures used for functional purposes, such as
warehouses, indoor sports facilities and manufacturing facilities,
shall include appropriate landscaping adjacent to boundary facades
in the public view.
§ 120-17.5 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-17.6
1:450
A. All grading, excavation or embankment construction shall be in
accordance with the approved final plat and shall provide for the
disposal of all stormwater runoff and such groundwater seepage as may
be encountered. All clearing, excavation and embankment construction
shall be in accordance with the applicable requirements of the New
Jersey Department of Transportation Standard Specifications. No
excavated material may be removed from the site, except in accordance
with an approved final plat, nor without the prior approval of the
Borough Engineer. The stockpile or removal of soil from a site, except in
relationship to an approved plan, shall not be permitted except as
provided by other ordinances of the Borough. Where borrow excavation
materials from off-site sources are required to complete the necessary
grading, such material shall meet the requirements of the Standard
Specifications for Borrow Excavation, Zone 3, and shall be subject to
the approval of the Borough Engineer. All trees to be saved must have a
snow fence erected at the dripline of the tree.
B. Material which the Borough Engineer judges unsuitable for use in
roadway embankments may be used for grading outside the roadway
right-of-way or in building areas with the permission of the Borough
Engineer and the Construction Official (for building areas). Any
unsuitable material which cannot be satisfactorily utilized on the site
shall be removed from the site and disposed of at places to be provided
by the developer.
C. No slopes shall be constructed which exceed a slope of one foot vertical
per three feet horizontal. The minimum slope shall be 1%.
D. Such slopes shall be suitably planted with perennial grasses or other
ground cover plantings in accordance with the plans approved by the
reviewing agency.
E. In areas where excavations or embankments would extend significantly
beyond road rights-of-way, thereby causing disruption to the natural
environment of the development, the reviewing agency may, upon the
application of the developer, consider or may, upon its own initiative,
direct the use of terraces, retaining walls, crib walls or other means of
maintaining roadway slopes.
(1) In any event, the entire roadway right-of-way shall be fully graded,
and any retaining walls, crib walls or terraces shall be located
outside of the roadway right-of-way, and their maintenance shall be
the responsibility of the owner of the property on which they are
constructed.
(2) The developer shall make suitable provisions in the instrument
transferring title to any property containing such terraces,
retaining walls or crib walls and shall provide a copy thereof to the
reviewing agency and the Borough Clerk.
§ 120-17.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-17.6
1:451
(3) All graded areas within or outside of the roadway right-of-way shall
be neatly graded, topsoiled, fertilized and seeded to establish a
stand of perennial grasses.
F. The tops of slopes in excavations and the toe of slopes in embankment
areas shall not extend beyond the right-of-way line or, where provided
on the plan, to the limit of grading as shown on the final plan. Sidewalk
and easement areas shall slope at 2% to the top of the curb elevation,
and sidewalk construction shall conform to this slope.
G. Lot grading. Lots shall be graded to secure proper drainage and to
prevent the collection of stormwater. The grading shall be performed in
a manner which will minimize the damage to or destruction of trees
growing on the land. Topsoil shall be provided and/or redistributed on
the surface as cover and shall be stabilized by seeding or planting.
Grading plans shall have been submitted with the preliminary and final
plats, and any departure from these plans must be approved in
accordance with the requirements of this Part 2 for the modification of
improvements. Grading shall be designed to prevent or minimize
drainage to structures or improvements when major storms, exceeding
the design basis of the storm drainage system, occur.
(1) Wherever possible, the land shall be graded so that the stormwater
from each lot shall drain directly to the street. If it is impossible to
drain directly to the street, it shall be drained to a system of
interior yard drainage designed in accordance with the standards
for drainage facilities, and suitable drainage easements shall be
provided.
(2) Unless otherwise required by the Standard Specifications, all tree
stumps, masonry and other obstructions shall be removed to a
depth of two feet below finished grade.
(3) The minimum slope for lawns shall be 2%, and, for smooth, hardfinished
surfaces, other than roadways, 3/4 of 1%.
(4) The maximum grade for lawns within five feet of a building shall be
5%. The maximum slope within 10 feet of a property line shall be
5%. No lawn areas shall exceed 30% in slope. Further, when there
exists a vertical grade differential that exceeds two feet between
first-floor elevations of structures on adjacent properties, the
reviews may require the use of retaining walls, terracing or other
features to minimize the impact, visual and otherwise, on the
adjoining property.
(5) Retaining walls installed in slope control areas shall be constructed
of heavy treated timber or logs, reinforced concrete, other
reinforced masonry or of other construction acceptable to the
Borough Engineer and adequately designed and detailed on the
final plat to carry all earth pressures, including any surcharges.
The height of retaining walls shall not exceed 1/3 of the horizontal
distance from the foundation wall of any building to the face of the
§ 120-17.6 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-17.6
1:452
§ 120-17.7. Streets and street design.
retaining wall. Should the Borough adopt, subsequently to this Part
2, standard details for such construction, the same shall govern.
(6) The developer shall take all necessary precautions to prevent any
siltation of streams during construction. Such provisions may
include, but are not limited to, construction and maintenance of
siltation basins or holding ponds and division berms through the
course of construction.
A. All major and minor arterial, collector, local collector, local and
marginal access streets shall be designed in accordance with the
proposals contained in the Master Plan of the Borough and in
accordance with this section.
(1) Upon receipt by the reviewing agency of any subdivision or site
plans calling for the installation of new streets or the extension of
old streets, the plats shall be referred to the Borough Engineer,
Police Department and Fire Department for review.
(a) They shall make recommendations as to the acceptable
minimum widths of each street and shall base the
recommendations upon such factors as the location, proposed
use and intensity of traffic, with an emphasis upon safety
considerations of a fire, first aid and police nature.
(b) These recommendations shall be submitted to the Borough
Engineer to be considered in conjunction with such studies and
statistics and other data which the Engineer shall have
assembled as a basis for determining minimum street widths
within the Borough.
(2) The enumerated standards are to be construed as minimum
standards and may be increased where, because of high traffic
volumes, steep grades or other such reasons, the municipal agency
determines that such action is necessary.
(3) In residential subdivisions, the minimum street width required
shall be in accordance with the Residential Site Improvement
Standards (N.J.A.C. 5:21).
B. The arrangement of streets not shown on the Master Plan or Official
Map shall be such as to provide for the appropriate extension and/or
realignment of existing streets, except that local and collector streets
should only be extended when such extension is necessary, and the
municipal agency concurs that such extension will promote safety and
conform to the street standards contained elsewhere in this Part 2.
C. Where developments abut existing roadways, sufficient right-of-way
shall be reserved for the functional classification of the street in
question.
§ 120-17.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-17.7
1:453
(1) If the subdivision or site plan is along one side only, 1/2 of the
required extra width shall be dedicated.
(2) The new cross section for the existing road shall be constructed so
as to provide a cross section constructed to the satisfaction of the
Borough Engineer.
D. Local streets shall be designed in accordance with the schedule of
street design standards and the requirements contained herein:
(1) No street or road shall be designed which has an elevation at the
center line lower than the one-hundred-year-flood elevation of the
area as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map.
(2) Local streets shall be arranged to discourage through traffic.
(3) Culs-de-sac (dead-end streets) should have a center-line length,
from the intersecting street center line to the center point of the
turnaround of the cul-de-sac, of not less than 100 feet nor longer
than 2,000 feet and should not provide access to more than 25 lots
or as applicable within the design criteria of specific zones in Part
3, Zoning.
(a) They shall provide an end turnaround with a pavement radius
of not less than 40 feet and a property line radius of not less
than 50 feet and tangent whenever possible to the right side of
the street, when viewed toward the closed end.
(b) In the event that it is contemplated that a dead-end street shall
be extended in the future, a temporary turnaround, meeting
the aforementioned design criteria, shall be required, and
provisions shall be made for future extension of the street and
reversion of the excess right-of-way to the adjoining properties.
(4) Loop streets.
(a) Loop streets should provide access to not more than 45 lots,
except that, where access is provided by a combination of a
short loop street and cul-de-sac, the maximum shall be 60 lots,
provided that the length of the loop street will not exceed
3,000 feet.
(b) Loop streets shall have both of their termini located on the
same street.
(5) P-loops, which are loop streets with a single access point, should
have an entrance not exceeding 700 feet in distance from the loop
intersection.
(a) There should also be provided an emergency vehicular and
pedestrian right-of-way of 15 feet in width from the loop
providing access to a street which is not a part of the P-loop.
§ 120-17.7 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-17.7
1:454
(b) The loop of a P-loop should have a street length not exceeding
3,000 feet.
(c) P-loops should provide access to no more than 45 lots, and the
entrance street should be designed in accordance with the
design standards for collector streets.
E. In any development, it shall be the duty of the reviewing agency to
approve classification of proposed streets according to their use and in
accordance with the Residential Site Improvement Standards. In
making decisions, the reviewing agency shall refer to the Master Plan
and the Union County Planning Board classification of roadways and
shall consider conditions within the development and the surrounding
areas and shall use as a guide the street classification and criteria
contained herein:
(1) A "local street" is a street serving only single-family residences and,
where feasible, should be either a cul-de-sac or a loop street
meeting the requirements hereinabove set forth.
(a) A street which serves traffic having origins and destinations
other than within the lots which abut the street shall not be
considered a local street.
(b) The traffic normally expected on a local street shall be 400
vehicles per day.
(c) The design speed for local streets shall be 25 miles per hour.
(2) A "collector street" is generally a street gathering traffic from local
streets and feeding it into a system of arterial highways.
(a) Even if laid out as a local street, a street should be considered
a collector street if it provides access or could provide access
to more than 150 lots, or would be utilized by traffic other than
residential in nature.
(b) Collector streets should generally be expected to carry traffic
volumes of approximately 3,000 vehicles per day.
(c) The design speed of collector streets, for alignment and sight
distance purposes, should be 50 miles per hour.
(3) "Arterials" are any federal, state or county highways intended to
carry traffic between other arterials and from the Borough to
destinations outside the Borough.
(4) Street classifications will be approved by the municipal agency in
accordance with the foregoing definitions, in accordance with the
provisions of the Master Plan and Official Map, if such is adopted,
in accordance with the provisions of applicable county and state
regulations or plans or, in the absence of specific information from
§ 120-17.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-17.7
1:455
the above, in accordance with its own best judgment concerning
the use to which the various streets in any development will be put.
F. All lots abutting collector streets should be provided with suitable
driveways for two cars with turnarounds eliminating any necessity for
vehicles to back into the collector street.
G. Other means of providing a satisfactory buffer separating through and
local traffic shall be provided as may be deemed proper by the
municipal agency.
H. Dwellings on corner lots shall have their driveway access on the
roadway designed and intended to carry the lesser amount of traffic.
I. Street intersections shall be designed according to the standards
contained herein:
(1) No more than two streets shall cross the same point. Street
intersections shall be right angles wherever possible, and
intersections of less than 60° (measured at the center line of
streets) shall not be permitted.
(2) Local streets should not enter the same side of collector streets at
intervals of less than 500 feet or arterials at intervals of less than
1,200 feet.
(3) Street jogs with center-line offsets of less than 125 feet shall be
avoided. Streets which enter collectors or arterials from opposite
sides shall be directly opposite to each other or must be separated
by at least 300 feet between their center lines, measured along the
center line of an intersected collector; or 500 feet along the center
line of an arterial.
(4) Four-way (cross) intersections involving minor or collector streets
shall be avoided.
J. Street layouts shall be in accordance with the provisions contained
herein:
(1) Curved local streets are preferred to discourage speed and
monotony. The maximum tangent distance between curves shall not
exceed 1,000 feet.
(2) The municipal agency in all cases may require provisions for
continuing circulation patterns onto adjacent properties and, for
this purpose, may require the provision of stub streets (street
extensions) abutting adjacent properties.
(3) Residential development areas containing more than 100 lots or
housing units should have two access points from collector streets
or arterial highways.
§ 120-17.7 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-17.7
1:456
(4) A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between
reverse curves on arterial and collector streets.
K. Street names and development names shall not duplicate, nearly
duplicate or be phonetically similar to the names of any existing streets
or developments in the Borough or contiguous areas of other
communities. Any continuation of an existing street shall have the same
street name. New streets shall be named by the Special Street Naming
Committee, established by appointment from the office of Mayor. The
Committee shall be advisory in nature and shall be appointed by the
Mayor when street naming services are needed. The Special Street
Naming Committee shall consist of five members. The Mayor shall
appoint one member from the administration, one member from the
Kenilworth Historical Society, one member from the Borough Council
and two members from the Kenilworth Central Veterans Committee.
The Committee shall function until its duties are complete. The Special
Street Naming Committee shall select proper street names as set forth
below:
(1) All new streets to be established in the Borough shall be named
after a Borough resident who died in combat in the service of the
United States until such names shall have been exhausted unless
the Special Street Naming Committee believes the street shall be
named in accordance with Subsection K(2) below. A list of such
residents shall be prepared and updated by the Kenilworth Central
Veterans Committee and placed on file with the Borough Clerk.
(2) All new streets shall be named after a historical figure or family of
the Borough when the proposed new street is to be constructed
upon their property, or which had been owned by such historical
figure or family.
(3) Any new street not falling into either category shall be named in
the discretion of the Special Street Naming Committee.
(4) All street names selected by the Special Street Naming Committee
must then be approved by the Borough Council and submitted to
the Planning Board for final approval in accordance with the terms
of this subsection.
L. The developer shall complete all improvements to the limits of the
development, unless other provisions have been made and approved by
the municipal agency.
(1) In those instances where completion of certain improvements
would not be possible until the development of adjacent land takes
place, alternate temporary improvements may be constructed,
subject to the approval of the municipal agency.
(2) Cash or a certified check representing the difference between the
value of the temporary improvements and the required
improvements may be accepted by the Borough Council to be
§ 120-17.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-17.7
1:457
§ 120-17.8. Subdivisions abutting public rights-of-way.
Subdivisions abutting public rights-of-way shall not be exempt from the
requirements of this chapter.
§ 120-17.9. Roadway construction.
credited toward the completion of such improvements at such time
as the adjacent land develops.
M. The right-of-way width shall be measured from lot line to lot line and
shall not be less than the following:
(1) Arterial streets: 80 feet.
(2) Collector streets: 60 feet.
(3) Minor streets: 50 feet.
(4) The right-of-way width for internal roads and alleys in multifamily,
commercial and industrial developments shall be determined on an
individual basis, and in all cases shall be of sufficient width and
design to safely accommodate the maximum traffic, parking and
loading needs and maximum access for firefighting equipment.
N. There shall be no reserve strips or areas controlling access to streets
except where control and disposal of the land comprising such strips or
areas have been placed under jurisdiction of the Borough Council under
conditions approved by the municipal agency.
A. Roadways and all appurtenances, including subgrade, subbase, base
courses and pavements, shall be constructed in accordance with the
applicable requirements of the Standard Specifications as modified
herein. All subsurface utilities, including service connections
(terminating at least two feet behind the sidewalk), to each lot and all
storm drains shall be installed in all roadway areas prior to the
construction of final pavement surfaces.
B. All roadways shall be constructed with either a bituminous concrete
flexible pavement structure or a Portland cement concrete rigid
pavement structure. Only one type of pavement shall be utilized
throughout any development.
C. The pavement structure design for each particular development
utilizing either a flexible or rigid pavement type must be approved by
the Borough Engineer.
(1) The pavement design shall be based upon traffic-loading
projections and field sampling and laboratory analysis of the
subgrade soils to be encountered in roadway areas in the
development and shall follow current design recommendations of
the Asphalt Institute, the Portland Cement Concrete Association or
§ 120-17.7 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-17.9
1:458
such other generally recognized standards as may be acceptable to
the Borough Engineer.
(a) As minimum requirements, rigid Portland cement paving shall
be expansion-joint-type paving utilizing joints similar to Type A
expansion joints, according to the Standard Construction
Details of the New Jersey Department of Transportation.
(b) Such paving shall be reinforced, constructed with Class B airentrained
concrete and shall have a minimum thickness of 6 1/
2 inches for local, local collector and minor collector streets
and eight inches for other classifications.
(2) Pavement on local, local collector and minor collector streets shall
be a four-inch dense aggregate subbase, four-inch compacted
thickness of bituminous stabilized base course (Mix I-2), with twoinch
compacted thickness of bituminous concrete surface course
(FABC, Mix I-5). On all other streets, not county or state
maintained, the pavement should be a six-inch dense aggregate
base course, six-inch compacted thickness of bituminous stabilized
base course (Mix I-2), with a two-inch compacted thickness of
bituminous concrete surface course (Mix I-5).
D. All subgrade shall be prepared in accordance with the applicable
requirements of the Standard Specifications for bituminous concrete
and reinforced concrete pavements.
E. Where granular subbase courses are included in the pavement design
section proposed by the developer, they shall be constructed in
accordance with the applicable requirements of the Standard
Specifications.
(1) Bituminous concrete pavements and stabilized bases may be
constructed on subgrade without subbase or aggregate base
courses, provided that the subgrade can be satisfactorily prepared
as hereinbefore described.
(2) Dense graded aggregate base courses shall comply with the
requirements of the Standard Specifications.
(3) Portland cement concrete pavements must be constructed with a
minimum of six inches of a granular-type subbase meeting the
requirements of the Standard Specifications.
(4) Any subbase course of aggregate base course to be utilized with
any type of pavement shall have a minimum thickness of four
inches.
F. Bituminous base course for use with bituminous concrete pavements
shall consist of plant-mixed bituminous stabilized base course (stone
mix or gravel mix) in accordance with the requirements of the Standard
Specifications, except that the requirements for the construction of the
§ 120-17.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-17.9
1:459
base course shall be amended to allow the laying of the base course
with a single-lift maximum thickness not exceeding four inches. Prior
to placement of any bituminous stabilized base course, the finished
surface of any underlying subbase or aggregate base shall receive
a prime coat in accordance with the requirements of the Standard
Specifications.
G. Bituminous pavements shall consist of a bituminous concrete surface
course Type FABC-1, in accordance with the requirements of the
Standard Specifications.
(1) The bituminous pavement wearing surface should generally not be
installed until just prior to the time the streets are prepared for
final acceptance.
(a) Prior to the installation of a bituminous concrete surface, the
bituminous base course shall be inspected by the Borough
Engineer.
(b) Any areas of the base course in need of repair shall be removed
and replaced at the direction of the Borough Engineer.
(c) If the Borough Engineer directs, a leveling course of FABC
(Mix I-5) material shall be placed on any uneven or belowgrade
base courses prior to the placement of finished
pavement.
(2) No pavement surfaces shall be placed unless permission to do so
has been granted by the Borough Engineer.
H. Concrete pavements shall be constructed in accordance with the
requirements of the Standard Specifications.
I. In areas where alternate pavement types are proposed or desired,
either for decorative purposes, because of physical restrictions or
existing conditions or because of limitations or shortages in certain
types of construction materials, a detail of the type and/or location of
alternate pavement type proposed shall be submitted for approval with
the preliminary and/or final plat.
(1) The use of alternate pavement types may only be permitted if the
applicant submits for review and approval details and
specifications concerning the equipment, materials and methods
proposed for use and if the Borough Engineer has inspected the
installation of and tested and approved of a suitable sample section
of such pavement.
(2) In the event that the Borough Engineer does not approve the
sample section of pavement, the developer shall remove the same
section and replace it with a type of pavement permitted by this
Part 2 or such other alternate as may be approved by the reviewing
agency.
§ 120-17.9 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-17.10
1:460
§ 120-17.10. Concrete requirements.
A. All concrete used in any subdivision or site improvement shall be
prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Standard
Specifications for the various classes of concrete used, except that the
twenty-eight-day compressive strength of the concrete used shall not be
less than the following:
Type of Concrete
Strength
(pounds per square inch)
Class A 5,000
Class B 4,500
Class C 4,000
Class D 3,500
B. Unless specific written permission is obtained from the Borough
Engineer to the contrary, only concrete obtained from dry-batched,
redi-mix trucks shall be allowed.
C. Concrete shall be cured with a compound in accordance with the
following methods or materials:
(1) Methods of application. The compound shall be applied in a
continuous uniform film by means of power-operated pressurespraying
or distributing equipment at the rate directed by the
Engineer, but not less than one gallon per 200 square feet of
surface. The equipment for applying the compound shall provide
for adequate agitation of the compound during application and
must be approved by the Engineer before work is started. If the
compound becomes too thick for satisfactory application during
cold weather, the material may be warmed in a water bath at a
temperature not over 100° F. Thinning with solvents will not be
permitted. Should the method of applying the compound produce a
nonuniform film, its use shall be discontinued, and the curing shall
be done by another method approved by the Engineer that will
conform to the requirements for curing concrete.
(2) Materials for curing. Liquid compound, clear or translucent. Clear
or translucent liquid-curing compound shall consist of a blend of
resins and other suitable materials held in solution in a volatile
solvent. It shall not separate on standing, shall be nontoxic and
shall become dry to the touch within four hours after being applied
to the concrete under ordinary conditions. Acceptance for
continued use also will be based upon satisfactory field
performance.
(3) Consistency. The consistency of the compound shall be such that it
can be applied to the concrete in the amount specified as a fine
spray by means of an atomizing nozzle.
§ 120-17.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-17.10
1:461
§ 120-17.11. Curbs and gutters.
Curbing shall be constructed on both sides of all streets shown on all major
and minor subdivisions and shall be required for all plot and site plans in
accordance with municipal standards. Unless otherwise noted, all parking
areas and driveways on site plans shall be curbed. Concrete stops, unless
part of a planned stormwater management plan, shall not be permitted.
(4) Character of film. The compound shall adhere to damp, vertical or
horizontal concrete surfaces forming a continuous coherent film
when applied at the specified rate. When dry, the film shall not be
tacky or track off the concrete when walked upon, nor impact a
slippery condition to the surface.
(5) Color. The compound shall produce no darkening or changing of
the color of the concrete to which it is applied. It shall, however, be
of such a nature or so treated that the film will be distinctively
visible for at least four hours after application. Any coloring matter
added to the compound shall be a fugitive organic dye of a color
approved by the Engineer. All trace of this color shall be indistinct
30 days after application.
(6) Reaction with concrete. The compound shall not react deleteriously
with the wet course and shall form a superficial layer over the
surface thereof.
(7) Moisture retention. When tested in accordance with current ASTM
Designation C 156, the moisture loss shall be not more than 0.055
gram per square centimeter of the mortar specimen surface, based
on the amount of water in the mortar at the time the curing
material is applied.
A. Layout. The arrangement of streets not shown on the Master Plan or
Official Map shall be such as to provide for the appropriate extension of
existing streets and, where necessary in order to promote orderly flow
of traffic, safety and welfare of the public, shall be such as to provide for
appropriate extension to adjoining properties for future streets.
B. Minor streets. Minor streets shall be so designed as to discourage
through traffic.
C. Arterial streets; service roads; buffers. Subdivisions abutting arterial
streets shall provide a marginal service road or reserve frontage with a
buffer strip for planting, or some other means of separation of through
and local traffic as the Planning Board may determine appropriate.
D. Width. The right-of-way width shall be measured from lot line to lot line
and shall not be less than the following:
(1) Arterial streets: 80 feet.
(2) Collector streets: 60 feet.
§ 120-17.10 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-17.11
1:462
(3) Minor streets: 50 feet.
(4) The right-of-way width for internal roads and alleys in multifamily,
commercial and industrial developments shall be determined on an
individual basis, and in all cases shall be of sufficient width and
design to safely accommodate the maximum traffic, parking and
loading needs and maximum access for firefighting equipment.
E. Reserve strips. No subdivision showing reserve strips controlling
access to streets shall be approved, except where the control and
disposal of land comprising such strips has been placed in the Borough
Council under conditions recommended by the Planning Board.
F. Street grades. Grades of arterial and collector streets shall not exceed
4% unless, because of local conditions, the Borough Engineer may
approve another percentage. Grades on other streets shall not exceed
10%. No street shall have a minimum grade of less than 0.5%.
G. Intersections. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as
is possible. In no case shall they be less than 60° nor more than 120°.
The block corners at intersections shall be rounded at the curbline with
a curve having a radius of not less than 20 feet.
H. Street jogs. Street jogs with center-line offsets of less than 125 feet
shall be prohibited.
I. Reverse curves. A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be introduced
between reverse curves on arterial and collector streets.
J. Connecting curves. When connecting street lines deflect from each
other at any one point by more than 10° and not more than 45°, they
shall be connected by a curve with a radius of 300 feet.
K. Vertical curves. All changes in grades in excess of 1 1/2% shall be
connected by vertical curves of sufficient length to provide a smooth
transaction and proper sight distance.
L. Dead-end streets. Dead-end streets and culs-de-sac shall not be longer
than 1,000 feet from the nearest intersection and shall provide a
turnaround at the end with a radius of not less than 50 feet to the base
of the curb and tangent, whenever possible, to the right side of the
street. If a dead-end street is of a temporary nature, a similar
turnaround shall be provided and provisions made for future extension
of the street and reversion of the excess right-of-way to the adjoining
properties. Wherever a temporary or permanent turnaround is
proposed on any street, the front yard setback line shall be measured
from the turnaround.
M. (Reserved)99
99.Editor's Note: Original § 225-251M, regarding street names, which was previously
included here, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. II). See § 120-17.7K.
§ 120-17.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-17.11
1:463
§ 120-17.12. Sidewalks and aprons.
(1) All new streets to be established in the Borough shall be named
after a Borough resident who died in combat in the service of the
United States until such names shall have been exhausted, unless
the Special Street Naming Committee believes the street shall be
named in accordance with Subsection M(2) below. A list of such
residents shall be prepared and updated by the Kenilworth Central
Veterans Committee and placed on file with the Borough Clerk.
(2) All new streets shall be named after a historical figure or family of
the Borough when the proposed new street is to be constructed
upon their property, or which had been owned by such historical
figure or family.
(3) Any new street not falling into either category shall be named in
the discretion of the Special Street Naming Committee.
(4) All street names selected by the Special Street Naming Committee
must then be approved by the Borough Council and submitted to
the Planning Board for final approval in accordance with the terms
of this Subsection M.
N. Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall be required. Parking layouts
shall be subject to the approval of the Planning Board and shall
normally include turnarounds. Residential lots shall be so arranged that
there is no backing out into the street.
O. Street construction permit. Before any street dedicated to public use in
an existing subdivision may be constructed or reconstructed hereafter,
the owners of abutting properties, the developer or other parties in
interest shall make application, in writing, for a permit to the Borough
Council and Planning Board, specifying the nature and location of the
improvement to be made, and shall furnish the Borough Council a
certificate from the Planning Board showing that the proposed street
construction or reconstruction conforms to the provisions of this Part 2.
The Borough Engineer shall inspect the proposed improvement and
report to the Borough Council before the issuance of the permit.
P. Vacation of streets. Vacation ordinances shall be referred to the
Planning Board for recommendation prior to final approval by the
Borough Council.
A. Sidewalk construction shall be required on both sides of all streets
within a development and entirely around the perimeter of all culs-desac.
Where the development abuts an existing street, the sidewalk shall
be constructed only on that side or as approved by the reviewing
agency. Sidewalks shall also be constructed at any other places, such as
pedestrian walkways or access points to open space, as shown on or
required at the approval of the final plat.
§ 120-17.11 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-17.12
1:464
§ 120-17.13. Guardrails.
(1) Installation of sidewalks may be waived by the reviewing agency,
with the written permission of the Borough Council, at the request
of the developer or on its own initiative, provided that, upon
granting such a waiver, the developer shall be required to pay the
Borough of Kenilworth an amount equal to the reasonable cost of
installing said sidewalks, said amount to be determined by the
Borough Engineer upon submission and consideration of various
estimates and other documentation from the developer, other
interested parties and the office of the Borough Engineer itself.
(2) All funds collected by the Borough from developers as a result of
waivers granted in accordance with this section shall be
maintained in a sidewalk construction account, the proceeds of
which shall be available to install sidewalks throughout the
Borough where and as authorized by the Borough Council.
(3) Nothing contained herein shall affect the right of the Borough to
enact ordinances requiring assessments for sidewalks from
property owners as authorized under N.J.S.A. 40:65-2 or other
statutory rights granted to municipalities.
B. Sidewalks within a street right-of-way shall generally be located with
the sidewalk edge farthest from the roadway, placed one foot from the
property line. Sidewalks not within street rights-of-way shall be located
to provide for the most likely routes of pedestrian travel. In cases where
the topography dictates or a proposed development provides for the
extension of an existing street or abuts an existing street, where
sidewalks have already been installed in a location other than as
specified above or where such variations in sidewalk locations are
needed to preserve trees or natural features, the municipal agency may
approve alternate sidewalk locations in order to provide for
preservation of physical features or the continuation of the existing
sidewalks. Where appropriate, sidewalks shall be designed to discharge
stormwater away from connecting paved surfaces and toward
neighboring lawns where feasible to disconnect these impervious
surfaces.
C. Sidewalks shall be four feet wide and four inches thick of Class B, airentrained
Portland cement concrete. Joints shall be cut in the sidewalk
at intervals equal to the width of the sidewalk. Preformed cellular
bituminous expansion joint filler shall be placed at joints not more than
20 feet on centers.
D. Curb ramps for the physically handicapped shall be provided at all curb
returns on the side(s) of the street where the sidewalk either exists or is
proposed and in all curblines intersected by sidewalk. Details of the
proposed ramps shall be shown on the preliminary plans of the
proposed development.
§ 120-17.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-17.13
1:465
§ 120-17.14. Blocks.
§ 120-17.15. Lot requirements.
A. Guardrails, pipe railing or other appropriate barricades, as required by
the reviewing agency, shall be designed and placed at drainage
structures, streams, embankment limits, curries and other required
locations.
B. Guardrails shall be standard steel-beam type with galvanized steel
posts in accordance with the Standard Specification details. Alternate
design of guardrails and barricades may be used and shall be submitted
for approval as part of the final plat submission. The use of cables, lines
or chains shall not be permitted.
A. Size. Block length and width, or acreage within bounding roads, shall
be such as to accommodate the size of lot required in the area by Part 3,
Zoning, and to provide adequately for sewage disposal, convenient
access, circulation control and safety of street traffic.
B. Minimum length and width. Blocks shall not be more than 600 feet in
length, nor a lesser number of feet in width than is necessary to comply
with the Borough zoning requirements, except where the Planning
Board may deem that existing or future conditions warrant a variation
from such requirements.
C. Commercial block size. For business, commercial or industrial use,
block size shall be sufficient to meet all area and yard requirements for
such use.
D. Internal roads. Alleys or road easements within blocks in commercial,
business or industrial areas may provide for access from at least two
streets and shall have a suitable width as determined by the Planning
Board.
A. Unless otherwise provided in this Part 2, lot area and dimensions shall
not be less than the requirements of the respective zoning districts as
set forth in Part 3, Zoning.
(1) The reviewing agency may require larger lots where additional
area will partially or completely eliminate the necessity of changes
in grade, which, in the opinion of the Board, would cause
unreasonable destruction of the topography or environment or
would create drainage or erosion problems.
(2) The reviewing agency may require larger lots adjacent to collector
or arterial streets where, in the opinion of the Board, the larger lots
would promote the health, safety and general welfare of the public
and the residents of the development.
(3) The reviewing agency may require larger lots where such lots are
plotted on a tract or tracts containing tidal or freshwater wetlands,
§ 120-17.13 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-17.15
1:466
steep slopes in excess of 8%, lakes and ponds, stream corridors,
floodways and floodplains. Where such conditions exist, the Board
may require that each lot contain an area unencumbered by the
aforementioned conditions equal to the minimum area
requirements of the respective zone district.
B. Insofar as is practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight
streets and radial to curved streets.
C. Lot line on widened street. Where extra width is to be provided for the
widening of existing streets, lot measurements shall begin at the
proposed right-of-way line, and all setbacks shall be measured from
such lines unless otherwise provided by this Part 2.
D. Unsuitable lots. All lots shall be suitable for the purpose for which they
are intended to be used. To prevent the use of lots which are not
suitable because of adverse topography, flood conditions, shallow depth
to water table or similar circumstances:
(1) The reviewing agency may withhold approval of such lots or
require revisions in a layout of the subdivision to provide that the
area of the unsuitable lot is included in other lots by increasing the
size of the remaining lots.
(2) Unsuitable lots may be included in an area to be deeded to the
Borough or other public or quasi-public body and will be held in
their natural state for conservation and/or recreation purposes.
(3) Some other suitable arrangement could be derived to alleviate the
condition.
E. A minimum of five substantially different front elevations with varied
setbacks, as approved by the reviewing agency, shall be used for
dwellings in each subdivision.
F. Only those trees shall be removed as shall be necessary to permit
construction of streets, driveways, lawns and dwellings and other
authorized structures.
G. In accordance with the Tax Map specifications of the State of New
Jersey, dated May 1975, prepared by the State of New Jersey,
Department of the Treasury, as amended, subdivided lots and blocks
shall generally bear the original numbers, with a decimal and a number
added as a subscript. Lot and block numbers shall be assigned by the
Borough Engineer.
H. House numbers shall be assigned to each lot prior to final plat approval
by the reviewing agency.
I. Lot frontage. Each lot shall front on an approved street accepted or to
be accepted by the Borough.
§ 120-17.15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-17.15
1:467
§ 120-17.16. Additional lot requirements.
§ 120-17.17. Public open space and common open space.
J. All structures shall be accessible by means of an approved driveway.
The driveway shall be not less than 10 feet wide and shall have a centerline
grade of not less than 0.5% and not greater than 10%. For all nonsingle-
family uses, driveways must provide turnarounds to eliminate
the necessity of any vehicle backing onto any street.
A. Lot dimensions, front, side and rear yards, and total area shall not be
less than the requirements of Part 3, Zoning.
B. Each lot must front upon an approved street at least 50 feet in width at
the street line, except lots fronting on streets described in
§ 120-17.11D(4).
C. Where extra width has been dedicated for widening of existing streets,
lots shall begin at such extra width lines, and all setbacks shall be
measured from such lines.
D. Where there is a question as to the suitability of a lot or lots for their
intended use due to factors such as rock formations, flood conditions,
sewage disposal or similar circumstances, the Planning Board may,
after adequate investigation, with professional assistance, if deemed
necessary, withhold approval of such lots.
A. Public open space or common open space shall be proposed to be
provided in conjunction with applications for development for
subdivisions or site plans in accordance with requirements contained
herein.
B. Natural features, such as trees, brooks, hilltops and views, shall be
preserved whenever possible in designing any subdivision containing
such features.
C. If the Master Plan or the Official Map provides for the reservation of
designated streets, public drainageways, flood-control basins or public
areas within the proposed development, before approving a subdivision
or site plan, the reviewing agency may further require that such streets,
ways, basins or areas be shown on the plat in locations and sizes
suitable to their intended uses.
(1) Any land shown on the Master Plan as proposed for park,
playground, school site or other public use shall be designated and
reserved for such use.
D. Where it is considered appropriate by the reviewing agency, portions of
proposed open spaces may be designated for passive and/or active
recreational activities.
§ 120-17.15 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-17.17
1:468
(1) Passive recreational activities may include, but are not limited to,
pedestrian paths, bicycle paths, sitting areas and naturally
preserved areas.
(2) Active recreation activities may include, but are not limited to,
swimming pools, tennis courts and ball fields.
(3) The location and shape of any land to be designated for
recreational activities shall be approved by the reviewing agency
based on, but not limited to, the standards contained herein:
(a) The reviewing agency shall consider the natural topography
and shall attempt to preserve the same to the greatest extent
possible.
(b) The reviewing agency shall attempt to tailor the location and
shape of recreational areas to harmonize with the shape of the
entire development.
(c) The reviewing agency shall consider the extent to which
specific recreational areas shall be used for passive or active
recreational purposes.
(d) The reviewing agency shall consider the sequence of
development.
E. Within open space areas, the reviewing agency may require a developer
to make certain site preparation improvements, which may include, but
are not limited to, those contained herein:
(1) Removal of dead or diseased trees.
(2) Thinning of trees or other growth to encourage more desirable
growth.
(3) Removal of trees in areas planned for ponds, lakes, active
recreational facilities or pathways.
(4) Grading and seeding.
F. Open space areas shall be subject to these requirements:
(1) Open space areas should not be less than 50 feet in width at any
location, except, where such open space is to be utilized primarily
for walkway access from a public street to the open space at the
rear of building lots, it may have a minimum width of 20 feet for a
length not to exceed 250 feet.
(2) Where possible, certain land areas and features as follows shall be
preserved as open space:
(a) Floodway and flood hazard areas.
§ 120-17.17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-17.17
1:469
(b) Areas containing a significant number of trees 12 inches or
greater in diameter.
(c) Existing watercourses or ponds.
(d) Land with a seasonal high-water table of less than two feet.
(e) Wetlands, as defined by the New Jersey Wetlands Act of
1970100 and delineated on wetlands maps prepared by the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
G. The type of ownership of land dedicated for open space purposes shall
be selected by the owner, developer or subdivider, subject to the
approval of the reviewing agency.
(1) These shall include:
(a) The Borough of Kenilworth, subject to acceptance of the
Borough Council.
(b) Other public jurisdictions or agencies, subject to their
acceptance.
(c) Quasi-public organizations, subject to their acceptance.
(d) Homeowners' or condominium associations or organizations.
(e) Shared, undivided interest by all property owners in the
development.
(2) Any lands dedicated for open space purposes shall contain
appropriate covenants and deed restrictions approved by the
reviewing agency, which ensure that:
(a) The open space area will not be further subdivided in the
future.
(b) The use of the open space areas will continue in perpetuity for
the purpose specified.
(c) Appropriate provisions are made for the maintenance of the
open space areas.
(3) No final approval of a subdivision or site plan containing open
space created pursuant to this article shall be granted until the
developer has submitted, and the reviewing agency has approved,
the master deed for such open space and the bylaws of the
organization established pursuant to this Part 2.
H. The Borough or other governmental agency may, at any time and from
time to time, accept the dedication of land or any interest therein for
public use and maintenance, but the reviewing agency shall not require
100. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:9A-1 et seq.
§ 120-17.17 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-17.17
1:470
as a condition of approval that land proposed to be set aside for
common open space be dedicated or made available to public use.
(1) The developer shall provide for an organization for the ownership
and maintenance of any open space for the benefit of owners or
residents of the development if the open space is not dedicated to
the Borough or other governmental agency.
(a) Such organization shall not be dissolved and shall not dispose
of any open space, by sale or otherwise, except to an
organization conceived and established to own and maintain
the open space for the benefit of such development.
(b) Thereafter, such organization shall not be dissolved or dispose
of any of its open space without first offering to dedicate the
same to the Borough.
(2) In the event that such organization shall fail to maintain the open
space in reasonable order and condition, the administrative officer
may serve written notice upon such organization or upon the
owners of the development setting forth the manner in which the
organization has failed to maintain the open space in reasonable
condition.
(a) The notice shall include a demand that such deficiencies of
maintenance be cured within 35 days thereof and shall state
the date and place of a hearing thereon which shall be held
within 15 days of the notice.
(b) At such hearing, the administrative officer may modify the
terms of the original notice as to deficiencies and may give a
reasonable extension of time, not to exceed 65 days, within
which they shall be cured.
(c) If the deficiencies set forth in the original notice or in the
modification thereof shall not be cured within 35 days or any
permitted extension thereof, the Borough, in order to preserve
the open space and maintain the same for a period of one year,
may enter upon and maintain such land. The entry and
maintenance shall not vest in the public any rights to use the
open space by the owners.
[1] Before the expiration of the year, the administrative officer
shall, upon his initiative or upon the request of the
organization theretofore responsible for the maintenance
of the open space, call a public hearing upon 15 days'
written notice to such organization and to the owners of
the development to be held by the administrative officer
(Zoning Officer), at which hearing such organization and
the owners of the development shall show cause why such
maintenance by the Borough shall not, at the election of
the Borough, continue for a succeeding year.
§ 120-17.17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-17.17
1:471
§ 120-17.18. Recreation areas.
Where recreation areas and facilities are required or provided, the
regulations and standards contained herein shall apply, along with
appropriate sections of this Part 2:
[2] If the administrative officer shall determine that such
organization is ready and able to maintain the open space
in reasonable condition, the Borough shall cease to
maintain the open space at the end of the year.
[3] If the administrative officer shall determine that such
organization is not ready and able to maintain the open
space in a reasonable condition, the Borough may, in its
discretion, continue to maintain the open space during the
next succeeding year, subject to a similar hearing and
determination in each year thereafter.
[4] The decision of the administrative officer in any such case
shall constitute a final administrative decision subject to
judicial review.
(d) The cost of such maintenance by the Borough shall be assessed
pro rata against the properties within the development that
have a right of enjoyment of the open space in accordance with
assessed value at the time of imposition of the lien and shall
become a lien and tax on the properties and be added to and be
a part of the taxes to be levied and assessed thereon and
enforced and collected with interest by the same officers and in
the same manner as other taxes.
A. Sufficient outdoor play and activity equipment shall be installed in
accordance with standards of the National Recreation and Parks
Association for the expected number of residents in the development.
(1) It should be located in an area which will not be detrimental to
adjacent properties or uses.
(2) The provision and location of such equipment shall be subject to
reviewing agency approval.
B. Private swimming pools in residential areas shall have a gross area of
water and deck designated for the needs of the residents of the
development.
(1) All swimming pools shall be fully enclosed by a chain-link or other
fully approved fence equipped with gates and locks in compliance
with all applicable building codes.
(2) All swimming pools shall have adequate lifesaving equipment in
compliance with all applicable building codes.
§ 120-17.17 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-17.18
1:472
§ 120-17.19. Easements.
(3) Within accessory building(s), all such pools shall have adequate
lavatory facilities, plus, under lock and key, storage facilities
wherein shall be kept all pool chemicals and equipment.
A. Drainage easements.
(1) If the property on which a proposed development is to be located is
or is proposed to be traversed by a drainage facility of any kind,
including a pipe, channel, stream or swale, the reviewing agency
may require that a stormwater and drainage easement or right-ofway
along said facility shall be provided by the developer,
conforming substantially with the lines of such facility.
(2) If existing land drainage structures, such as french drains, are
encountered during the course of construction of any development,
such drainage structures shall either be removed entirely or a
revised final plat showing the location of such drainage structures
and accompanied with detailed cross sections thereof shall be filed
with the Borough Engineer for consideration by the reviewing
agency. The reviewing agency, after consulting its engineer and
other appropriate agencies, shall either require a drainage
easement, require that the structure be removed in part or in its
entirety or recommend such other action to the governing body as
it deems appropriate.
(3) All easements shall be shown on the final plat or site plan with a
notation as to the purpose and restrictions of the easement.
Easement lines of a final plan shall be shown with accurate
dimensions and bearings unless the easement lines are parallel or
concentric with lot lines.
(4) The land which is the subject of an easement or right-of-way shall,
in the case of storm drains or constructed channels, be of a suitable
width meeting the requirements for design of drainage facilities, or
be a strip which conforms substantially to the floodplain of any
watercourse along both sides of the watercourse to a width of 35
feet in each direction from the center line of the watercourse,
whichever is the greater; except, however, that if the location of
such watercourse is at or near the boundary of the subdivision, the
dimensions of the easements and right-of-way shall be modified to
retain it within the confines of the development.
(5) The easement and right-of-way shall include provisions assuring
the following:
(a) Preservation of the channel of the watercourse.
(b) Except in the course of an authorized drainage improvement,
prohibition of alteration of the contour, topography or
composition of the land within the easement and right-of-way.
§ 120-17.18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-17.19
1:473
(c) Prohibition of construction within the boundaries of the
easement and right-of-way which will obstruct or interfere with
the natural flow of the watercourse.
(d) Reservation of a public right of entry for the purpose of
maintaining the storm drain, drainage channel or the natural
flow or drainage through the watercourse, of maintaining any
and all structures related to the exercise of the easement and
right-of-way and of installing and maintaining a storm or
sanitary sewer system or other public utility.
B. Conservation easements.
(1) Conservation easements may be required along all drainage and
stormwater rights-of-way in the development and may be required
also along ponds, marshes, swamps and streams or other
watercourses along which drainage rights-of-way are not required.
Such easements are intended to help prevent the siltation of
streams and other courses and adjacent lands.
(2) The land subjected to a conservation easement shall be a strip at
least 25 feet but not more than 100 feet in width, independently
located or running adjacent to each side of any required drainage
or stormwater right-of-way. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
(3) Such conservation easement shall contain provisions to restrict the
removal of trees and ground cover, except for the following
purposes: removal of dead or diseased trees; thinning of trees and
other growth to encourage a more desirable growth; removal of
trees to allow for structures designed to impound water; and
removal of trees in areas to be flooded for the creation of ponds or
lakes.
(4) The easements shall also prohibit filling or grading of the lands or
the disposal of refuse or waste material of any type within the limits
of the easement.
(5) The easement shall be indicated on the plat and shall be marked on
the land by iron stakes wherever the lines of such easement change
direction or intersect lot lines.
C. Sight triangle easements.
(1) In addition to right-of-way widths required for the full design of all
streets and the wider intersections as specified, sight triangle
easements may be required on all corners at all street
intersections.
(2) Such easements shall include provisions to restrict the planting of
trees or other plantings or the location of structures exceeding 30
inches in height that would obstruct the clear sight across the area
§ 120-17.19 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-17.19
1:474
§ 120-17.20. Garages.
of the easements and a reservation to the public right of entry
for the purpose of removing any object, natural or otherwise, that
obstructs the clear sight.
(3) Such easements shall include the area of each street corner that is
bounded by Borough street right-of-way lines and a straight line
connecting points on each right-of-way line 50 feet from the
intersection of the right-of-way lines with points on the intersecting
right-of-way line, which points are the following distances from the
intersection of the right-of-way lines, or of their prolongations:
(a) On local streets: 50 feet.
(b) On collector streets: 100 feet.
(c) On arterial streets: 200 feet.
(4) Where intersections occur on highways or roadways under the
jurisdiction of the State of New Jersey or County of Union, the sight
triangle easements required by the state or the County of Union
shall be substituted in lieu of the requirements above.
A. Underground garages or garages under structures shall be properly
lighted.
(1) Roofs of garages may be landscaped or utilized for approved
recreation uses, such as but not limited to tennis courts.
(2) The garage shall be designed to be properly drained.
B. A garage which is within the building line of a principal building shall
contain not more than 50 parking spaces.
(1) Private garages which are an integral part of an individual dwelling
unit shall not contain more than two parking spaces each, and each
parking space shall contain a minimum of 240 square feet of floor
area.
(2) A private garage for an individual dwelling unit shall not have
access thereto from another dwelling unit or garage.
C. An accessory commercial or industrial building garage shall be fully
enclosed and have a full roof covering all parking spaces.
(1) Such garage shall contain at least four parking spaces.
(2) No portion of more than one level shall be above ground.
(3) All levels shall be lighted and properly ventilated, and any
underground levels shall meet all the requirements set forth above
for an underground garage.
§ 120-17.19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-17.20
1:475
§ 120-17.21. Monuments and iron stakes. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
Monuments shall be of a size and shape required by N.J.S.A. 46:26B-3,
Monumentation, and amendments and supplements thereto, and the New
Jersey State Board of Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors and shall
be placed in accordance with the statute. In addition to the required
monuments, after the grading is finished the developer shall install a solid
steel stake one inch in diameter and 30 inches in length on lot corners, lot
line angle points or other changes in direction not marked by monuments
and at all angle points or discontinuities in easement lines where such
easements are not parallel to property lines.
§ 120-17.22. Streetlighting.
D. No freestanding commercial garage or parking structure shall be
placed nearer than 100 feet to a side or rear property line. In no case
shall a garage or accessory building be permitted between a street
frontage and building.
(1) Garages, whether attached or detached, shall be arranged to open
to the side or rear of the lot, except fully detached garages located
entirely to the rear of the principal building.
(2) Attached garages shall have a joint capacity of not more than 10
vehicles arranged in a row, and there shall be a minimum distance
of 20 feet between such structures.
(3) Garages and other accessory buildings shall be no more than one
story in height.
(4) The architectural design and materials used in the construction
thereof shall conform to the design and building materials used in
the construction of the main structures.
(5) No part of any garage or other accessory building shall be used for
living purposes.
E. All public garages shall have adequate security provisions.
F. Only passenger vehicles, small vans, pickup trucks and similar vehicles,
whether such carry passenger or commercial plates, may be parked in
any parking space for extended periods.
G. Garages and parking areas shall be used as automobile parking units
only, with no sales, dead storage, dismantling or servicing of any kind
permitted.
A. For all major subdivisions which require site plan approval, the
developer shall arrange with the serving public utility to provide
streetlighting service upon the appropriate tariff and prevailing
government rules and regulations. The reviewing agency may alter the
§ 120-17.20 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-17.22
1:476
§ 120-17.23. Street signs.
streetlighting requirements as it deems appropriate due to special
circumstances, including but not limited to intersections, curves, culsde-
sac and collector or arterial roadways.
B. The serving public utility shall install wiring in addition to that on the
approved streetlighting plan where the additional wiring is required to
accommodate the full plan in accordance with the utility's filed tariff
and approved procedure at the time.
C. The cost of this additional wiring shall be the responsibility of the
subdivider.
D. Streetlighting shall be installed, as directed by and subject to approval
by the reviewing agency, prior to the certificates of occupancy being
issued.
E. The cost of the additional wiring and electricity for streetlighting for all
streets within the development shall be paid for by the owner or
subdivider until streets are accepted by the Borough, all certificates of
occupancy have been issued and the Borough Council has authorized
the release of all performance bonds upon completion of all
improvements for the development.
F. (Reserved)101
G. No subdivision plat shall receive final approval unless the suggested
streetlighting plan of the electric utility is shown thereon.
H. After final acceptance, operation and maintenance costs of the
streetlighting shall be the responsibility of the Borough.
I. All wiring shall be underground.
A. Street signs shall be appropriate metal street signs of a type and size
approved by resolution of the Borough Council in accordance with all
state regulations and shall be properly installed at each street
intersection.
B. Street signs shall be placed, two per intersection, on the near righthand
corner as viewed from both directions on the street which is
expected to carry the greatest traffic through the intersection at
locations approved by the Borough Engineer.
C. Mountings shall be in accordance with the standard procedures of the
Borough or with requirements adopted by the Borough Council.
D. Street signs shall be placed before any certificate of occupancy for
houses on the subject street is issued.
101. Editor's Note: Original § 225-262F, regarding the suggested streetlighting plan, which was
previously included here, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II). See § 120-17.22G.
§ 120-17.22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-17.24
1:477
§ 120-17.24. Street trees.
A. Any person erecting or constructing any new buildings or residences
within the Borough which require site plan or subdivision approval shall
plant pollution-resistant shade trees on the property owner's side of the
sidewalk adjacent thereto.
(1) In each subdivision of land, the developer shall plant between the
sidewalk and the right-of-way line proper shade and/or decorative
trees of a type approved by the municipal agency in consultation
with the Department of Public Works. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
(2) Planting sites shall be indicated on the preliminary plat.
B. Street trees shall be planted on the property owner's side of the
sidewalk, not to lie closer than five feet to existing or future sidewalks.
(1) In all cases, said trees shall be planted in a place which shall not
interfere with utilities.
(2) Trees shall be of pollution-resistant varieties selected from among
species determined by the Department of Public Works or Borough
Planner or Borough Engineer. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
(3) The municipal agency, in consultation with the Department of
Public Works or Borough Planner or Borough Engineer, may reduce
or waive such plantings if there are approved varieties of trees
growing along such right-of-way or on the property abutting the
street line. A developer shall make a donation to the Shade Tree
Fund in lieu of the required plantings. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
C. The subdivider or developer shall be required to plant such number of
trees as shall be necessary, when taking into consideration existing
trees, to provide at least one tree in every 30 feet of front yard.
(1) Pollution-resistant shade trees shall be planted along all private
streets, undedicated roads, drives and parking areas at intervals of
not more than 30 feet of curbing or edge of pavement.
(2) No tree shall be planted less than 25 feet from an existing or
proposed streetlight or street intersection.
D. Pollution-resistant trees referred to above shall be selected from among
species determined by the Department of Public Works, the Borough
Engineer or the Borough Planner. Suitable trees shall be selected on the
basis of specific site conditions.
E. All shade trees to be hereafter planted in accordance with this Part 2
shall be nursery grown or of substantially uniform size and shape and
shall have straight trunks.
§ 120-17.24 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-17.24
1:478
§ 120-17.25. Buffers and landscaping.
(1) Ornamental trees need not have straight trunks but must conform
in all other respects to the provisions for trees and tree plantings
outlined in this Part 2.
(2) All trees shall be of Grade A nursery stock, with a minimum caliper
of two to 2 1/2 inches measured one foot from the butt.
A. Buffering and screening design and standards.
(1) Guidelines. The following guidelines shall be used to prepare and
review buffering and screening for any development plan. The
provision of buffer areas and screening within such areas shall take
into account the opportunities and constraints of existing
conditions on the site, such as existing vegetation to be preserved,
critical views into and out of the site, the days and hours of
operation, intensity of use of the proposed development, potential
off-site impacts and other such issues.
(2) General standards. The following standards shall be used to
prepare and review screening devices required in this article:
(a) Evergreen trees or hedges. Where an evergreen screen is
utilized, such plantings shall be sufficiently dense so as to
provide a minimum of 75% of the required screening at time of
planting. Arrangement of plantings shall be in a continuous
row and may be overlapped or staggered within such row.
Placement of such plantings shall provide maximum protection
to existing vegetation to be preserved located in the buffer
area and on adjacent properties.
(b) Walls and fences. Where a masonry wall or solid wooden fence
is utilized, the design of such shall be architecturally
compatible with the style, materials, colors and details of the
building(s) on the site. Where such wall or fence fronts toward
or is visible from a public right-of-way, foundation plantings
shall be planted along the base of all visible portions of the wall
or fence.
(c) Earth berms. Where an earth berm is utilized, it shall be
designed to have a maximum side slope of one increment high
to two increments wide or a ratio of one high to two wide (one
to two). The minimum width of the top of a berm shall be four
feet. Berms shall be composed of a soil type sufficient to
sustain the growth of plantings it will support. Berms shall be
landscaped with combinations of evergreen and deciduous
trees and shrubs and ground cover.
(3) Specific standards. The following standards shall be used to
prepare buffering and screening for any development plan:
§ 120-17.24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-17.25
1:479
(a) Residential uses and districts. Any residential use and district
shall be suitably buffered and screened from all uses other
than single- and two-family dwellings in order to minimize the
impacts of noise, glare, vibration, vehicular traffic, pedestrian
activity and other potential nuisances. The width of buffering
and height of screening shall be provided based on the type of
use that is being buffered and the district in which it is located,
as follows:
Type of Use or Location
Screening
Height
(feet)
Buffer Width
(feet)
Conditional uses in
residential districts
6 10
Permitted multifamily
residential uses
6 5
Permitted nonresidential
uses
6 10
Permitted light industrial
uses
6 15
All nonconforming uses — in a design to be determined by
the Planning Board
(b) Driveways and parking lots. All driveways and parking lots
shall be suitably buffered and screened to minimize the
impacts of noise, lighting and glare, exhaust fumes, views of
parked vehicles and other nuisances. Buffering and screening
shall minimize such impacts both within the site itself as well
as from adjacent and nearby properties and public rights-ofway,
as follows:
[1] Buffering shall consist of a minimum five-foot-wide area
surrounding all sides of a parking lot exposed to view.
Where such parking area is located on a tract adjacent to a
residential use or district, such buffering shall consist of a
minimum ten-foot-wide area surrounding all sides of a
parking lot exposed to view.
[2] Screening shall consist of a minimum four-foot-high
visually impervious screen to be located within the
buffering area. Where such parking area is located on a
tract adjacent to a residential use or district, such
screening shall consist of a minimum six-foot-high visually
impervious screen. The height of any required screen shall
decrease to a maximum of three feet in height where
driveways approach sidewalks or walkways in order to
provide adequate visibility of pedestrians from motor
vehicles.
§ 120-17.25 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-17.25
1:480
(c) Loading areas. All loading areas, including loading dock areas
of buildings and driveways providing access to the same, shall
be suitably buffered and screened to minimize the impacts of
noise, loading and unloading activities, lighting and glare,
exhaust fumes, views of loading and unloading vehicles and
other nuisances. Buffering and screening shall minimize such
impacts both within the site itself as well as from adjacent and
nearby properties and public rights-of-way, as follows:
[1] Buffering shall consist of a minimum ten-foot-wide area
surrounding all sides of a loading area exposed to view.
Where such loading area is located on a tract adjacent to a
residential use or district, such buffering shall consist of a
minimum twenty-five-foot-wide area surrounding all sides
of a parking lot exposed to view.
[2] Screening shall consist of a minimum ten-foot-high visually
impervious screen. If such screen consists of a wall or
fence, the buffer area between the wall or fence and the lot
line shall be a minimum of 10 feet in width and shall also
be extensively planted with both deciduous and evergreen
trees.
(d) Disposal and collection areas. All areas used for solid waste
disposal and recyclable collection facilities shall be suitably
buffered and screened to minimize the impacts of noise, odors,
disposal and collection activities and views of collection bins
and dumpsters. Buffering and screening shall minimize such
impacts both within the site itself as well as from adjacent and
nearby properties and public rights-of-way.
[1] Buffering shall consist of a minimum four-foot-wide area
surrounding all sides of such facility exposed to view. If
such facility is located on a site adjacent to a residential
use or district, such buffering shall consist of a minimum
ten-foot-wide area surrounding all sides of such facility
exposed to view.
[2] Screening shall consist of a minimum six-foot-high
masonry wall, solid wooden fence or accessory building
with gates or doors and ramped access to facilitate the
movement of bins or dumpsters. The base of such screen
shall be planted with a minimum four-foot-high evergreen
hedge along the sides and rear of same.
(e) HVAC equipment and utility service boxes. All ground level
HVAC equipment and utility service boxes shall be suitably
buffered and screened to minimize views of the same from both
within the site itself as well as from adjacent and nearby
properties and public rights-of-way, as follows:
§ 120-17.25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-17.25
1:481
[1] Buffering shall consist of a minimum three-foot-wide area
surrounding all sides of HVAC equipment and utility
storage boxes exposed to view.
[2] Screening shall consist of a minimum four-foot-high
evergreen hedge along all sides of the same.
(f) Screening for wireless communications facilities. Such
facilities shall be screened from view from all adjacent
properties and public rights-of-way in order that a six-foot tall
person, with an eye level from grade of approximately 5 1/2
feet, is not able to see the lowest 20% of the total antenna
height from a distance of 25 feet from the lot line containing
such antenna. In no instance, however, shall such screening be
less than six feet in height; however, any fence greater than six
feet in height shall require a variance from the provisions of
this subsection. Such screening may utilize a solid wooden
fence, earth berms, closely spaced evergreen plantings or
some combination of those devices. If evergreen plantings are
utilized, such shall be sufficiently dense as to achieve 75% of
the required screening at planting.
B. Landscaping design guidelines and standards.
(1) The following guidelines shall be used to prepare and review
landscaping for any development plan. The landscaping plan shall
be prepared by a New Jersey certified landscape architect.
(a) Landscaping. The entire development shall be extensively
landscaped in accordance with a plan conceived as a complete
pattern and style throughout the total site. All areas of the site
not occupied by buildings and other improvements shall be
intensively planted with trees, shrubs, hedges, ground cover
and perennials and annuals. Landscaping shall be provided to
achieve the following:
[1] Preservation and enhancement, to the greatest extent
possible, of existing natural features on the site, including
vegetation, land forms and bodies of water.
[2] Assistance in adapting a site to its proposed development.
[3] Mitigation and control of environmental and community
impacts from a development.
[4] Creation of an attractive appearance for the development,
as viewed from both within the site itself and the
surrounding area.
[5] Enhancement of the habitability of a development.
[6] Definition of yard areas and other open space.
§ 120-17.25 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-17.25
1:482
[7] Energy conservation and micro-climatic control.
[8] Maintenance of a desirable ecological balance on a
developed site.
(b) Other site design elements. The development plan shall
incorporate landscaping with other functional and ornamental
site design elements, where appropriate, such as the following:
[1] Courtyards, plazas, alleys and similar public and
semipublic open spaces.
[2] Active recreation areas and facilities.
[3] Ground paving materials.
[4] Paths and walkways.
[5] Berms and other earth forms.
[6] Ponds, fountains and other water features.
[7] Trellises, pergolas, gazebos and other accessory
structures.
[8] Fences, walls and other screens.
[9] Street or site furniture.
[10] Art and sculpture.
(2) General standards. The following general standards shall be used
to prepare and review landscaping for any development plan:
(a) Plant species. The selection of plant species to be used shall be
appropriate in terms of function and size and shall be hardy for
the climatic zone in which the Borough is located.
Consideration shall be given to soil conditions, availability of
water, exposure to sunlight and other existing conditions.
Plantings shall be selected from the recommended Borough
plant list.
(b) Planting sizes. Deciduous trees shall have a minimum caliper
of three inches at time of planting. Evergreen trees shall be a
minimum of six feet in height at time of planting. Low-growing
evergreen shrubs shall be a minimum of 2 1/2 feet in height at
time of planting. Size of other plantings shall depend on setting
and type of plant material.
(c) Planting specifications. Only nursery-grown plant material
shall be utilized. All trees, shrubs and ground cover shall be
planted according to accepted horticultural standards and the
Borough's approved planting specifications. All grass shall be
planted in accordance with the New Jersey State Soil
§ 120-17.25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-17.25
1:483
Conservation Committee's Standards for Soil Erosion and
Sedimentation Control in New Jersey, current edition.
(d) Mulch. Trees and other vegetation that have been removed
may be reduced to chips and used as mulch in landscaped
areas.
(e) Maintenance. Plantings shall be watered regularly and in a
manner appropriate for the specific plant material through the
first growing season. All landscaped areas shall be well
maintained and kept free of all debris, rubbish, weeds, tall
grass, other overgrown conditions and the storage of any
equipment or materials.
(f) Replacement of dead plantings. The developer shall be
required to replace dead or dying plant material for a period of
two years from the date of issuance of a final zoning permit for
occupancy and shall post a maintenance guaranty for such
pursuant to Article 6 of this chapter. If plant material is dead or
dying during a planting season, it shall be replaced that same
season. If plant material is dead or dying during a nonplanting
season, it shall be replaced as soon as is reasonably possible at
the start of the next planting season.
(3) Specific standards. The following standards shall be used to
prepare and review landscaping on any development plan:
(a) Parking lots. The interior area of all parking lots shall be
landscaped to provide visual relief from the undesirable and
monotonous appearance of extensive parking areas and to
provide shading that will reduce solar heat gain to both the
surface of the parking lot and vehicles parked thereon. Such
landscaped areas shall be provided in protected planting
islands or peninsulas within the perimeter of the parking lot
and shall be placed so as not to obstruct the vision of motorists.
The area and types of plantings shall be provided based on the
number of parking spaces in the lot, as follows:
[1] For parking lots with 10 spaces or fewer, no such interior
landscaping shall be required if the Board determines
there is adequate landscaping directly surrounding the
perimeter of the parking lot. If the Board finds that such
landscaping is inadequate, then the requirements of
Subsection B(3)(a)[2] below shall apply.
[2] For parking lots with 11 or more spaces, a minimum of 5%
of the interior area of the parking lot shall be landscaped
with a minimum of one deciduous tree planted for every
five parking spaces. The remainder of any such interior
planting areas not containing trees shall be planted with
low-growing evergreen shrubs. If all of the above required
trees cannot all be located within such interior planting
§ 120-17.25 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-17.25
1:484
§ 120-17.26. Public use and service areas.
areas, then such remaining trees shall be planted in
locations directly surrounding the perimeter of the
parking lot.
(b) Foundation plantings. The base of all sides of a building shall
be planted with foundation plantings consisting of evergreen
and/or semi-evergreen shrubs and trees. Such plantings shall
be a minimum of two feet high at time of planting and spaced
an average of three feet on center.
(c) Slope plantings. All cut and fill areas, terraces, earth berms
and roadway embankments with slopes steeper than one
increment vertical to three increments horizontal shall be
sufficiently landscaped to prevent erosion.
(d) Drainage facilities. Detention basins, headwalls, outlet
structures, concrete flow channels, riprap channels and other
drainage facilities shall be suitably planted with shrubs and
trees. Detention basin embankments shall be extensively
landscaped with wet-site-tolerant plantings.
(e) Energy conservation. Landscaping shall be designed to
conserve energy, such as the planting of evergreen windbreaks
to provide shielding from northwesterly winds during the
winter and deciduous shade trees to reduce solar heat gain
during the summer.
(f) Street or site furniture. Benches, trash receptacles, kiosks,
phone booths and other street or site furniture shall be located
and sized in accordance with the functional need of such.
Selection of such furniture shall take into consideration issues
of durability, maintenance and vandalism. All such furniture
shall be architecturally compatible with the style, materials,
colors and details of buildings on the site.
A. Utility easement. In large-scale developments, easements along rear
property lines or elsewhere for utility installation may be required.
Such easements shall be at least 20 feet wide and located in
consultation with the companies or Borough departments concerned.
B. Drainage easement. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse,
drainageway channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater
easement or drainage right-of-way at least 15 feet wide, conforming
substantially to the lines of such watercourse, and such further width or
construction, or both, as will be adequate for the purpose of disposing
of stormwater and for flood control. The developer shall deed areas
deemed necessary for flood control by the Planning Board to the
Borough.
§ 120-17.25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-17.26
1:485
§ 120-17.27. Bulk storage.
§ 120-17.28. Fire hydrants.
C. Preservation of natural features. Natural features such as trees, brooks,
hilltops and views shall be preserved in designing any subdivision
containing such features, except that dead, dying and diseased trees
shall be removed.
A. In zoning districts where bulk storage is a permitted accessory use, the
following minimum requirements shall apply:
(1) No bulk storage of material or equipment shall be permitted in any
required front yard area or within 50 feet of any public street,
whichever is greater.
(2) No bulk storage of materials or equipment shall be permitted
between any side or rear lot line and the required side or rear
setback line.
(3) All bulk storage areas shall be screened from public view by means
of suitable fencing and/or evergreen plantings as required by the
reviewing agency. Where the property is adjacent to a residential
zone or use, the screening shall meet the minimum requirements in
this Part 2, and a six-foot chain-link fence or equivalent shall be
provided.
B. No fence used to screen a bulk storage area shall be placed closer to
any property line than the distance constituting the required front, side
or rear setbacks, and all setback areas shall be landscaped in
accordance with the requirements in this Part 2.
C. All service roads, driveways and bulk storage areas shall be paved with
bituminous concrete or other surfacing material, as required by the
reviewing agency, which shall be of sufficient strength to handle the
anticipated use.
D. In no instance shall on-site bulk storage of material exceed the height of
10 feet.
E. No heavy equipment shall be operated or parked closer to the front
property line than the required front setback, plus 20 feet, except as the
same may be in transit to or from the site.
A. A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued for a new residential
structure which is the subject of a major subdivision or site plan located
in an area serviced by New Jersey American Water unless the distance
from the midpoint of the frontage of such premises to a functioning fire
hydrant, which has been tested and approved, as measured down to the
center line of connecting public streets is 600 feet or less. [Amended
at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II)]
§ 120-17.26 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-17.28
1:486
§ 120-17.29. Sewage disposal. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 120-17.30. Soil erosion and sediment control.
B. Final subdivision plats shall not be approved by the reviewing agency
unless fire hydrants are indicated on the final plat in accordance with
the requirements herein contained as to location of and distance
between fire hydrants.
C. Fire hydrants shall not be placed at the closed end of the turnaround of
a cul-de-sac unless the distance between the open end and the closed
end is greater than 400 feet, in which event the fire hydrants shall be
placed at both the open end and the closed end of the cul-de-sac.
D. The installation of fire hydrants, with respect to any subdivision, shall
not be considered a subdivision improvement to be included in the
bonding requirements of this Part 2, but rather the proper installation
of fire hydrants shall be a condition of the issuance of the certificate of
occupancy; however, all costs shall be borne by the developer.
E. All fire hydrants shall be painted in accordance with the standards of
the Borough of Kenilworth.
A. Prior to the approval of any final plat, the full approval of any sanitary
sewage disposal system must have been obtained from the Rahway
Valley Sewerage Authority and filed with the municipal agency or the
final approval will be conditioned upon full approval of the Rahway
Valley Sewerage Authority.
B. The public sewage disposal system shall be installed in accordance with
the rules and regulations of the New Jersey Board of Public Utilities and
in accordance with other requirements of law and subject to the
approval of the Rahway Valley Sewerage Authority.
A. All developments shall protect streams, lakes and ponds from
sedimentation and shall control erosion in accordance with the
standards for soil erosion and sediment control in New Jersey, set forth
in the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, Chapter 251, Laws of
1975, as amended and supplemented.102
B. Certification of the soil erosion and sediment control plan shall be
required from the Somerset-Union Soil Conservation District, unless:
(1) Land disturbance is associated with the construction of a singlefamily
dwelling unit, unless such unit is a part of a subdivision, site
plan, zoning variance or building permit application involving two
or more such single-family dwelling units.
102. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.
§ 120-17.28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-17.30
1:487
§ 120-17.31. Solid waste storage.
(2) Land disturbance is 5,000 square feet or less of the surface area of
land for the accommodation of construction for which the Uniform
Construction Code of the State of New Jersey would require a
building permit. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
(3) Land disturbance is associated with agricultural use of lands when
operated in accordance with a farm conservation plan approved by
the Somerset-Union Soil Conservation District or where the soil
district has determined that such use will not cause excessive
erosion and sedimentation.
(4) Land disturbance is associated with gardening primarily for home
consumption.
A. Solid wastes from all uses other than single- or two-family homes, if
stored outdoors, shall be placed in metal receptacles within a screened
refuse area.
B. The screened refuse area shall not be located within any front yard
area.
C. The refuse storage area shall be surrounded on three sides by a solid
uniform fence or wall not less than four feet nor more than eight feet in
height. Such fence shall be exempt from the provisions of any ordinance
of the Borough regulating the height of fences and requiring permits
therefor. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
D. A five-foot minimum width landscaping area shall be provided along the
fence or wall enclosing the refuse storage area. The landscaping to be
provided shall be shown on the site plan submitted for municipal
agency approval.
E. The opening in the enclosed refuse area should be provided with a solid
gate not less than five feet in height to permit access to the refuse
enclosure and screening from adjoining properties and public streets.
F. If located within or adjacent to a parking area or access drive, the
enclosed refuse area shall be separated from such parking area or
access drive by curbing.
G. The enclosed refuse area shall not be located so as to interfere with
traffic circulation or the parking of vehicles.
H. All refuse shall be deposited in containers maintained within the refuse
area. No containers shall be maintained anywhere on a site except in a
refuse area meeting these requirements.
I. If outdoor storage of solid waste is not proposed, the site plan
submission shall detail the methods proposed for accommodating solid
§ 120-17.30 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-17.31
1:488
§ 120-17.32. Storm drainage facilities.
Stormwater management in all proposed subdivisions and residential
developments and all business, commercial and industrial developments
shall be in accordance with the Residential Site Improvement Standards
(N.J.A.C. 5:21-7), as modified by the NJDEP Stormwater Management Rules
(N.J.A.C. 7:8).
§ 120-17.33. Storm drainage calculation criteria.
waste within the structure. The municipal agency may require that a
suitable area be set aside, but not improved, for a future solid waste
storage area meeting these requirements, even if indoor
accommodations for solid waste are proposed.
A. The minimum design storm frequencies for drainage calculations shall
be two, 10 years and 100 years. Detention and retention basin
calculations shall include an analysis to show that a one-hundred-year
design storm will not overtop the basin wall.
B. Velocity restrictions. In general, velocities in closed conduits at design
flow should be at least 2.5 feet per second, but not more than the
velocity which will cause erosion damage to the conduit, and velocities
in open channels at design flow shall not be less than 1.5 feet per
second and not greater than that velocity which will begin to cause
erosion or scouring of the channel.
(1) For unlined earth channels, the maximum velocity allowed will be
two feet per second.
(2) At transitions between closed conduits and open channels or
different types of open channels, suitable provisions must be made
to accommodate the velocity transitions.
C. All encroachments of natural waterways must be referred to the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, Land Use Regulation
Program, for approval in accordance with statute.
D. Storm drainage facilities. In all proposed subdivisions and residential
developments and all business, commercial and industrial
developments, the peak runoff after development shall be in
accordance with peak rate reduction factors as per the Residential Site
Improvement Standards (N.J.A.C. 5:21-7).
E. Runoff calculation criteria.
(1) Peak runoff after development shall be no greater than the
applicable percentage of the peak runoff prior to development
computed for the one-, two-, ten-, and one-hundred-year design
storm as stated in the Residential Site Improvement Standards.
§ 120-17.31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-17.33
1:489
(2) "Design storm" is defined as a twenty-four-hour storm using Type
III rainfall distribution recommended by the United States Natural
Resources Conservation Service when using United States SCS
procedures as outlined in TR-55. [Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
(3) For the purposes of computing existing runoff, a site shall be
assumed to be in good condition if the lands are pastures, lawns or
parks, with good cover (if the lands are woods), or with
conservation treatment (if the land is cultivated), regardless of
actual conditions existing at the time of computation.
(4) Time of concentration and travel time computations, for the
purpose of computing site runoff, shall be estimated utilizing the
methodologies as outlined in the Natural Resources Conservation
Service TR-55. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
(5) Water quality control.
(a) The one-year, twenty-four-hour, Type III storm or a storm of
1 1/4 inches of rainfall in two hours shall be retained and
released to allow 90% volumetric release in 18 hours
(residential) and 36 hours (other).
(b) Minimum orifice diameter shall be three inches.
(c) Infiltration measures may be used to accomplish water quality
requirements, but the lowest point in the basin must be a
minimum of four feet above the seasonal high groundwater for
residential developments. For other development, infiltration
measures may be used on a case-by-case basis only, to avoid
pollution of groundwater. Complete infiltration must occur
within 72 hours.
(d) In retention ponds, the water quality requirements shall be
satisfied if the volume of the permanent pond is at least three
times the volume of runoff produced by the water quality
design storm.
F. Design criteria for detention facilities.
(1) Bottoms. To promote complete emptying and prevent standing
water or soggy surfaces, vegetated bottoms shall be required.
(a) Four-foot-wide, V-shaped, concrete low-flow channels shall be
constructed with a minimum slope of 1/2 of 1% from all influent
pipes to the discharge structure.
(b) The lowest point in the pond bottom shall be at least four feet
above the seasonally high groundwater level or bedrock unless
adequate subsurface drains are provided.
§ 120-17.33 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-17.33
1:490
(c) Subsurface drains connected to low-flow channels, principal
outlet structures or other downstream discharge points are
encouraged to promote quick and thorough drying of the
facility bottom.
(2) Embankments and side slopes.
(a) For safe movement of personnel and safe operation of
equipment, side slopes greater than five feet in height shall be
no steeper than four horizontal to one vertical. Side slopes less
than five feet high should not exceed three horizontal to one
vertical.
(b) The minimum top width of the embankment shall be 10 feet.
(c) The minimum elevation to the top of the settled embankment
shall be one foot above the water surface in the detention basin
with the emergency spillway at the maximum design flow or a
minimum of two feet above the crest of the emergency
spillway, whichever is higher.
(3) Outlet structures.
(a) Multiple-level outlets or other fully automatic outlets shall be
designed so that discharge rates from the development for all
design storms will not be increased over existing conditions.
(b) The discharged water shall not cause erosion or other damage.
(c) Outlets shall be designed to function without manual, electric
or mechanical controls.
(d) Outlet orifice and weir plates should be constructed from
aluminum or other lightweight, noncorrodible materials. The
plates should be fastened to the structure with noncorrodible,
removable fasteners. A gasket of neoprene or similar material
should be placed between the plate and the structure wall. The
opening in the structure wall, over which the plat is bolted,
should have at least twice the area of the outlet orifice or weir.
(e) To facilitate access and movement by maintenance personnel,
principal outlet structures should have a minimum horizontal
interior dimension of four feet.
(f) To facilitate cleaning, trash racks should be comprised
primarily of sloping bars aligned longitudinally (in the
direction of flow). Perpendicular bars, aligned transverse to
the direction of flow, should be added for strength and rigidity.
In general, longitudinal bars shall be spaced a distance equal
to 1/2 the diameter of the outlet orifice or 1/2 the width or
height (whichever is less) of the outlet weir. Minimum and
maximum spacings of two inches and six inches on center,
§ 120-17.33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-17.33
1:491
§ 120-17.34. Traffic control devices.
§ 120-17.35. Utilities.
respectively, are recommended. Transverse bars should be
spaced as necessary for strength and rigidity.
(g) Trash racks should be hinged or attached with noncorrodible,
removable fasteners to allow access to the outlet orifice or weir
by maintenance personnel.
G. Storm sewer design and calculation criteria.
(1) Storm sewers shall be designed utilizing the Rational Method. The
minimum design storm frequency shall be 25 years.
(2) Velocity restrictions. Velocities in closed conduits, at design flow,
should be at least 2.5 feet per second, but not more than the
velocity which will cause erosion damage to the conduit. Velocities
in open channels, at design flow, shall not be less than 1.5 feet per
second and not greater than two feet per second for unlined earth
channels.
(3) At transitions between closed conduits and open channels or
different types of open channels, suitable provisions must be made
to accommodate the velocity transitions.
A. The developer shall, prior to final acceptance, install all traffic control
devices required within any development or, with the consent of the
Borough Council, may pay to the Borough Treasurer a nonrefundable
sum, in cash or certified check, in the amount set by the Borough
Engineer equal to the cost of all necessary traffic control devices not
installed by the developer.
B. Traffic control devices shall include, but are not limited to, signs, traffic
lines, lights, reflectors and channelizing markers.
(1) The number, type, legend, placement and size of all traffic control
devices shall be in accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices by the United States Department of Transportation
and the requirements of municipal, county and state regulations.
(2) Proposed devices shall be according to an approved plan submitted
at the time of final plat approval.
C. Construction details of all proposed traffic control devices shall be in
accordance with standards prepared by the Borough Engineer and
approved by the Borough Council.
A. All utility lines and necessary appurtenances, including but not limited
to electric transmission and electric and gas distribution,
communications, streetlighting and cable television, shall be installed
underground within easements or dedicated public rights-of-way in
§ 120-17.33 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-17.35
1:492
accordance with the Typical Utility Layout and Typical Road Section or
in such other configuration as set forth by the approving body, Borough
Engineer and utility companies where necessary and appropriately
coordinated.
(1) The installation of all underground utilities shall conform to the
regulations of the New Jersey State Board of Public Utilities.
(2) Installation of all utilities shall conform to the construction
standards of the appropriate utility.
B. Utilities may be required to be located along the rear property lines or
elsewhere with easements as provided in this Part 2.
(1) All utility installations shall be connected with a public utility
system and shall be adequate for all present and probable future
development of the subdivision.
(2) Wherever the utility is not installed in the public right-of-way, an
appropriate utility easement not less than 25 feet in width shall be
provided and located in consultation with the utility companies
and/or Borough departments concerned.
C. For all major subdivisions, the developer shall arrange with the serving
utility for the underground installation of the utility's distribution
supply lines and service connections in accordance with the provisions
of the applicable standard terms and conditions incorporated as part of
its tariff as the same are then on file with the State of New Jersey Board
of Public Utilities and shall submit to the municipal agency, prior to the
granting of final approval, a written instrument from each serving
utility which shall evidence full compliance with the provisions of this
article; provided, however, that lots in such subdivisions which abut
existing streets or public rights-of-way where overhead utility
distribution supply lines have theretofore been installed on a portion of
the streets involved may be supplied with service from such overhead
lines or extensions thereof, but the service connections from the
overhead lines shall be installed underground.
D. In any event, new building service connections for all multifamily
developments and for any industrial, commercial or office
developments containing a floor area of 10,000 square feet or more
shall be installed underground. All other new service connections shall
also be installed underground unless a specific waiver is granted by the
municipal agency.
E. Where a state permit is required for utilities, the applicant shall submit
said permit prior to any final approval or issuance of a building permit
as determined by the Planning Board.
F. Meters may be mounted on exterior walls. All meters shall be screened
so that they are not visible from any internal or public streets and
access satisfactory to the supplying utility is maintained.
§ 120-17.35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-17.36
1:493
§ 120-17.36. Water supply. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
Prior to the approval of any final plat, the full approval of any public water
system must have been obtained and filed with the municipal agency, or the
final approval will be conditioned upon full approval from the appropriate
utility.
§ 120-17.36 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-17.36
1:494
ARTICLE 18
Recycling Areas in Multifamily Housing Developments
§ 120-18.1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MULTIFAMILY HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A building containing three or
more dwelling units occupied or intended to be occupied by persons living
independently of each other, or a group of such buildings.
RECYCLING AREA — Space allocated for collection and storage of sourceseparated
recyclable materials.
§ 120-18.2. Recycling area required; dimensional standards.
There shall be included in any new multifamily housing development that
requires subdivision or site plan approval an indoor or outdoor recycling
area for the collection and storage of residentially generated recyclable
materials. The dimensions of the recycling area shall be sufficient to
accommodate recycling bins or containers which are of adequate size and
number and which are consistent with anticipated usage and with current
methods of collection in the area in which the project is located. The
dimensions of the recycling area and the bins or containers shall be
determined in consultation with the Municipal Recycling Coordinator and
shall be consistent with the district recycling plan, adopted pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13, and any applicable requirements of the Municipal
Master Plan, adopted pursuant to § 26 of P.L. 1987, c. 102.103
§ 120-18.3. Location; lighting; signs; landscaping and fencing.
A. The recycling area shall be conveniently located for the residential
disposition of recyclable materials in accordance with applicable
Borough law, preferably near, but clearly separated from, a refuse
dumpster.
B. The recycling area shall be well lit and shall be safely and easily
accessible by recycling personnel and vehicles. Collection vehicles shall
be able to access the recycling area without interference from parked
cars or other obstacles. Reasonable measures shall be taken to protect
the recycling area, and the bins or containers placed therein, against
theft of recyclable materials, bins or containers.
C. The recycling area or the bins or containers placed therein shall be
designed so as to provide protection against adverse environmental
conditions which might render collected materials unmarketable. Any
bins or containers which are used for the collection of recyclable paper
or cardboard and which are located in an outdoor recycling area shall
103. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28.
§ 120-18.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-18.3
1:495
be equipped with a lid, or otherwise covered, so as to keep the paper or
cardboard dry.
D. Signs clearly identifying the recycling area and the materials accepted
therein shall be posted adjacent to all points of access to the recycling
area. Individual bins or containers shall be equipped with signs
indicating the materials to be placed therein.
E. Landscaping and/or fencing shall be provided around any outdoor
recycling area and shall be developed in an aesthetically pleasing
manner.
§ 120-18.3 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-18.3
1:496
ARTICLE 19
Violations and Penalties
§ 120-19.1. Subdivision violations.
§ 120-19.2. Site plan violations.
Failure to comply with any of the conditions of site plan approval
subsequent to the receipt of a building permit or certificate of occupancy,
as the case may be, shall be construed to be a violation of this Part 2 and
shall be grounds for the revocation of any building permit or certificate
of occupancy, as the case may be. Written notice of revocation, sent by
certified mail by the Construction Official, requiring compliance with the
conditions of site plan approval within a period of time of not less than five
days shall effectively revoke any building permit or certificate of occupancy,
as the case may be, if compliance shall not be made within the time limit
set.
§ 120-19.3. Other violations; violations and penalties.
A. Penalties. If, before favorable referral and final subdivision approval
has been obtained, any person transfers or sells or agrees to sell, as
owner or agent, except pursuant to an agreement expressly conditioned
on final subdivision approval, any land which forms part of a subdivision
on which, by ordinance, the Planning Board is required to act, such
person shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000, and each parcel,
plot or lot so disposed of shall be deemed a separate violation in
accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-55.
B. Civil remedies. In addition to the foregoing, the Borough may institute
and maintain a civil action:
(1) For injunctive relief.
(2) To set aside and invalidate any conveyance made pursuant to such
contract of sale, if a certificate of compliance has not been issued in
accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-56.
C. Lien. In any such action, the transferee, purchasers or grantee shall be
entitled to a lien upon the portion of the land from which the
subdivision was made that remains in the possession of the developer
or his/her assigns or successors to secure the return of any deposit
made or purchase price paid, and also a reasonable search fee, survey
expense and title closing expense, if any. Any such action must be
brought within two years after the date of the recording of the
instrument of transfer, sale or conveyance of such land, or within six
years if unrecorded.
A. In addition to the penalties set forth above, and for any other violation
of the provisions of this Part 2, the provisions of Part 1, Article 7, shall
apply.
§ 120-19.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-19.3
1:497
B. All actions to enforce any lien set forth in this article or to revoke any
permit shall follow the procedures set forth in this chapter.
§ 120-19.3 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-19.3
1:498
Part 3
Zoning
ARTICLE 20
General Provisions
§ 120-20.1. Purpose.
This Part 3 is enacted in accordance with the Master Plan of the Borough of
Kenilworth, as amended, and is enacted for the following purposes:
§ 120-20.2. Conformance to regulations required.
No land or premises shall be used and no building or structure shall be
erected, raised, moved, extended, enlarged, altered or used for any purpose
other than a purpose permitted herein for the zone district in which it is
located, and all construction shall be in conformity with the regulations
provided for the zone in which such building or premises is located.
§ 120-20.3. Applicability.
A. To guide the appropriate use and development of land in a manner
which will promote the public health, safety, morals and general
welfare.
B. To secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other natural and man-made
disasters.
C. To provide adequate light, air and open space.
D. To promote the establishment of appropriate population densities and
concentrations that will contribute to the well-being of persons and
neighborhoods and preservation of the environment.
E. To encourage the location and design of transportation routes which
will promote the free flow of traffic while discouraging location of such
facilities and routes which result in congestion or blight.
F. To promote a desirable visual environment through creative
development techniques and good civic design and arrangements.
G. To protect and preserve the unique character, identity and historic
heritage of historical districts and historical sites.
H. To comport with such other purposes as set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-2.
A. For purposes of this chapter, the terms in this Part 3 shall have the
meaning attributed to them herein except as may be specifically
provided otherwise in this chapter, or unless the context clearly
indicates a different meaning.
B. In case of conflict in the application of the RSIS,104 the terms used
herein shall have the meaning attributed to them in said standards.
§ 120-20.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-20.3
1:499
§ 120-20.4. Word usage.
In the construction of this chapter, the usage of words shall be as follows,
unless the context, other provisions of this chapter, the application of law,
or plain sense indicate otherwise:
§ 120-20.5. Statute citations.
The following statutes, with their citations, are referenced in this chapter:
C. When a term is not defined herein, then the meaning shall be as defined
by applicable statute. If a term is not defined herein or by applicable
statute, then the meaning attributed by the Zoning Officer shall be
binding unless reversed on appeal to the Board pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70a. The Zoning Officer and Board may be guided by the
definitions in The Complete Illustrated Book of Development
Definitions, Moskowitz and Lindbloom, Center for Urban Policy
Research, New Brunswick, 2015 or the latest edition of such manual.
A. The present tense shall include the future tense;
B. The singular number or word shall include the plural, and the plural,
the singular;
C. The word "shall" indicates a mandatory requirement, and the term
"may" indicates a permissive action; and
D. The word "used" includes the words "arranged, designed or intended to
be used."
A. Child Care Center Licensing Act, N.J.S.A. 30:5B-1 et seq.
B. Clean Air Act, 42 U.S.C. § 7401 et seq.
C. Code of Criminal Justice, N.J.S.A. 2C:34-6.
D. Community Affairs, N.J.A.C. 5:21.
E. Conservation and Development, Solid Waste Management, N.J.S.A.
13:1E-99.13a et seq.
F. Cooperatives, N.J.S.A. 46:8D-1 et seq.
G. County and Municipal Investigation Law, N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq.
H. County Planning Act, N.J.S.A. 40:27-1 et seq.
I. Environmental Protection, N.J.A.C. 7:7A et seq., and 7:27-1.1 et seq.
J. Family Day Care Provider Registration Act, N.J.S.A. 30:5B-16 et seq.
K. Freshwater Wetlands Protection Act, N.J.S.A. 13:9B-1 et seq.
104. Editor's Note: See N.J.A.C. 5:21-1.1 et seq.
§ 120-20.3 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-20.5
1:500
§ 120-20.6. Existing uses and nonconforming uses, structures or
lots.
L. Institutions and Agencies, N.J.S.A. 30:11B-1 et seq.
M. Law and Public Safety, N.J.A.C. 13:27, 13:40 and 13:41.
N. Local Public Contracts Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.
O. Map Filing Law, N.J.S.A. 46:26B-1 et seq. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
P. Municipal and Counties Local Bond Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:2-22.
Q. Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
R. Motor Vehicle and Traffic Laws, N.J.S.A. 39:1-1 et seq.
S. Open Public Meetings Law, N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
T. Penalty Enforcement Law, N.J.S.A. 2A:58-10 et seq. [Amended at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
U. Pollution Control Law, N.J.S.A. 26:2C-1 et seq.105
V. Property and Public Records, N.J.S.A. 46:8B-1 et seq.
W. Public Utility Commissions, N.J.S.A. 48:2-13 et seq.
X. Radiation Protection Act, N.J.S.A. 26:2D-1 et seq., and N.J.A.C. 7:28-1.1
et seq.
Y. Residential Site Improvement Standards, N.J.A.C. 5:21 et seq.
Z. Soil Conservation, N.J.S.A. 4:24-18 et seq.
AA. Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.
BB. Tax Sale Law, N.J.S.A. 54:5-14 et seq.
CC. Uniform Construction Code, N.J.A.C. 5:23 et seq.
DD. Uniform Construction Code Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
EE. Water and Water Supply, N.J.S.A. 58:1A-1 et seq.
A. Any nonconforming use or structure lawfully existing at the time of
passage of the ordinance which made such use or structure
nonconforming may be continued upon the lot or in the structure so
occupied and any such structure may be restored or repaired in the
event of partial destruction thereof. The applicant for any application
for development shall have the burden of proof.
105. Editor's Note: This citation refers specifically to the Air Pollution Control Act.
§ 120-20.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-20.6
1:501
B. Maintenance may be made to a nonconforming use, structure, or lot,
provided the maintenance work does not change the use, expand the
building or the functional use of the building, increase the area of a lot
used for a nonconforming purpose, or increase the nonconformity in
any manner.
C. Any existing structure with a permitted use located on either a
conforming or nonconforming lot, but which building is situated on the
lot so as to violate one or more yard requirements, may have additions
to the principal building and/or construct an accessory building without
an appeal for a variance, provided the floor area ratio, total permitted
building or lot coverage is not exceeded and the accessory building and/
or the addition to the principal building does not violate any setback or
other requirements of this chapter.
D. An existing lot whose area and/or dimensions are sufficient to permit a
subdivision, but where a structure exists on the lot with one or more
setback violations, may nevertheless be subdivided without an appeal
for a variance, provided the subdivision itself does not create any new
zoning violations and does not increase the severity of the existing
setback violations.
E. Notwithstanding the protections provided in this section, the Planning
Board will review any application for development by applying the
purposes of zoning and the purposes of the Municipal Land Use Act,
N.J.S.A. 40:55D, in reviewing said applications. The Planning Board will
encourage each applicant to reduce, to the greatest extent possible, the
degree of nonconformity with each new application for development.
§ 120-20.6 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-20.6
1:502
ARTICLE 21
Establishment of Zoning Districts
§ 120-21.1. Designation of zoning districts. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
For the purpose of this Part 3, the Borough is hereby divided into 16 classes
of land use districts, including overlay zones, as follows:
R-6 Low Density Single-Family Residential Zone District
R-5 Medium Density Single-Family Residential Zone District
R-5A High Density One- and Two-Family Residential Zone District
BD Boulevard Downtown Zone District
AC Area Commercial Zone District
C Commercial Zone District
OR Office Research Zone District
I Industrial Zone District
G Government Zone District
P Park Zone District
CE Cemetery Zone District
CS Community Serving Zone District
SLO Senior Living Overlay Zone District
GO Gateway Overlay Zone District
Boulevard Downtown Residential Overlay
Affordable Housing Overlay Zone
§ 120-21.2. Zoning Map.106 [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
The location and boundaries of districts established herein are shown on the
current Zoning Map, as amended, which map accompanies and is declared
to be part of this Part 3. The Zoning Map is on file in the office of the Zoning
Officer and the Borough Engineer and is hereby incorporated in and made
a part of this Part 3 as though appended thereto.
§ 120-21.3. District boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any of the districts
established, as shown on the Zoning District Map, the following rules shall
apply:
A. District boundary lines are intended to follow the center line of streets,
alleys, and watercourses, parkway and railroad rights-of-way, or lots
106. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 120-21.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-21.3
1:503
and parcels as they exist on plots of record at the time of the enactment
of this Part 3.
B. Where such a district boundary line does not coincide with such center
lines, right-of-way lines or lot or parcel lines, or where it is not shown by
dimensions or otherwise clearly indicated, its location shall be
determined by the scale of the map.
C. Where a boundary line dividing two or more districts divides a lot or
parcel of record, the district covering the greatest portion of the
frontage of such lot or parcel shall be considered as extending to the
entire lot or parcel, provided that such extension shall be within 50 feet
of the dividing boundary line and shall include the entire lot or parcel.
D. Where not resolved, the exact location of a district boundary line shall
be determined by the Planning Board, as provided in Article 5.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 120-21.3 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-21.3
1:504
ARTICLE 22
General Regulations, Exceptions and Modifications
§ 120-22.1. Compliance required.
Except as otherwise provided, the following provisions of this article shall
apply.
§ 120-22.2. Use regulations.
A. No land or premises may be used and no building or structure may be
erected, raised, moved, extended, enlarged, altered or used for any
purpose other than a purpose permitted by this chapter for the zone
district in which the land, premises, building or structure is located,
and all uses and construction shall be in conformity with the regulations
provided for the zone district in which such land, premises, building or
structure is located, and in conformity with the Uniform Construction
Code.
B. In applying the provisions of this chapter, a departure from the literal
requirements shall not be considered a violation if, in the opinion of the
Zoning Officer, the departure is de minimis. For purposes of
administering this provision, "de minimis" is intended to mean that the
departure from the literal requirements of this chapter is inappreciable
and does not impair the intent and purpose of the zone plan and this
chapter. Any interested party may appeal a determination of the Zoning
Officer in this regard in accordance with the procedures set forth in
Article 5.
C. No development shall be permitted without first obtaining zoning
approval, a building permit, demolition permit, or certificate of
occupancy, as applicable, unless specifically exempted by this chapter
or other law. No zoning approval, construction permit, demolition
permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the Construction
Official or Zoning Officer except upon application and approval in
accordance with the procedures set forth in Article 9 and in conformity
with the provisions of this chapter. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
D. The control and regulation of the uses of buildings and structures by
this chapter shall apply equally to the nature and extent of the uses of
the lot or lots upon which they are erected.
E. Every principal building shall be erected upon a lot as hereinbefore
defined, and, except as hereinafter provided, there shall not be more
than one one-family detached dwelling on one lot.
F. The following uses and activities are specifically prohibited in any
district:
(1) All outdoor advertising signs, whether freestanding or attached to
a structure or painted or otherwise represented on the surface of
§ 120-22.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-22.2
1:505
§ 120-22.3. Dangerous conditions.
No building permit or zoning approval shall be granted for a building,
structure or use if the design or construction of said building or structure
involves exceptional risks of traffic congestion or public safety. If the
Construction Official or Zoning Officer, as applicable, finds either of the
above to be the case, he/she shall refuse to issue a permit and refer the
application to the Board.
any structure, which are not expressly related to the business being
conducted on the premises.
(2) Permanent outdoor commercial amusements.
(3) Trailers, trailer coach parks and trailer sales.
(a) Exception. Where, as the result of an emergency caused by
fire, flood or other disastrous circumstances, the Construction
Official determines it to be necessary and appropriate to
permit residents, property owners or commercial enterprises
to utilize a trailer as a temporary place of residency or business
during any period of reconstruction of damages to premises,
then, upon application by the property owner, the Construction
Official may issue a permit for the use of the trailer on a
temporary basis for a period not to exceed six months. The
issuance of such permit shall be conditioned upon the
applicant's compliance with all relevant health and sanitation
codes. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
(b) Fee. Upon application for such a permit, the applicant shall pay
to the Borough a permit fee as set forth in Article 6 of this
chapter.
(4) Junkyards.
(5) Privately owned and operated dumps for disposal of garbage, trash,
refuse, junk or debris of any kind.
(6) No halfway house, reformatory facility, jail, penal institution, house
of remediation, or any other such facility wherein convicted
criminals are housed while serving sentences imposed by the court
shall be permitted to be established in any zone within the
Borough. "Halfway houses" shall be defined so as to include those
places housing not only convicted criminals but also any individuals
embarked voluntarily or involuntarily on drug rehabilitation
programs, mental health programs and the like, and the foregoing
uses are expressly prohibited.
(7) Massage, body art and somatic therapy establishments except
those allowed by Chapter 129 of the Borough Code and located in
nonresidential zones.
§ 120-22.2 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-22.4
1:506
§ 120-22.4. Outdoor storage containers.
Outdoor storage containers, sometimes called PODS (portable on demand
storage) are portable and temporary storage units intended to be utilized
upon the exterior of residential premises for the purpose of storing items of
personal and household property either as general temporary storage or to
facilitate the moving of persons from household unit to another household
unit, with the understanding that such items, after a period of time (as
defined herein) for loading, will be removed from the site.
A. Time limit. Except in the case of a state of emergency declared by
federal, state or municipal authorities, the outdoor storage container
shall not be located on residential premises for a total of more than 90
days. If more than one outdoor storage container is utilized, the ninetyday
period shall commence at the time the first outdoor storage
container is physically situated on the real estate. A permit for each
such outdoor storage container under this subsection shall be obtained
from the Building Department before placement. The fee for said
permit for each storage container per 30 days, or portion thereof, is set
forth in § 120-6.2, Schedule of fees. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
B. Placement. Outdoor storage containers may be placed only on
driveways, rear yards, or side yards behind the front house line. The
final placement of the container(s) is subject to the approval of the
Zoning Officer. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
C. Miscellaneous additional requirements. The following requirements
shall be met by the owner or occupier of the residential premises with
respect to outdoor storage containers:
(1) The outdoor storage container situated on residential property
shall only be used for the storage of personal property, furniture
and household items normally located on or in a residential
dwelling or premises.
(2) All outdoor storage containers shall not have a height in excess of
seven feet nor a length of more than 10 feet nor a width of more
than eight feet.
(3) All access doors shall be secured by locks.
D. Violations and penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this
section shall, upon conviction thereof in the Municipal Court, be
punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000. A separate offense may be
deemed committed for each day during or on which a violation occurs
or continues.
§ 120-22.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-22.5
1:507
§ 120-22.5. Animals and birds.
The keeping of fowl, chickens, ducks, pigeons, horses, ponies, or other
domestic equine animals, pigs, goats, sheep or cattle or other kinds of
livestock or exotic animals is prohibited in all zones.
§ 120-22.6. Flag lots.
Flag lots, as defined in this chapter, are prohibited in all zones.
§ 120-22.7. Structures adjacent to gas transmission lines.
§ 120-22.8. Height regulations.
A. No building or structure shall be permitted to be constructed within 50
feet of any distribution, gathering or transmission line.
B. No building or structure, or part thereof, which is used for the
manufacturing, processing, generation or storage of corrosive, highly
toxic, oxidizing, pyrophoric, water reactive, highly combustible,
flammable, or explosive materials that constitute a high fire, explosion,
or health hazard, including loose, combustible fibers, dust and unstable
material, shall be constructed within 125 feet of any distribution,
gathering, or transmission line.
C. Notwithstanding anything herein contained in this section to the
contrary, this section shall not apply to the construction of any structure
required to provide access to certain real property when no other
reasonable means of access is available; to provide utility service to
certain real property; or to perform any work to a pipeline by or on
behalf of the owner or operator of such pipeline.
A. General limitation; accessory structures. No structure shall be erected
or altered to exceed in height the limit hereinafter designated for the
district in which such structure is located, except as otherwise
specifically provided. Wherever in this Part 3 a height limit is
designated in feet or in number of stories, such designation, in
combination, shall be considered as the maximum permitted height.
Unless otherwise specified as exempted or excluded from height
controls, no accessory building or structure shall exceed a height of 15
feet, except for antennas or aerials, the height of which shall be
governed by the provisions set forth below.
B. Structures excluded from height controls. The height limits set forth in
this Part 3 shall not apply to church spires, belfries, cupolas,
penthouses or roof structures for the housing of elevators, ventilating
fans, air-conditioning equipment or similar equipment required to
operate and maintain the building, utility poles, and television or radio
antennas or aerials less than 60 inches in height and/or 30 inches in
diameter, water storage towers and tanks, chimneys and smokestacks,
fire and parapet walls, or similar features, and necessary mechanical
§ 120-22.5 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-22.8
1:508
appurtenances usually carried above the roof level. Such features,
however, shall be erected only to such height as is necessary to
accomplish the purposes they are to serve. Nothing in this subsection
shall be deemed to permit signs of any kind to exceed the height limits
for any district as prescribed in this Part 3. No roof structure shall have
an area greater than 20% of the roof area of the principal structure.
C. Public and quasi-public buildings. Public buildings, subsidized senior
housing, churches and church schools may exceed the height
limitations of this Part 3, provided that the minimum front, rear and
side yards shall be increased one foot for each foot by which such
building exceeds the height limit herein established for such district in
which such building is erected, and provided further that in no case
shall any such building have a height greater than 50 feet.
D. Antennas and aerials.
(1) For the purposes of this section, all antennas and aerials in excess
of 60 inches in height and/or 30 inches in diameter shall require the
same permits as required for accessory buildings.
(2) Television or radio antennas, or aerials greater than 60 inches in
height and/or 30 inches in diameter, shall be erected only after
receiving the approval of the administrative officer and upon
meeting the conditions set forth below:
(a) No antennas more than 60 inches in height and/or 30 inches in
diameter may be mounted on a roof. Antennas larger than 60
inches in height and/or 30 inches in diameter shall be groundmounted
in such a manner as to be suitable to maintain
stability under all conditions, and the plans for same shall be
subject to the approval of the Borough Engineer.
(b) No antennas greater than 10 feet in height and/or eight feet in
diameter may be located in any zone.
(3) No television or radio antenna or aerial shall be located in the front
yard or required side yard. Rear yard distance requirements shall
be the same as those set forth in this Part 3 for accessory buildings
in the zone where such antenna or aerial is proposed.
(4) The antenna or aerial shall be located and screened to minimize
visibility from the street and adjacent properties. In considering
such uses, the administrative officer may require additional
buffering or screening so as to accomplish the objective of this
section.
(5) Antennas or aerials recommended to be installed on the ground by
the manufacturer shall be so located. A copy of the manufacturer's
installation recommendations shall be submitted to the
administrative officer for his/her review before issuing any permit
§ 120-22.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-22.8
1:509
§ 120-22.9. Area and yard provisions.
if the installation is contemplated other than in the manner
recommended by the manufacturer.
A. General yard and open spaces provisions.
(1) No building or structure shall be erected or altered to encroach
upon or reduce in any manner the required yard dimensions, areas
or open spaces hereinafter designated for the district in which such
building is located, except as otherwise specifically provided.
(2) No yard or other open spaces provided about any building for the
purpose of complying with the provisions of this Part 3 shall be
considered as a yard or open space for any other building, and no
yard or other open space of a building on one lot shall be
considered as a yard or open space for a building on any other lot.
(3) All yards and courts required by this Part 3 shall be open and
unobstructed to the sky, except as provided herein.
(4) No lot shall be reduced in area so as to make any yard or other
open space less than the minimum required by this Part 3.
B. Undersized lots.
(1) On any undersized lot in single ownership, where the owner of
which owns no adjoining lots, the combined total side yard
requirements for the district in which such lot is located may be
reduced by six inches for each foot a lot is less than the required
minimum lot frontage at the building line prescribed for such
district, where necessary to permit construction thereon of a
building having a minimum floor area prescribed for such district.
However, no principal building shall be placed any nearer than five
feet to any side lot line, except where specifically permitted by this
Part 3, and provided further that no principal building shall be
placed any nearer than 15 feet to any principal building on an
adjoining lot.
(2) Where the owner of an undersized lot owns adjoining lots upon
which there are not any principal structures situated, and where
the composite of the lots, or a portion thereof under single
ownership, meets the minimum area requirements for the district
in which the composite of lots is located, such composite, or portion
thereof, shall be considered as one single lot, and the area and yard
provisions of this Part 3 shall apply.
C. Corner lots.
(1) Front yards. All yards facing upon a public street shall conform to
the minimum front yard requirements for the particular district,
except that for any corner lot of record that is not of sufficient
§ 120-22.8 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-22.9
1:510
width to permit the adherence to the minimum requirements for a
front yard in a particular district, the front yard abutting the side
street line may be reduced by not more than 1/3 of the required
depth for a front yard, with a minimum of 15 feet. Nothing in this
subsection shall permit the reduction in width or depth of the other
required yards of such corner lots.
(2) Side yards. All side yards not abutting and facing upon a public
street shall conform to the minimum side yard requirements for the
particular district, except that the side yard of a corner lot which
adjoins the required front yard abutting the side street line shall
conform to the minimum rear yard requirements for the adjoining
interior lots.
(3) Rear yards (nonexistent). For the purposes of applying the
provisions of this Part 3, a corner lot shall be deemed to have two
front yards.
D. Front yards.
(1) Corner lots. Front yards required on corner lots shall be subject to
the provisions of Subsection C(1) above.
(2) Double-frontage lots. Yards facing upon public streets shall be
considered as front yards and shall conform to the minimum front
yard requirements for the particular district. The building line of
any principal structure or building erected or constructed upon
such lots shall not be established in excess of 15 feet of the average
front yard depth of adjoining lots on either side.
(3) Accessory buildings. Unless otherwise provided, no accessory
buildings shall be permitted in any required front yard.
(4) Extensions and projections. The following portions of, or
attachments to, a principal building may extend and project into a
required yard:
(a) Steps and uncovered stoops, terraces, patios and porches.
(b) Bay windows, vestibules, entrances and balconies, but not
more than three feet into any minimum front yard.
(c) Cornices, sills, fire escapes, outside stairways and chimneys,
and ornamental or architectural features.
(d) Show windows in commercial districts, but not more than 18
inches into any front yard.
(e) Awnings and similar appurtenances.
E. Front yard setback for flagpoles. In all zones wherein the owner of the
property seeks to erect a flagpole in accord with the terms hereof, the
front yard setback for said flagpole shall be a distance equal to 50% of
§ 120-22.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-22.9
1:511
§ 120-22.10. Vision clearance at intersections.
In all districts where front yards are required on corner lots, all walls,
fences, ornamental structures, hedges, shrubbery or other plantings, other
fixtures and structures, and ground elevation located within a triangular
area having two thirty-foot sides measured along the front lot line and
side street line from the intersection point of such lines shall be limited in
height so as to prevent the impairment of vision at such street intersection.
Such height shall not be in excess of three feet above the established
curb elevation of the nearest curb, except that retaining walls shall be
permitted where changes in street grade, width, or alignment have made
such structures necessary. In the case of trees within this triangular area,
all branches shall be trimmed away to a height of nine feet above the curb
level where vision is measurably impaired or obstructed.
§ 120-22.11. Fences and walls.
the front yard setback required for the erection of a principal structure
in said zone.
A. Fences and walls shall be exempt from the yard requirements of this
Part 3.
B. Fences and walls shall not be allowed within any required front yard
setback. [Amended 9-12-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-14]
C. Where any fence or wall is situated on a corner lot, the provisions of
§ 120-22.10 shall apply with respect to the height limitations for
visibility clearance at street intersections.
D. No fence or wall hereafter erected, constructed or added to that is
situated between two abutting residential properties shall be any
greater in height than six feet, measured from the finished grade
elevation along the length of such wall or fence, except fences located
in the front yard shall comply with Subsection B above.
E. In the case of a residential corner lot, a fence or wall not greater than
six feet in height may be permitted to extend along the right-of-way
where such wall or fence screens the rear yard of a home located on the
corner lot, providing the provisions of § 120-22.10 are also met.
F. Nothing in this section shall apply to shrubbery, hedges or other
plantings located between such properties.
G. Open security fences up to eight feet high shall be permitted in any
industrial zone upon proper application to the Construction Official.
H. The face, or finished side, of a fence or wall shall face the adjacent
property.
I. No fence or wall shall be constructed with barbed wire, metal spikes or
other such dangerous material, except as provided in
§ 120-22.9 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-22.11
1:512
§ 120-22.12. Retaining walls.
The following regulations apply to retaining walls:
§ 120-23.7C(10)(a), or constructed in such a manner as to be dangerous
to animals or humans. Electrified fences shall be prohibited. [Amended
9-12-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-14]
J. Fences required for pools may be solid but shall not be any closer than
the required front yard setback and may be 52 inches high to meet
Construction Code requirements. [Amended 8-14-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-09]
K. Industrial and commercial property fences shall be of a solid
construction, such as board on board, or nine gauge chain link fence
with privacy slats.
L. Prior to the installation of a fence or wall in the Borough, a permit shall
be obtained from the Building Department. Permit applications for
retaining walls in excess of four feet shall require structural
calculations per § 120-22.12.
A. "Retaining wall" shall mean a structure that is constructed between
lands of different elevations to stabilize the surfaces, prevent erosion,
and/or protect structures.
B. Retaining walls shall be permitted in front, side and rear yards.
C. Building permits shall be required for new or substantial replacement
of retaining walls over three feet high conforming with the height limits
for same as set forth in this section. Permit applications for retaining
walls in excess of four feet shall require structural calculations.
[Amended 9-12-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-14]
D. Retaining walls shall not exceed four feet in height in the front yard or
six feet in height in the side and rear yards. In the event a guard rail or
other restraining device is provided at the top of the wall, the wall
height shall be measured to the top of said restraining device. For
purposes of administering this subsection, terraced retaining walls
involving more than one section of wall above or below each other shall
be construed as one wall unless the base of the upper wall is separated
from the face of the lower wall by at least four feet, measured
horizontally.
E. In the event a retaining wall is permitted by variance to exceed four feet
in height in the front yard or six feet in height in the side and rear yards,
the approving authority granting the variance may require an
appropriate guard rail or other restraining device in order to protect
persons from falling off the edge of the wall.
F. Retaining walls which may present a danger or hazard to the public
welfare, including but not limited to retaining walls which are
§ 120-22.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-22.12
1:513
§ 120-22.13. Essential services exemption.
Essential services shall be exempt from the provisions of this Part 3.
§ 120-22.14. Performance standards.
electrified or contain broken glass, razor wire or barbed wire, or other
sharp edges, are prohibited.
G. Approval by the Borough Engineer shall be required for the erection,
relocation, alteration or other construction involving any retaining wall
located within a street right-of-way, public drainage or sewer easement
or other public land or easement under the control or jurisdiction of the
Borough.
A. Smoke control. No smoke shall be emitted from any chimney or other
source as visible gray greater than permitted by the most current
standards enforced by NJDEP, and the New Jersey Air Pollution Control
Act (N.J.A.C. 7:27, 7:27A and 7:27B).
B. Dust, dirt, fly ash, fumes, vapors and gases.
(1) No emission shall be made which can cause any danger to health,
to animals, or vegetation or other forms of property or which can
cause excessive soiling at any point.
(2) No emission of liquid or solid particles from any chimney or device
shall exceed the most current standards enforced by NJDEP, and
the New Jersey Air Pollution Control Act, as amended (N.J.A.C.
7:27, 7:27A and 7:27B).
C. Odors. There shall be no emission of odorous matter in such quantities
as to be offensive. Any process which may involve the creation or
emission of any odors shall be provided with a secondary safeguard
system so that control will be maintained. As a guide in determining
offensive odors, the most current standards enforced by NJDEP and/or
the Union County Health Department shall prevail.
D. Glare or heat. Any operation producing intense glare or heat shall be
performed within an enclosed building or behind a solid fence in such a
manner as to be completely imperceptible from any point beyond the lot
line.
E. Vibration. No vibration shall be produced which is transmitted through
the ground and is discernible without the aid of instruments at or
beyond the lot line, nor shall any vibration produced exceed 0.002 g
peak, measured at or beyond the lot line using either seismic or
electronic vibration measuring equipment.
F. Radioactivity or electrical disturbance. There shall be no activities
which emit dangerous or harmful radioactivity. There shall be no
§ 120-22.12 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-22.14
1:514
disturbance adversely affecting the operation of any equipment located
beyond the property line of the creator of such disturbance.
G. Outdoor storage and waste disposal.
(1) No flammable or explosive liquids, solids, or gases shall be stored
in bulk above ground; however, tanks or drums of fuel directly
connecting with energy devices, heating devices, or appliances
located on the same lot as tanks or drums of fuel are excluded from
this provision.
(2) All outdoor storage facilities or fuel, raw materials and products
stored outdoors shall be enclosed by a fence adequate to conceal
the facilities from any adjacent properties.
(3) Materials or wastes shall not be deposited upon a lot in such form
and manner that they may be transferred off the lot by natural
causes or forces.
(4) All material or wastes which may cause fumes or dust or which
constitute a fire hazard or which may be edible or otherwise
attractive to rodents or insects shall be stored outdoors only in
closed containers.
(5) Compliance with the New Jersey Solid Waste Management, as
amended, shall be required (N.J.S.A. 13:1E-1 et seq.).
H. Industrial waste or sewage. No use shall be conducted in such a way as
to discharge any treated or untreated sewage or industrial waste into
treatment and disposal facilities except as shall be approved by the
Health Officer and Borough Engineer.
I. Provisions and use of water. All water requirements shall be stated in
the permit application.
J. Noise.
(1) In residential and commercial districts, when measured at the lot
line, and industrial districts, when measured at any point on the
boundary of the nearest residential or office district, the soundpressure
level radiated continuously from a facility between the
hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. shall not exceed the following in
any octave band of frequency: [Amended 9-12-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-14]
Frequency Band
(cycles per second)
Sound-Pressure Level
(decibels re 0.0002
microbar)
20 to 75 69
75 to 150 54
150 to 300 47
§ 120-22.14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-22.14
1:515
§ 120-22.15. Aboveground outside storage tanks.
Any outdoor aboveground storage tank in any zone district within the
Borough of Kenilworth shall be enclosed by a solid wall no higher than
eight feet in height and constructed of noncombustible materials. Such
tanks shall meet all maximum setbacks applicable for mechanical devices,
such as generators, air-conditioning units and compressors, and accessory
structures.
Frequency Band
(cycles per second)
Sound-Pressure Level
(decibels re 0.0002
microbar)
300 to 600 45
600 to 1,200 41
1,200 to 2,400 34
2,400 to 4,800 31
4,800 to 10,000 28
(2) If the noise is not smooth and continuous and is not radiated
between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., one or more of the
following corrections shall be added to or subtracted from each of
the decibel levels given above:
Type of Operation/Character of
Noise Correction in Decibels
Daytime operation only +5
Noise source operated less than 20%
of the time
+5*
Noise source operated less than 5% of
the time
+10*
Noise source operated less than 1% of
the time
+15*
Noise of impulsive character
(hammering, etc.)
-5
Noise of periodic character (hum,
screech)
-5
NOTES:
* Applying one of these corrections only.
The sound-pressure level shall be measured with a sound-level
meter and an octave bank analyzer that conforms to the latest
specifications published by the American Standard Association,
New York, New York.
§ 120-22.14 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-22.16
1:516
§ 120-22.16. Building requirements. [Added 5-22-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-03]
A. Prior to a building permit being issued for any new building, building
addition, or building alteration that involves construction of a new
foundation for any use, the owner shall demonstrate, to the satisfaction
of the Borough Engineer, that any subsurface floor is at an elevation of a
minimum of two feet above the seasonal high water table (SHWT) and
that no footing drain or under-drain system shall be less than two feet
above the SHWT. For the purpose of this section, "subsurface" shall be
defined as any part of a building that is below existing grade.
B. The SHWT elevation shall be certified by a licensed professional
engineer as described in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-5.8. Profile pits are required at
the location of the proposed foundation. One profile pit per 5,000
square feet of building footprint area is required.
C. Profile pits shall be provided as described in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-5.8(e), as
follows:
(1) Profile pits shall be excavated, if possible, to a minimum depth of
10 feet below the existing ground surface or to solid bedrock,
where encountered. If the profile pit becomes unstable due to lack
of soil cohesion or the presence of groundwater, or both, the pit
may be terminated at a depth less than 10 feet, and soil evaluation
below the depth of the pit may be carried out by means of three or
more soil borings, performed as prescribed in N.J.A.C. 7:9-5.8(f).
The depth of the soil evaluation shall never be less than two feet
below the proposed lowest subsurface floor elevation.
(2) It is recommended that persons performing soil evaluation not
enter into portions of a soil profile pit which have been excavated to
depths greater than five feet below the surrounding ground
surface. It is the responsibility of persons performing or witnessing
soil evaluation to comply with all applicable federal, state and local
laws and regulations governing occupational safety.
(3) In soil profile pits and borings, the following characteristics of each
recognizable soil horizon or substratum (not including rock
substrata) shall be determined:
(a) Depth and thickness of horizon;
(b) Soil color, using the Munsell system of classification, which
includes an alphanumeric symbol together with a descriptive
color name;
(c) Estimated soil textural class, using the USDA system of
classification;
(d) Estimated volume percentage of coarse fragment, if present;
(e) Abundance, size and contrast of mottles, if present;
§ 120-22.16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-22.16
1:517
(f) Soil structural class (soil profile pits only); and
(g) Soil consistence.
(4) Terminology for soil logs shall be as described in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-5.3.
Alternate methods may be used as approved by the Borough
Engineer.
D. Profile pits and soil borings are required to be witnessed by the
Borough. A notice of not less than 48 hours shall be provided. A witness
fee of $300 per profile pit or soil boring is required.
E. The elevation of the SHWT shall be determined as described in N.J.A.C.
7:9A-5.8 as follows:
(1) Where mottling is observed, at any season of the year, the SHWT
shall be taken as the highest level at which mottling is observed,
except when the water table is observed at a level higher than the
level of the mottling.
(2) Where mottling is not observed, the SHWT shall be determined
based upon either of the following methods:
(a) During the months of January through April, inclusive, water
levels may be measured directly within soil profile pits or
borings. Whenever the Borough determines that there has
been a significant departure from normal climatic conditions,
the Borough may, with due notice to the administrative
authority, lengthen or shorten the period allowed for direct
measurement during any given year. In low-lying coastal areas
where groundwater levels fluctuate with the tides,
measurements shall be taken at the time of highest
groundwater elevation in response to tidal fluctuation; or
(b) During other times of the year, the depth to the SHWT may be
obtained from the Soil Conservation Service County Soil
Survey Report, provided that the soil series present at the site
is identified based upon comparison of soil profile morphology
observed within a soil profile pit, and the soil profile
description provided for the soil series in question within the
County Soil Survey Report. In cases where the SHWT is shown
as a range of elevations in the County Soil Survey Report, the
highest elevation of the range shall be used as the seasonal
high water table. The highest elevation determined by this
method shall be decreased by a factor of 1.5. For example, a
SHWT depth of six feet shall be reduced to four feet.
(3) When the determination of the SHWT must be made in disturbed
ground recognized as prescribed in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-5.10, direct
observation during the months of January through April, inclusive,
is the only method which shall be permitted.
§ 120-22.16 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-22.17
1:518
§ 120-22.17. Securing construction/renovation site. [Added
5-22-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-03]
A. It shall be the responsibility of the contractor working at a construction/
renovation site or the owner of a construction/renovation site to secure
the construction/renovation site with a lockable fence to protect the
health and safety of the public. The Borough Engineer or the
Construction Official, in the reasonable exercise of their discretion,
shall determine the type of fence as to material, height, type, fencelocking
mechanism, and the type of machinery that requires fencing
and the size of the hole, cavity or mound that requires fencing so as to
protect the health and safety of the public. The fence shall be installed
prior to the commencement of work and shall remain and be
maintained on the construction/renovation site until there is no longer a
hole, cavity or mound, until there is no machinery or until a structure is
closed, whichever is later. For subdivisions and new single-family
construction, it shall be the responsibility of the contractor/owner to
install a fence around the entire perimeter of the construction area.
Fencing is to remain closed/locked/secured when no personnel are at
the construction site or no construction activities are taking place.
B. Fences shall be constructed and erected according to trade standards
and of adequate strength to resist wind pressures, and for purposes of
preventing unauthorized entry. Fences shall not be constructed of
barbed wire, razor ribbon, metal spikes, electrified materials or other
dangerous materials. Affixed to the fence shall be two signs. The first
sign shall read, "NO TRESPASSING," and the second sign shall read
"DANGER."
C. The construction/renovation site must be closed, and the fence locked,
as set forth in this section, at the end of each workday and whenever
the construction/renovation site is not attended to by either the owner
or contractor.
D. Fences shall not block or prohibit access to fire hydrants or Fire
Department suppression system/standpipe system connections.
E. Fences erected on construction/renovation sites pursuant to this
§ 120-22.17 shall be considered temporary fences; and nothing within
this § 120-22.17 shall be construed to replace, amend or supersede the
provisions of the Borough's Land Use Code at Chapter 120, § 120-22.10,
(Vision clearance at intersections).
§ 120-22.17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-22.17
1:519

ARTICLE 23
Zone District Regulations
§ 120-23.1. R-6 Low Density Single-Family Residential Zone
District.
A. Purpose.
(1) Since the Borough is an established suburban residential
community, it is the intent of this chapter to preserve and protect
the established character of its neighborhoods and to encourage a
compatible relationship between new and expanded houses and
traditional neighboring structures that reflect the best of local
character, particularly in terms of scale, siting, design features and
orientation on site.
(2) The purpose of this district is to preserve the quality of life and
individuality of the existing detached one-family homes and to
discourage subdivision. The district is intended to protect the
character of the streets and neighborhoods from inappropriate
intrusions.
B. Principal uses and structures. The following principal uses and
structures shall be permitted in the R-6 Zone District:
(1) Single-family residential uses in detached single-family residential
structures;
(2) Public parks and playgrounds; and
(3) Community residences for the developmentally disabled, as
regulated in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.1 and 55D-66.2.
C. Accessory uses and structures. The following accessory uses and
structures shall be permitted in the R-6 Zone:
(1) Parking and parking facilities as regulated in Article 27;
(2) Signs as regulated in Article 31;
(3) Home occupations as regulated in Article 25;
(4) Family day-care homes as regulated in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.5b;
(5) Antennas, as regulated in Article 28;
(6) Private swimming pools enclosed in a yard by a fence not less than
four feet high, as regulated in Article 24;
(7) Accessory uses and structures customarily subordinate and
incidental to permitted principal uses and accessory uses and
structures customarily subordinate and incidental to permitted
conditional uses;
§ 120-23.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-23.1
1:521
(8) Senior suites; and
(9) Reference is made to Article 24 as that article relates to residential
accessory uses and structures.
D. Conditional uses and structures. The following conditional uses and
structures shall be permitted only if they comply with the appropriate
regulations for such uses or structures in Article 30:
(1) Residential public utility facilities, excluding wireless
telecommunications facilities.
(2) Community shelters for victims of domestic violence, community
residences for the terminally ill, and community residences for
persons with head injuries, either of the foregoing which house
fewer than 16 persons, excluding resident staff, as regulated in
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.1 and 40:55D-66.2.
(3) Renewable energy facilities, which must comply with all bulk
standards of the zone. Facilities may be attached to the primary
residence, provided no new variances are created.
E. Prohibited uses and structures. Any use or structure other than those
uses or structures permitted in Subsection B, C or D above is
prohibited.
F. Bulk and lot regulations. The following bulk and lot regulations shall
apply to all development within the R-6 Zone District:
(1) Minimum lot size. Every lot shall contain a minimum lot area of
6,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot width. There shall be a minimum lot width of 60 feet.
(3) Minimum lot frontage. There shall be a minimum lot frontage of 60
feet for all lots.
(4) Minimum front yard. There shall be a front yard setback of not less
than 25 feet to the ground floor and 23 feet to the second floor.
(5) Minimum side yard. Except as provided below for corner lots, there
shall be two side yards totaling 25% or more of lot width. Each side
yard shall be a minimum of eight feet. For corner lots, the required
side yard shall be regulated by Article 23. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, patios accessory to and additions and decks attached to
a principal building in existence as of the effective date of this
subsection may have an eight-foot side yard setback, excluding
corner lots, so long as the addition, deck or patio is erected in such
a manner that its side lines continue in a straight line or are a
distance from the side lot line no greater than the side of the
principal building.
§ 120-23.1 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-23.1
1:522
§ 120-23.2. R-5 Medium Density Single-Family Residential Zone
District.
(6) Minimum rear yard. There shall be a rear yard of at least 20 feet in
depth.
(7) Maximum building height. No principal building shall exceed the
maximum of 2 1/2 habitable floors, exclusive of basement, and 35
feet. The height of a proposed addition may match the existing
nonconforming height of the principal dwelling.
(8) Maximum building coverage. No more than 50% of the area of any
lot shall be covered by above-grade buildings and/or structures.
Decks and patios, as defined herein, shall not be considered as a
building or structure for purposes of computing this coverage.
(9) Maximum impervious coverage. No more than 75% of the area of
any lot shall be covered by physical improvements, including but
not limited to any above-grade buildings and/or structures, as well
as at-grade structures, including but not limited to ingress/egress
platforms, sidewalks, parking areas, patios, driveways, swimming
pools, etc., and including aboveground decks. It is the intention of
this provision that each lot shall have at least 25% of its lot area
without any improvements, dedicated to vegetation.
(10) Floor area ratio. Floor area ratio shall be limited to 0.75.
G. Other regulations. In addition to the above requirements, any
development in the R-6 Zone District must comply with all applicable
regulations of this chapter.
A. Purpose.
(1) Since the Borough is an established suburban residential
community, it is the intent of this chapter to preserve and protect
the established character of its neighborhoods and to encourage a
compatible relationship between new and expanded houses and
traditional neighboring structures that reflect the best of local
character, particularly in terms of scale, siting, design features and
orientation on site.
(2) The purpose of this district is to preserve the quality of life and
individuality of the existing detached one-family homes and to
discourage subdivision. The district is intended to protect the
character of the streets and neighborhoods from inappropriate
intrusions.
B. Principal uses and structures. The following principal uses and
structures shall be permitted in the R-5 Zone District:
(1) Single-family residential uses in detached single-family residential
structures;
§ 120-23.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-23.2
1:523
(2) Public parks and playgrounds; and
(3) Community residences for the developmentally disabled, as
regulated in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.1 and 40:55D-66.2.
C. Accessory uses and structures. The following accessory uses and
structures shall be permitted in the R-5 Zone:
(1) Parking and parking facilities as regulated in Article 27;
(2) Signs as regulated in Article 31;
(3) Home occupations as regulated in Article 25;
(4) Family day-care homes as regulated in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.5b;
(5) Antennas as regulated in Article 28;
(6) Private swimming pools enclosed in a yard by a fence not less than
four feet high, as regulated in Article 24;
(7) Accessory uses and structures customarily subordinate and
incidental to permitted principal uses and accessory uses and
structures customarily subordinate and incidental to permitted
conditional uses;
(8) Senior suites; and
(9) Reference is made to Article 24 as that article relates to residential
accessory uses and structures.
D. Conditional uses and structures. The following conditional uses and
structures shall be permitted only if they comply with the appropriate
regulations for such uses or structures in Article 30:
(1) Residential public utility facilities, excluding wireless
telecommunications facilities.
(2) Community shelters for victims of domestic violence, community
residences for the terminally ill, and community residences for
persons with head injuries, either of the foregoing which house
fewer than 16 persons, excluding resident staff, as regulated in
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.1 and 40:55D-66.2.
(3) Renewable energy facilities, which must comply with all bulk
standards of the zone. Facilities may be attached to the primary
residence, provided no new variances are created.
E. Prohibited uses and structures. Any use or structure other than those
uses or structures permitted in Subsection B, C or D above is
prohibited.
F. Bulk and lot regulations. The following bulk and lot regulations shall
apply to all development within the R-5 Zone District:
§ 120-23.2 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-23.2
1:524
§ 120-23.3. R-5A High Density One- and Two-Family Residential
Zone District.
(1) Minimum lot size. Every lot shall contain a minimum lot area of
5,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot width. There shall be a minimum lot width of 50 feet.
(3) Minimum lot frontage. There shall be a minimum lot frontage of 50
feet for all lots.
(4) Minimum front yard. There shall be a front yard setback of not less
than 25 feet to the ground floor and 23 feet to the second floor.
(5) Minimum side yard. Except as provided below for corner lots, there
shall be two side yards totaling 20% or more of lot width. Each side
yard shall be a minimum of five feet. For corner lots, the required
side yard shall be regulated by Article 23. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, patios accessory to and additions and decks attached to
a principal building in existence as of the effective date of this
subsection may have a five-foot side yard setback, excluding corner
lots, so long as the addition, deck or patio is erected in such a
manner that its sides continue in a straight line or are a distance
from the side lot line greater than the side of the principal building.
(6) Minimum rear yard. There shall be a rear yard of at least 20 feet in
depth.
(7) Maximum building height. No principal building shall exceed the
maximum of 2 1/2 habitable floors, exclusive of basement, and 35
feet. The height of a proposed addition may match the existing
nonconforming height of the principal dwelling.
(8) Maximum building coverage. No more than 50% of the area of any
lot shall be covered by above-grade buildings and/or structures.
Decks and patios, as defined herein, shall not be considered as a
building or structure for purposes of computing this coverage.
(9) Maximum improvement coverage. No more than 75% of the area of
any lot shall be covered by physical improvements, including but
not limited to any above-grade buildings and/or structures, as well
as at-grade structures, including but not limited to ingress/egress
platforms, sidewalks, parking areas, patios, driveways, swimming
pools, etc., but including aboveground decks. It is the intention of
this provision that each lot shall have at least 25% of its lot area
without any improvements except vegetation.
(10) Floor area ratio. Floor area ratio shall be limited to 0.75.
G. Other regulations. In addition to the above requirements, any
development in the R-5 Zone District must comply with all applicable
regulations of this chapter.
§ 120-23.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-23.3
1:525
A. Purpose.
(1) Since the Borough is an established suburban residential
community, it is the intent of this chapter to preserve and protect
the established character of its neighborhoods and to encourage a
compatible relationship between new and expanded houses and
traditional neighboring structures that reflect the best of local
character, particularly in terms of scale, siting, design features and
orientation on site.
(2) The purpose of this district is to preserve the quality of life and
individuality of the existing detached one-family homes and
attached two-family homes and to discourage subdivision. The
district is intended to protect the character of the streets and
neighborhoods from inappropriate intrusions.
B. Principal uses and structures. The following principal uses and
structures shall be permitted in the R-5A Zone District:
(1) Single-family residential uses in detached single-family residential
structures;
(2) Two-family residential uses in attached residential structures;
(3) Public parks and playgrounds; and
(4) Community residences for the developmentally disabled, as
regulated in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.1 and 40:55D-66.2.
C. Accessory uses and structures. The following accessory uses and
structures shall be permitted in the R-5A Zone:
(1) Parking and parking facilities as regulated in Article 27;
(2) Signs as regulated in Article 31;
(3) Home occupations as regulated in Article 25;
(4) Family day-care homes as regulated in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.5b;
(5) Antennas as regulated in Article 28;
(6) Private swimming pools enclosed in a yard by a fence not less than
four feet high, as regulated in Article 24;
(7) Accessory uses and structures customarily subordinate and
incidental to permitted principal uses and accessory uses and
structures customarily subordinate and incidental to permitted
conditional uses;
(8) Senior suites; and
(9) Reference is made to Article 24 as that article relates to residential
accessory uses and structures.
§ 120-23.3 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-23.3
1:526
D. Conditional uses and structures. The following conditional uses and
structures shall be permitted only if they comply with the appropriate
regulations for such uses or structures in Article 30:
(1) Residential public utility facilities, excluding wireless
telecommunications facilities.
(2) Community shelters for victims of domestic violence, community
residences for the terminally ill, and community residences for
persons with head injuries, either of the foregoing which house
fewer than 16 persons, excluding resident staff, as regulated in
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.1 and 40:55D-66.2.
(3) Renewable energy facilities, which must comply with all bulk
standards of the zone. Facilities may be attached to the primary
residence, provided no new variances are created.
E. Prohibited uses and structures. Any use or structure other than those
uses or structures permitted in Subsection B, C or D above is
prohibited.
F. Bulk and lot regulations. The following bulk and lot regulations shall
apply to all development within the R-5A Zone District:
(1) Minimum lot size.
(a) Every single-family lot shall contain a minimum lot area of
5,000 square feet.
(b) The minimum lot size for all new two family residences shall be
7,500 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot width. There shall be a minimum lot width of 50 feet.
(3) Minimum lot frontage. There shall be a minimum lot frontage of 50
feet for all lots.
(4) Minimum front yard. There shall be a front yard setback of not less
than 25 feet to the ground floor and 23 feet to the second floor.
(5) Minimum side yard. Except as provided below for corner lots, there
shall be two side yards totaling 20% or more of lot width. Each side
yard shall be a minimum of five feet. For corner lots, the required
side yard shall be regulated by Article 23. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, patios accessory to and additions and decks attached to
a principal building in existence as of the effective date of this
subsection may have a five-foot side yard setback, excluding corner
lots, so long as the addition, deck or patio is erected in such a
manner that its sides continue in a straight line or are a distance
from the side lot line greater than the side of the principal building.
(6) Minimum rear yard. There shall be a rear yard of at least 20 feet in
depth.
§ 120-23.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-23.3
1:527
§ 120-23.4. BD Boulevard Downtown Zone District.
(7) Maximum building height. No principal building shall exceed the
maximum of 2 1/2 habitable floors, exclusive of basement, and 35
feet. The height of a proposed addition may match the existing
nonconforming height of the principal dwelling.
(8) Maximum building coverage. No more than 50% of the area of any
lot shall be covered by above-grade buildings and/or structures.
Decks and patios, as defined herein, shall not be considered as a
building or structure for purposes of computing this coverage.
(9) Maximum improvement coverage. No more than 75% of the area of
any lot shall be covered by physical improvements, including but
not limited to any above-grade buildings and/or structures, as well
as at-grade structures, including but not limited to ingress/egress
platforms, sidewalks, parking areas, patios, driveways, swimming
pools, etc., but including aboveground decks. It is the intention of
this provision that each lot shall have at least 25% of its lot area
without any improvements except vegetation.
(10) Floor area ratio. Floor area ratio shall be limited to 0.75.
G. Other regulations. In addition to the above requirements, any
development in the R-5A Zone District must comply with all applicable
regulations of this chapter.
A. Purpose of the district. The downtown should be a place with many
diverse retail shops and restaurants where the community can gather
on nights and weekends, conduct business, buy personal and household
needs and be a part of Borough life. The Boulevard Downtown District
has been created to replace the current Local Commercial Zone along
the Boulevard between 18th Street and near Market Street. The BD
Zone District is intended to encourage retail sales and personal
services oriented to pedestrian shopping on the ground floor and other
commercial activity on the upper floors.
B. Principal uses and structures. The following principal uses and
structures shall be permitted in the BD Zone District. Principal uses
which are substantially similar to the listed principal uses shall be
permitted uses.
(1) Business establishments devoted primarily to the retail sales of
goods and personal services on the premises, including restaurants
and food establishments intended for food consumption on the
premises or for takeout of food, and taverns.
(2) Banks and other financial institutions engaged in the business of
accepting deposits from the public and/or extending credit to the
public in the form of loans. Such business must be conducted on the
premises and must be the principal activity of the use on the
premises.
§ 120-23.3 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-23.4
1:528
(3) General, administrative, executive and professional offices.
(4) Medical offices.
(5) Veterinary offices.
(6) Museums, art galleries and indoor motion-picture theaters, and
theaters for conducting live entertainment or cultural
performances.
(7) Municipal parking facilities.
(8) Offices on the second or third floor of a building.
(9) Child-care centers.
(10) Funeral homes.
(11) Indoor commercial recreational facilities and schools of martial
arts, yoga, and dance instruction.
(12) Any other use, in the opinion of the approving authority,
substantially similar to those identified in this subsection.
C. Accessory uses and structures. The following accessory uses and
structures shall be permitted in the BD Zone District:
(1) Parking and parking facilities as regulated in Article 27.
(2) Signs, pursuant to the provisions of Article 31, for the uses for
which signs are permitted.
(3) Antennas, as regulated in Article 28.
(4) Outdoor seating in conjunction with a permitted restaurant or
eating and drinking establishment, subject to the following:
(a) The consumption of food by the public at tables located within
that portion of the sidewalk which lies between the public
street and the building's principal facade, excepting therefrom
an unobstructed area at least four feet in width to permit the
passage of pedestrians.
(b) Containing readily removable tables, chairs and other such
temporary railings, furniture and structures.
(c) Unenclosed by fixed walls, ceilings or fences, except for
retractable awnings, removable barriers, umbrellas or other
nonpermanent enclosures.
(5) Other accessory uses and structures customarily subordinate and
incidental to permitted principal uses and permitted conditional
uses.
§ 120-23.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-23.4
1:529
(6) Reference is made to Article 24 as it relates to accessory uses and
structures in nonresidential zones.
D. Conditional uses and structures. The following conditional uses and
structures shall be permitted only if they comply with the appropriate
regulations for such uses or structures in Article 30:
(1) Nonprofit chartered membership organizations.
(2) Residential-type public utility facilities.
(3) Certain telecommunications antennas, as set forth in Article 28.
(4) Gasoline and automotive service stations presently existing.
(5) Private commercial parking lots as a principal use.
(6) Public utility facilities.
E. Prohibited uses and structures. Any uses and structures other than
those uses or structures permitted in Subsection B, C, or D above are
prohibited.
F. Bulk and lot regulations. The following bulk and lot regulations shall
apply to all uses permitted in the BD Zone District, unless more
stringent requirements are provided by this chapter:
(1) Minimum lot area. Every lot shall contain a minimum lot area of
2,500 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot width. Every lot shall have a minimum lot width of 25
feet.
(3) Minimum lot frontage. There shall be a minimum lot frontage of 25
feet for all lots.
(4) Minimum lot depth. There shall be a minimum of 100 feet of depth.
(5) Setbacks.
(a) Front. No front yard setback is required.
(b) Rear. Ten feet or 10% of the lot depth, whichever is greater.
(c) Side. No side yard will be required unless the side property
line is adjacent to a residential zone, where a minimum side
yard of five feet, which is to be heavily landscaped, is required.
(6) Maximum building height. No principal building shall exceed the
maximum of three habitable floors, exclusive of basement, but not
more than 35 feet in height.
(7) Maximum building coverage shall not exceed 80%.
(8) Maximum impervious cover shall not exceed 90%.
§ 120-23.4 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-23.4
1:530
§ 120-23.5. AC Area Commercial Zone District.
(9) Minimum open space ratio. The minimum area of the lot that shall
be provided as landscaped open space shall be 10% of the total lot
area. Such landscaped area shall be planted with lawn, shrubs,
hedges, flowering plants or trees.
(10) Maximum floor area ratio. The total habitable floor area of all
buildings or structures on any lot shall not be more than 250% of
the total lot area.
G. Other regulations. In addition to the above requirements, any
development in the BD Zone District must comply with all applicable
regulations of this chapter.
A. Purpose of district. The purpose of the AC Area Commercial District is
to encourage retail and wholesale sales, personal and business
services, as well as business, administrative and professional offices.
Well-planned, larger-scale commercial developments designed in a
comprehensive manner, integrating the needs of pedestrians,
employees and vehicles, are also encouraged.
B. Permitted uses. In the AC District, only the following uses shall be
permitted, except as provided in Subsections C and D. Principal uses
which are substantially similar to the listed principal uses shall be
permitted uses.
(1) Retail establishments.
(2) Personal and consumer service uses.
(3) Supermarkets.
(4) Restaurants and eating and drinking establishments.
(5) Taverns.
(6) Banks and financial institutions, including drive-through banks.
(7) Art, music and dance studios.
(8) Motor inns and hotels.
(9) Banquet and catering facilities.
(10) General, administrative, executive and professional offices.
(11) Medical offices.
(12) Veterinary offices.
(13) Computer and data processing centers.
(14) Indoor commercial recreational facilities.
§ 120-23.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-23.5
1:531
(15) Museums, art galleries and indoor motion-picture theaters, and
theaters for conducting live entertainment or cultural
performances.
(16) Child-care centers.
(17) Municipal parking facilities.
(18) Wholesale commercial establishments.
(19) Dry cleaner.
(20) Fine arts schools.
(21) Automobile gasoline and service stations.
(22) Car wash.
(23) Funeral homes.
(24) Any other use, in the opinion of the approving authority,
substantially similar to those identified in this subsection.
C. Accessory uses and structures. Accessory uses and structures in the AC
Zone District shall be subject to the following requirements:
(1) Parking and parking facilities as regulated in Article 27.
(2) Signs as regulated in Article 31.
(3) Antennas as regulated in Article 28.
(4) Mobile storage structures are prohibited, except to the extent they
are regulated by the definition of "mobile storage structures" in
Article 1.
(5) Outdoor seating in conjunction with a permitted restaurant or
eating and drinking establishment, subject to the following:
(a) The consumption of food by the public at tables located within
that portion of the sidewalk which lies between the public
street and the building's principal facade, excepting therefrom
an unobstructed area at least four feet in width to permit the
passage of pedestrians.
(b) Containing readily removable tables, chairs and other such
temporary railings, furniture and structures.
(c) Unenclosed by fixed walls, ceilings or fences, except for
retractable awnings, removable barriers, umbrellas or other
nonpermanent enclosures.
(6) Day-care center.
(7) Storage areas.
§ 120-23.5 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-23.5
1:532
(8) Other accessory uses and structures customarily subordinate and
incidental to permitted principal and/or permitted conditional uses.
(9) Reference is made to Article 24 as it relates to accessory uses and
structures in nonresidential zones.
D. Conditional uses and structures. The following uses and structures shall
be permitted in the AC Zone District only if they comply with the
appropriate regulations for such uses or structures in this chapter:
(1) Public utility facilities.
(2) Nonprofit chartered membership organizations.
(3) Certain telecommunications antennas as set forth in Article 28.
(4) Private commercial parking lots as a principal use.
E. Prohibited uses and structures. Any use or structure other than those
uses or structures permitted in Subsection A, B, C or D above is
prohibited.
F. Bulk and lot regulations. The following bulk and lot regulations shall
apply to all uses permitted in the AC Zone District, unless more
stringent requirements are provided by this chapter:
(1) Minimum lot area. Every lot shall contain a minimum lot area of
40,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot width. Every lot shall have a minimum lot width of 100
feet.
(3) Minimum lot frontage. There shall be a minimum lot frontage of
100 feet for all lots.
(4) Minimum lot depth. There shall be a minimum of 200 feet of lot
depth.
(5) Setbacks.
(a) Front. A fifty-foot front yard setback is required. A corner lot
shall have a fifty-foot front yard which is parallel to the street
with the larger right-of-way. The front yard on a street with a
lesser right-of-way may be reduced to 30 feet. For corner lots
facing two streets with equal rights-of-way, a fifty-foot front
yard setback is required.
(b) Rear. A thirty-foot rear setback is required.
(c) Side. Minimum side yard shall be 15 feet with a total of 40 feet
for both side yards. If the side property line is adjacent to a
residential zone, a minimum of five feet is required to be
heavily landscaped.
§ 120-23.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-23.5
1:533
§ 120-23.6. C Commercial Zone District.
(6) Maximum building height. No principal building shall exceed the
maximum of three habitable floors, exclusive of basement, but not
more than 40 feet in height.
(7) Maximum building coverage shall not exceed 40%.
(8) Maximum impervious cover shall not exceed 80%.
(9) Minimum open space ratio. The minimum area of the lot that shall
be provided as landscaped open space shall be 20% of the total lot
area. Such landscaped area shall be planted with lawn, shrubs,
hedges, flowering plants or trees. Walkways provided in such a
landscaped area may be included in the minimum open space area,
provided they do not exceed 5% of the total lot area.
(10) Maximum floor area ratio. The total habitable floor area of all
buildings or structures on any lot shall not be more than 100% of
the total lot area.
A. Purpose of district. The purpose of the C Commercial District is to
encourage retail and wholesale sales, personal and business services,
as well as business, administrative and professional offices. Wellplanned,
larger-scale commercial developments designed in a
comprehensive manner, integrating the needs of pedestrians,
employees and vehicles, are also encouraged. Multifamily residential
buildings are also encouraged as a transitional use. This zone is
intended to function as a transition zone between residential and
industrial zones.
B. Permitted uses. In the C District, only the following uses shall be
permitted, except as provided in Subsections C and D. Principal uses
which are substantially similar to the listed principal uses shall be
permitted uses.
(1) Retail establishments.
(2) Personal and consumer service uses.
(3) Restaurants and eating and drinking establishments.
(4) Taverns.
(5) Banks and financial institutions, including drive-through banks.
(6) Art, music and dance studios.
(7) Motor inns and hotels.
(8) Banquet and catering facilities.
(9) General, administrative, executive and professional offices.
§ 120-23.5 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-23.6
1:534
(10) Medical offices.
(11) Veterinary offices.
(12) Computer and data processing centers.
(13) Indoor commercial recreational facilities.
(14) Museums, art galleries and indoor motion-picture theaters, and
theaters for conducting live entertainment or cultural
performances.
(15) Child-care centers.
(16) Municipal parking facilities.
(17) Wholesale commercial establishments.
(18) Dry cleaner.
(19) Fine arts schools.
(20) Private schools.
(21) Automobile gasoline and service stations.
(22) Car wash.
(23) Funeral homes.
(24) Storage warehouse.
(25) Any other use, in the opinion of the approving authority,
substantially similar to those identified in this subsection.
C. Accessory uses and structures. Accessory uses and structures in the C
Zone District shall be subject to the following requirements:
(1) Parking and parking facilities as regulated in Article 27.
(2) Signs as regulated in Article 31.
(3) Antennas as regulated in Article 28.
(4) Mobile storage structures are prohibited, except to the extent they
are regulated by the definition of "mobile storage structures" in
Article 1.
(5) Outdoor seating in conjunction with a permitted restaurant or
eating and drinking establishment.
(6) Day-care center.
(7) Storage areas.
(8) Other accessory uses and structures customarily subordinate and
incidental to permitted principal and/or permitted conditional uses.
§ 120-23.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-23.6
1:535
(9) Reference is made to Article 24 as it relates to accessory uses and
structures in nonresidential zones.
D. Conditional uses and structures. The following uses and structures shall
be permitted in the C Zone District only if they comply with the
appropriate regulations for such uses or structures in this chapter:
(1) Public utility facilities.
(2) Nonprofit chartered membership organizations.
(3) Certain telecommunications antennas as set forth in Article 28.
(4) Private commercial parking lots as a principal use.
(5) Multifamily apartment buildings with a density of less than 26 units
per acre.
E. Prohibited uses and structures. Any use or structure other than those
uses or structures permitted in Subsection A, B, C or D above is
prohibited.
F. Bulk and lot regulations. The following bulk and lot regulations shall
apply to all uses permitted in the C Zone District, unless more stringent
requirements are provided by this chapter:
(1) Minimum lot area. Every lot shall contain a minimum lot area of
20,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot width. Every lot shall have a minimum lot width of 100
feet.
(3) Minimum lot frontage. There shall be a minimum lot frontage of
100 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth. There shall be a minimum of 100 feet of lot
depth.
(5) Setbacks.
(a) Front. A ten-foot front yard setback is required. A corner lot
shall have a twenty-five-foot front yard which is parallel to the
street with the larger right-of-way. The front yard on a street
with a lesser right-of-way may be reduced to 15 feet. For
corner lots facing two streets with equal rights-of-way, a
twenty-five-foot front yard setback is required.
(b) Rear. A ten-foot rear setback is required.
(c) Side. Minimum side yard shall be five feet with a total of 15
feet for both side yards. If the side property line is adjacent to a
residential zone, a minimum of five feet is required to be
heavily landscaped.
§ 120-23.6 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-23.6
1:536
§ 120-23.7. OR Office Research Zone District.
(6) Maximum building height. No principal building shall exceed the
maximum of three habitable floors, exclusive of basement, but not
more than 35 feet in height.
(7) Maximum building coverage shall not exceed 50%.
(8) Maximum impervious cover shall not exceed 80%.
(9) Minimum open space ratio. The minimum area of the lot that shall
be provided as landscaped open space shall be 20% of the total lot
area. Such landscaped area shall be planted with lawn, shrubs,
hedges, flowering plants or trees. Walkways provided in such a
landscaped area may be included in the minimum open space area,
provided they do not exceed 5% of the total lot area.
(10) Maximum floor area ratio. The total habitable floor area of all
buildings or structures on any lot shall not be more than 125% of
the total lot area.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the OR Office Research Zone is to provide for
the expansion and development of land uses for research, engineering,
product development, manufacturing and related executive and
administrative offices in the Borough, to provide for a compatible
relationship with abutting land uses, and to provide for the safe and
efficient flow of vehicles to and from the office-research areas.
B. Permitted uses. In the OR District, only the following uses shall be
permitted, except as provided in Subsections C and D. Principal uses
which are substantially similar to the listed principal uses shall be
permitted uses.
(1) Research laboratories.
(2) Pilot manufacturing plants.
(3) Manufacturing facilities.
(4) General, administrative, executive and business offices.
(5) Any other use, in the opinion of the approving authority,
substantially similar to those identified in this subsection.
C. Permitted accessory uses and structures. The following accessory uses
and structures shall be permitted, provided they meet the lot, height
and yard requirements for principal uses in the zone:
(1) Parking garages, parking structures and surface parking.
(2) Gatehouses and security structures.
(3) Services and facilities for the exclusive use of employees, including
indoor and outdoor recreational facilities, cafeterias and outdoor
§ 120-23.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-23.7
1:537
seating areas, health care centers, credit unions, and laundry and
dry-cleaning facilities.
(4) Day-care centers primarily for the use of employees.
(5) Helistops.
(6) Equipment used for transmitters and receiving radio and
electromagnetic waves, including parabolic antennas.
(7) Generators.
(8) Warehousing and storage of materials associated with the above
principal uses.
(9) Signs as regulated in Article 31.
(10) Other accessory uses and structures customarily subordinate and
incidental to permitted principal and/or permitted conditional uses.
(11) Fences no more than eight feet high, which may be topped by no
more than two feet of barbed wire.
D. Conditional uses. The following uses and structures shall be permitted
in the OR Zone District only if they comply with the appropriate
regulations for such uses or structures in this chapter:
(1) Public utility facilities.
(2) Certain telecommunications antennas as set forth in Article 28.
E. Prohibited uses and structures. Any use or structure other than those
uses or structures permitted in Subsection A, B, C or D above is
prohibited. The following uses are specifically prohibited in the OR
zone:
(1) All residential uses, except that sleeping quarters for custodial or
security personnel may be provided for.
(2) All retail uses, except those provided for the exclusive use of
employees and their guests, as provided for herein.
F. Area, yard and building dimensions. In the OR Zone District, the
following dimensional requirements shall apply:
(1) Minimum lot dimensions:
(a) Area: 10,000 square feet.
(b) Frontage: 100 feet.
(2) Minimum yard setbacks:
(a) Front: 40 feet.
(b) Rear: 25 feet.
§ 120-23.7 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-23.7
1:538
§ 120-23.8. I Industrial Zone District.
(c) Side: 15 feet. If the side property line is adjacent to a
residential zone, a minimum of 15 feet is required to be heavily
landscaped.
(3) Maximum building dimensions:
(a) Building height: 40 feet and three stories, except as allowed in
§ 120-22.8.
(b) Lot coverage.
[1] Twenty-five percent for buildings.
[2] Seventy-five percent for impervious cover.
[3] Twenty-five percent for open space, landscaping and
buffer. Landscaped areas shall be planted with lawn,
shrubs, hedges, flowering plants or trees.
[4] Maximum floor area ratio. The total habitable floor area of
all buildings or structures on any lot shall not be more than
125% of the total lot area.
A. Purpose. This zone is designed to protect and concentrate those
commercial and industrial/manufacturing uses that are currently viable
and those sites for which industrial/commercial reuse is feasible and
probable. It is also designed for those industrial and commercial uses
which have a minimum of environmental impacts but have vehicular
traffic or utilitarian or operational requirements that make them more
appropriately located adjacent to major arterials and compatible land
uses, rather than residential uses.
B. Permitted uses. In the I District, only the following uses shall be
permitted, under the performance standards in § 120-22.14, except as
provided in Subsections C and D. Principal uses which are substantially
similar to the listed principal uses shall be permitted uses.
(1) Activities of an industrial nature and associated office and clerical
activities, provided that they do not cause a nuisance or hazard due
to fire, toxic or corrosive fumes, gas, smoke, odors, flashes or
objectionable effluent.
(2) Public utility and public service activities of an industrial character.
(3) Public garages, automotive repair shops, and new motor vehicle
sales and used motor vehicle sales in conjunction therewith, all
fully enclosed in a building.
(4) Storage warehouses, lumber and building material sales and
storage and contractor storage yards.
§ 120-23.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-23.8
1:539
(5) Processing, assembling, finishing, packaging and storing of goods
and materials.
(6) Packaging and bottling establishment.
(7) Metalworking and welding activities, excluding the use of heavy
machinery of a nuisance-producing character.
(8) Household appliance repairs, reupholstering and furniture repairs.
(9) Research laboratories.
(10) Animal hospitals and kennels.
(11) Automotive service stations at which motor fuel and oil are
dispensed; lubrication, maintenance and minor repair services are
performed; tires, batteries and other automobile accessories are
sold; and vehicles are washed, provided that they are not within
500 feet of another station, whether said station is inside or outside
the Borough limits.
(12) Telecommunications towers, antennas and appurtenant facilities;
all such uses shall comply with the provisions of Article 28.
Clustering or grouping of multiple towers is disfavored in the
Borough; co-location of antennas on existing towers is encouraged.
(13) Retail establishments.
(14) Personal and consumer service uses.
(15) Restaurants and eating and drinking establishments.
(16) Taverns.
(17) Banks and financial institutions, including drive-through banks.
(18) Art, music and dance studios.
(19) General, administrative, executive and professional offices.
(20) Medical offices.
(21) Veterinary offices.
(22) Computer and data processing centers.
(23) Indoor commercial recreational facilities.
(24) Child-care centers.
(25) Wholesale commercial establishments.
(26) Dry cleaner.
(27) Fine arts schools.
§ 120-23.8 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-23.8
1:540
(28) Private schools.
(29) Automobile gasoline and service stations.
(30) Car wash.
C. Accessory uses and structures. Accessory uses and structures in the I
Zone District shall be subject to the following requirements:
(1) Parking and parking facilities as regulated in Article 27.
(2) Signs as regulated in Article 31.
(3) Antennas as regulated in Article 28.
(4) Mobile storage structures are prohibited, except to the extent they
are regulated by the definition of "mobile storage structures" in
Article 1.
(5) Outdoor seating in conjunction with a permitted restaurant or
eating and drinking establishment.
(6) Storage areas and buildings as accessory uses shall preferably be
confined to enclosed buildings, but may be permitted in outdoor
areas or compounds, provided that such an area or compound shall
be screened on all sides by a solid masonry wall, solid fence or
dense evergreen planting not less than six feet in height. Such
accessory storage shall not exceed 10% of the lot area and shall be
so arranged at the rear of the building as to be minimally visible
from a street. No unscreened outdoor storage areas shall be
permitted.
(7) Other accessory uses and structures customarily subordinate and
incidental to permitted principal and/or permitted conditional uses.
(8) Reference is made to Article 24 as it relates to accessory uses and
structures in nonresidential zones.
D. Prohibited uses and structures. Any use or structure other than those
uses or structures permitted in Subsection A, B, or C above is
prohibited.
E. Bulk and lot regulations. The following bulk and lot regulations shall
apply to all uses permitted in the I Zone District, unless more stringent
requirements are provided by this chapter:
(1) Minimum lot area. Every lot shall contain a minimum lot area of
20,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot width. Every lot shall have a minimum lot width of 100
feet.
(3) Minimum lot frontage. There shall be a minimum lot frontage of
100 feet.
§ 120-23.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-23.8
1:541
(4) Minimum lot depth. There shall be a minimum of 100 feet of lot
depth.
(5) Setbacks.
(a) Front. A ten-foot front yard setback is required. A corner lot
shall have a fifteen-foot front yard which is parallel to the
street with the larger right-of-way. The front yard on a street
with a lesser right-of-way may be reduced to 10 feet. For
corner lots facing two streets with equal rights-of-way, a
fifteen-foot front yard setback is required.
(b) Rear. A ten-foot rear setback is required.
(c) Side. Minimum side yard shall be five feet with a total of 15
feet for both side yards. If the side property line is adjacent to a
residential zone, a minimum of five feet is required to be
heavily landscaped.
(6) Maximum building height. No principal building shall exceed three
stories and 40 feet in height.
(7) Maximum building coverage shall not exceed 50%.
(8) Maximum impervious cover shall not exceed 80%.
(9) Minimum open space ratio. The minimum area of the lot that shall
be provided as landscaped open space shall be 20% of the total lot
area. Such landscaped area shall be planted with lawn, shrubs,
hedges, flowering plants or trees.
(10) Maximum floor area ratio. The total habitable floor area of all
buildings or structures on any lot shall not be more than 125% of
the total lot area.
F. Design and site requirements.
(1) Landscaping.
(a) All portions of a lot not covered by buildings and outdoor
storage enclosures and pedestrian and vehicular surfaces shall
be landscaped and thereafter maintained in good condition.
"Landscaping" shall mean the planting of grass, shrubs, trees
and other comparable ground cover. Appropriate foundation
plantings along the front building line shall be provided.
(b) When the lot, or portion thereof, on which parking or loading
spaces are located abuts the rear line or side line of, or is
across the street from, any land in a residential district, a solid
wall, solid fence or compact evergreen planting no less than
four feet in height shall be provided and maintained in good
condition. Such screen shall be located adjacent to parking or
loading areas rather than on the periphery of the lot.
§ 120-23.8 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-23.8
1:542
§ 120-23.9. G Government Zone District.
§ 120-23.10. P Park Zone District.
(c) Luminaries on off-street parking areas shall not be more than
15 feet above ground level and shall be arranged and designed
so as not to cause offensive light or glare in abutting or nearby
residential properties. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
(2) Architectural appearance. No permit shall be granted in an I
District for a building or use if the design or construction of the
building is so markedly incongruous with the character of the
neighborhood as to be seriously detrimental to the value of
adjacent or nearby property. For this purpose, the Planning Board
shall review all plans.
A. Purpose of district.
(1) The purpose of the G Zone District is to accommodate all
government buildings in the Borough, occupied by the Borough,
county, state, or federal government, or agencies thereof, on a
permanent basis, for public purposes.
(2) Examples of Government zoned parcels include, but are not limited
to: Municipal Building complex; public schools; public works;
rescue squad, library; Fire Department and post office.
B. Principal uses and structures. The G Zone District shall permit public
buildings and uses, subject to the performance standards in
§ 120-22.14.
C. Bulk and lot regulations: none.
A. Purpose of district.
(1) The purpose of the P Park Zone District is to provide parks and
open space for passive and active recreation. Services provided by
the Borough include maintenance of parkland and linear parkway
sites, improved multi-use trails, facilities, and recreational
programs for the Borough's children, adults, and senior citizens.
(2) Community and neighborhood parks provide both passive and
active recreational opportunities throughout the Borough. The
parks provide playing fields/courts for tennis, basketball,
volleyball, soccer, baseball, softball and football, many of which are
used by local sports organizations to serve area youth. The parks
also offer picnic and playground areas, skateboarding, and roller
hockey amenities.
§ 120-23.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-23.10
1:543
§ 120-23.11. CE Cemetery Zone District.
§ 120-23.12. CS Community Serving Zone District.
(3) Examples of Park zoned parcels include, but are not limited to:
Lenape Park; Black Brook Park; Galloping Hill Park; and DiMario
Park.
B. Principal uses and structures. The P Zone District shall permit parks,
playgrounds, and open space, subject to the performance standards in
§ 120-22.14.
C. Accessory uses and structures. The P Zone District shall permit offstreet
parking; recreation, entertainment and educational programs;
and signs.
D. Bulk and lot regulations: none.
A. Purpose of district. The purpose of the CE Zone District is to allow more
control over the placement of cemetery activities within the Borough
and ensure the compatibility of the cemetery with the surrounding land
uses, thereby protecting the health, safety and general welfare of the
Borough residents.
B. Principal uses and structures: cemeteries and mausoleums. Any
building and land may be used for the permanent internment of one or
more dead human bodies or cremated remains, in addition to any
accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the operation
and maintenance of a cemetery.
C. Accessory uses and structures: off-street parking and signs.
D. Bulk and lot regulations. Maximum height for mausoleums: 30 feet;
minimum setback of mausoleums and graves from property line: 30
feet.
A. Purpose of district. The purpose of the Community Serving (CS) Zone
District is to establish and preserve areas for community services which
are needed to serve the residents of the Borough. The Community
Serving District shall include those lands currently occupied by uses
that serve the community while owned by nongovernmental
organizations, such as the following:
(1) Churches, synagogues and mosques.
(2) Public and private educational institutions and services (other than
state education facilities), including public, private and religious
schools.
(3) Veterans organizations.
(4) Community groups.
§ 120-23.10 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-23.12
1:544
§ 120-23.13. Boulevard Downtown Residential Overlay.
§ 120-23.14. SLO Senior Living Overlay Zone District.
B. Principal uses and structures: houses of worship; parochial schools;
nonprofit chartered membership organizations; religious, recreational,
social, educational and cultural purposes, subject to the performance
standards in § 120-22.14.
C. Accessory uses and structures: off-street parking and signs.
D. Bulk and lot regulations: none. Reasonable standards shall be applied
by the approving authority during site plan review.
A. While residential uses have not been allowed on the Boulevard in quite
some time, there is a pocket of preexisting nonconforming second floor
apartments within the LC Local Commercial District between 20th
Street and 24th Street. Over 20 apartments exist in this area of the
Boulevard. Rather than continue the nonconforming status of those
properties, the Board believes it to be in the public interest to recognize
the existing land use pattern and to bring as many properties as
possible into conformity with the Land Use Ordinance. The Boulevard
Downtown Residential Overlay shall be limited to the area described
herein. The Board recommends that this area, and only this area, be
placed in the Residential Overlay Zone with a minimum of two
bedrooms per apartment.
B. Residential dwelling units shall be limited to the second or third floor of
a building. Each unit shall consist of at least two bedrooms and be a
minimum of 650 square feet in size.
A. Purpose. The current industrial area between North 10th Street and
North 12th Street between Washington and Monroe Avenues should be
an overlay Senior Citizens Housing Zone. This would allow any age
restricted (55+) and disabled housing in the overlay zone. A minimum
of 10% of the senior housing shall meet affordable housing guidelines.
All forms of senior living are encouraged. Density shall be no more than
24 units per acre and parking shall be provided in accordance with the
Land Use Ordinance. Recreational facilities shall be included as part of
any senior complex and will include outdoor and indoor recreational
areas.
B. Accessory uses and structures. The following accessory uses and
structures shall be permitted in the SLO Zone:
(1) Parking and parking facilities as regulated in Article 27.
(2) Signs as regulated in Article 31.
(3) Antennas as regulated in Article 28.
§ 120-23.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-23.14
1:545
(4) Accessory uses and structures customarily subordinate and
incidental to permitted principal uses and accessory uses and
structures customarily subordinate and incidental to permitted
conditional uses. For the purposes of administering this provision,
recreational facilities, such as swimming pools, tennis courts and
racquetball courts, shall not be considered to be a use customarily
incidental to senior citizens housing.
C. Conditional uses and structures. The following conditional uses and
structures shall be permitted in the SLO Senior Living Overlay Zone
only if they comply with the appropriate regulations for such uses or
structures identified in Article 30:
(1) Residential-type public utility facilities.
(2) Certain cellular telecommunications antennas as set forth in Article
28.
(3) Uses in the floodplain which are also permitted principal, accessory
or conditional uses in other residential zones.
D. Prohibited uses and structures. Any use or structure other than those
uses or structures permitted in Subsection A, B or C above is
prohibited.
E. Bulk and lot regulations. The following bulk and lot regulations shall
apply to all uses permitted in the Senior Living Overlay District:
(1) Minimum lot area. Every lot shall contain a minimum lot area of
three acres.
(2) Minimum lot width. Every lot shall have a minimum lot width of 400
feet.
(3) Minimum lot frontage. There shall be a minimum lot frontage of
400 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth. There shall be a minimum of 300 feet of lot
depth.
(5) Setbacks:
(a) Front. Thirty-five feet or the height of the principal building,
whichever is greater.
(b) Rear. A thirty-five-foot rear setback is required.
(c) Side. Minimum side yard shall be 35 feet. If the side property
line is adjacent to a residential zone, a minimum of five feet is
required to be heavily landscaped.
(6) Maximum building height. No principal building shall exceed four
stories and 45 feet in height.
§ 120-23.14 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-23.14
1:546
§ 120-23.15. GO Gateway Overlay Zone District.
The nonresidential zoned Gateway areas at the entrance to the Borough
should be placed in an overlay Gateway Zone that will visually identify, in
a formal and attractive way, the entrance into the Borough. This can be
accomplished by adding identifiable features, such as banners, specialized
sidewalks, specialized paving and enhanced landscaping requirements. The
(7) Maximum building coverage shall not exceed 50%.
(8) Maximum impervious cover shall not exceed 80%.
(9) Minimum open space ratio. The minimum area of the lot that shall
be provided as landscaped open space shall be 20% of the total lot
area. Such landscaped area shall be planted with lawn, shrubs,
hedges, flowering plants or trees.
(10) Minimum floor area per dwelling unit. Every building shall contain
a minimum habitable floor area per dwelling unit that complies
with the following schedule:
(a) Efficiency: 400 square feet.
(b) One-bedroom: 550 square feet.
(c) Two-bedroom: 700 square feet.
F. Other regulations applicable to senior citizens housing in the Senior
Living Overlay District.
(1) Compatible architecture. The design of accessory buildings and
structures, including the nature of building materials used, shall be
substantially the same as used in the construction of principal
buildings on the same site designed to be used for multifamily
residential use.
(2) Use of accessory buildings, basements and attics. No part of any
accessory building or structure, basement or attic shall be used for
living purposes.
(3) Screening. Any premises in the SLO Senior Living Overlay District
that is used for senior citizens housing shall be effectively screened
on any side which abuts any premises that is used exclusively as a
single-family detached or two-family dwelling or underlying
industrial use. The required screening shall meet the conditions
imposed by the Planning Board for this purpose.
G. Other regulations. In addition to the above requirements, any
development in the SLO District must comply with all applicable
regulations of this chapter, including but not limited to the following:
(1) The general provisions of § 120-23.14; and
(2) The off-street parking provisions of Article 27.
§ 120-23.14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-23.15
1:547
Gateway area shall include: North Michigan Avenue from Route 22 to Black
Brook Park; Springfield Road from Route 22 to Black Brook Park; and
Kenilworth Boulevard starting at the Garden State Parkway and extending
approximately 1,000 feet west to Market Street.
A. Purpose.
(1) The purpose of the Gateway Zone is to provide a community entry
experience which can be accomplished with limited gateway
corridors. The Gateway is the entrance into the Borough of
Kenilworth and the gateway corridors are the defined travel routes
that extend from these entrances into primary destination areas of
the Borough.
(2) Gateways are intended to identify primary entrances into the
Borough of Kenilworth. The incorporation of "gateway scenes" at
the defined gateways will function as a visual anchor to clearly
identify the area as a gateway. "Gateway scenes" should be
composed of specific elements that serve to provide a sense of
arrival, reaffirm direction, and reinforce the identity and character
of Kenilworth. The Primary Gateways are defined as the following:
(a) North Michigan Avenue from Route 22 to Black Brook Park,
including Lot Nos. 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9 and 10 in Block No. 1; Lot
Nos. 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12 and 13 in Block No. 2; and
Lot Nos. 1 and 2 in Block No. 3.
(b) Springfield Road from Route 22 to Black Brook Park, including
Lot Nos. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 18 and 19 in Block 3.
(c) Kenilworth Boulevard starting at the Garden State Parkway
and extending approximately 1,000 feet west to Market Street,
including Lot No. 1 in Block 184; Lot No. 2.01 in Block No.
184.1; Lot 10 in Block No. 183; Lot Nos. 1 and 7.01 in Block
179; and Lot No. 1 in Block 128.
B. Recommended features to be included.
(1) Gateways should announce entry into Kenilworth by incorporating
specific elements that create a "gateway scene." The composition
should function as a visual anchor and provide a sense of arrival,
reaffirm direction, and reinforce the identity of Kenilworth.
(2) The specific elements proposed for the "gateway scene" should
reflect the history and spirit of Kenilworth and include gateway
monumentation, fencing, decorative planting, and seasonal interest
plants. The design for each of the defined gateways may vary,
although the elements comprising the "gateway scene" should be
repeated to reinforce the concept of entry.
C. Signage. Gateway monumentation should be incorporated into the
design of the "gateway scene" at the primary gateways. Gateway
§ 120-23.15 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-23.15
1:548
§ 120-23.16. Affordable Housing Overlay Zone. [Added 9-28-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-07]
signage will need to be addressed in greater detail in a signage plan
and coordinated with the Planning Board, Borough Planner and
Borough Engineer for incorporation into the primary gateways. The
design for the monuments may vary at each gateway but should use the
same design vocabulary, color scheme, and graphics. The monuments
should be reflective of the character of the gateway, appropriately
scaled, and legible to motorists. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
D. Fencing.
(1) Fencing should be an integral part of the "gateway scene" for all
the primary gateways. Fencing will help to define the gateways,
providing a backdrop that reflects the design vocabulary and
reinforces Kenilworth's identity. [Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
(2) The proposed fence design for the primary gateways may vary but
should incorporate forms, materials, and colors associated with a
formalized setting in wrought iron or similar materials that are
similar to fencing used in the region but unique enough to establish
an unquestionable identity.
E. Brick pavers. Brick masonry and paving is an element that is often
visually associated with the downtown historic buildings and the
Borough core. Incorporation of brick pavers in the design for the
primary gateways will reinforce their connection to downtown and help
orient the traveler.
F. Decorative planting. Landscape provides an opportunity to reinforce
Kenilworth's support of attractive features and the beauty of the
Borough, a feature that should be enforced and encouraged throughout
the Borough. Variations of the planting scheme will ultimately extend
throughout the Borough. Plant material, color, and forms should be
used to reinforce the unique character of each gateway. Each gateway
should be somewhat structured and formal. Plant material proposed for
the primary gateways should be selected to reflect seasonal change.
Ornamental shrubs, annuals, and perennials should be introduced to
emphasize entry, introduce the character of the corridor, and reinforce
Kenilworth's appreciation of the beauty of the landscape.
G. Public art. Gateways are the front door to the Borough and are prime
locations for public art because of the visual exposure they provide.
Public art helps to define gateways and the character of the Borough by
providing an image that travelers associate with. Public art should be
incorporated into the primary gateways either as part of the design for
the gateway monuments or in separate piece of work.
§ 120-23.15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-23.16
1:549
A. Purpose. The purpose of this zone district is to provide a realistic
opportunity for the construction of low- and moderate-income housing
as land becomes available for development and redevelopment in the
Borough of Kenilworth, thereby addressing some of the constitutional
housing obligations of the Borough under New Jersey's Fair Housing
Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq., the rules of the New Jersey Council on
Affordable Housing ("COAH"), N.J.A.C. 5:94, and the Mount Laurel
doctrine.
B. Scope of applicability. This overlay zone shall apply to all of the land
area, excluding lands in Zone Districts G, P, CE, and CS, of the Borough
of Kenilworth.
C. Low- and moderate-income housing requirements. Neither the Planning
Board nor the Borough Council on an appeal of a final decision of the
Planning Board or the Borough Council in adopting and implementing a
redevelopment plan shall approve a development application in any
zone district or area in need of redevelopment or rehabilitation for a
residential development or a mixed use development with four or more
dwelling units unless 20% of the total number of dwelling units
developed at the same site of the development application are set aside
and sold or rented to low- and moderate-income households, as defined
by COAH, in accordance with applicable COAH rules, currently codified
at N.J.A.C. 5:94, as may be amended from time to time. Alternatively, at
the discretion of the approving agency, up to 50% of the required
number of affordable units may be developed off site, according to a
schedule and strategy acceptable to the approving agency. All fractional
obligations shall be rounded to the closest whole number. Any deviation
from these requirements shall be at the sole discretion of the approving
agency. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 120-23.16 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-23.16
1:550
ARTICLE 24
Accessory Uses, Buildings and Structures
§ 120-24.1. Requirements for residential accessory uses and
structures.
Except as may be specifically provided otherwise in this chapter, the
following provisions shall apply to the specific accessory buildings, uses
and/or structures for all residences in all residential and nonresidential
zones; provided, however, that except for improvement coverage
requirements herein, this article shall not apply to parking, signs and
other accessory structures regulated elsewhere in this chapter when such
regulations expressly or by clear implication supersede those in this article:
A. No detached private garage shall be closer than three feet from the
rear or side property line, except where the detached private garage is
on a street side yard, in which case it shall be no closer to the side
property line than half of the established front yard depth pursuant to
this Part 3.
(1) No detached private garage shall be closer than three feet from the
rear or side property line, except where the detached private
garage is on a street side yard in which case it shall be no closer
than half of the established front yard depth pursuant to this Part
3.
(2) Detached private garages shall be limited to one story and shall
have a peaked roof with a maximum pitch of no greater than one on
one and shall not be larger than 500 square feet in the floor area.
No premises shall have more than one detached garage, regardless
of its size.
B. Sheds. Sheds, as defined in Article 1, shall comply with the following:
(1) Sheds shall be permitted only in the rear yard.
(2) Sheds shall not be larger than 100 square feet in the floor area, nor
greater than 10 feet in height and no premises shall have more
than one shed, regardless of its size.
(3) No shed shall be closer than three feet from the rear or side
property line, except where the shed is on a street side yard in
which case it shall be no closer than half of the established front
yard depth pursuant to Part 3.
C. Gazebos. Gazebos are accessory structures and are subject to the
provisions of this article. Gazebos shall comply with the following:
(1) Yard location. Gazebos shall be permitted only in the rear yard or in
the side yard for corner lots.
§ 120-24.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-24.1
1:551
(2) Gazebos shall not be larger than 100 square feet in the floor area
nor greater than 12 feet in height and no premises shall have more
than one gazebo, regardless of its size.
(3) No gazebo shall be closer than 10 feet from any side or rear
property line, except where the gazebo is on a side street yard, in
which case it shall be no closer than half of the established front
yard depth pursuant to Part 3.
D. Decks and patios. Decks and patios are accessory structures and are
subject to the provisions of this article. The following specific
requirements shall apply to decks and patios in all residential zones and
accessory to any residential use in a nonresidential zone:
(1) Yard location. Decks shall be permitted only in the rear yard.
(2) Setback requirements. Decks and patios shall be set back from the
side lot lines a distance equal to or greater than the distance
required for principal buildings. [Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
(3) Lighting. Artificial lighting shall be permitted, provided that any
lighting shall be placed so as to eliminate the transmission of glare
to adjoining properties or to adjoining streets, and provided further
that such lighting shall not be located higher than six feet above the
elevation of the deck floor.
(4) Subfloor areas. The space between the floor of the deck and the
ground shall be screened with appropriate plantings or shrubbery
or shall be covered with a skirt of lattice or other material so that
open space between the deck and the ground, if any, is not visible.
Skirts, lattices or appropriate screening shall have at least one inch
and no more than three inches of ground clearance and shall
provide a method of human access under the deck or raised patio.
E. Private swimming pools. Private swimming pools shall comply with the
following:
(1) Use. Private swimming pools shall be designed and intended only
for the private use of the occupants of the premises and their
guests as a swimming pool.
(2) Where permitted. Private swimming pools are permitted only in the
residential zone districts.
(3) Location. Swimming pools shall be permitted only in the rear yard.
The swimming pool shall not be closer than five feet from any side
or rear property line. On corner lots, the swimming pool shall be set
back from the side street line a distance at least equal to the street
side yard setback requirement for a principal building.
(4) Lighting. Artificial lighting shall be permitted below the surface of
the water and/or at a height not to exceed six feet above grade level
§ 120-24.1 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-24.1
1:552
and any lighting above grade level shall be placed so as to eliminate
the transmission of glare to adjoining properties or to adjoining
streets.
(5) Other provisions of law. All other provisions of state law and
Borough Code with respect to swimming pools shall be satisfied.
(6) Exclusions. Hot tubs, wading pools, landscape pools and fish pools
are not swimming pools and are not required to meet the specific
requirements of this subsection, but are considered to be accessory
uses and must meet all other applicable requirements of this
article.
F. Hot tubs. Hot tubs are required to meet all the general requirements for
accessory uses as set forth in this section, provided the following
additional requirements shall be satisfied:
(1) Location. Hot tubs shall be permitted only in the rear yard. The hot
tub shall not be closer than five feet from any side or rear property
line. On corner lots, the hot tub shall be set back from the side
street line a distance at least equal to the street side yard setback
requirement for a principal building.
(2) In the event a hot tub is located within or adjacent to a deck, the
hot tub shall be required to comply with the requirements for
decks.
(3) In the event a hot tub is constructed as a freestanding structure,
the hot tub shall be subject to the same setback requirements
applicable to swimming pools.
(4) Hot tubs installed outside a building shall have a hard permanent
lockable cover which must be kept closed and locked when not in
use.
G. Game courts. Game courts involving a ball in play, such as but not
limited to private tennis courts, racquetball courts, paddleball courts,
platform tennis courts, handball courts, basketball courts and similar
recreational facilities, are conditional uses and shall be subject to the
following:
(1) Location. The recreational facilities included in this subsection
shall be permitted only in the rear yard.
(2) Coverage by recreational facilities. Except as may be otherwise
provided in this chapter, the total coverage by accessory buildings
and above-grade structures in the rear yard shall not exceed 25%
of the area of the rear yard. The foregoing coverage restriction
shall not be construed as permitting the total coverage by buildings
and above-grade structures or the total coverage by improvements
on the lot to exceed the maximum coverage permitted in the
particular zone district or for the particular use, as applicable, or as
§ 120-24.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-24.1
1:553
excluding such coverage in the rear yard from the calculation
of total coverage by buildings and above-grade structures on the
lot, or as excluding such coverage from the calculation of total
coverage by improvements on the lot.
(3) Setback. The recreational facility shall not be closer than 15 feet
from any side or rear property line. On corner lots, the recreational
facility shall be set back from the side street line a distance equal to
or greater than the street side yard setback requirement for a
principal building.
(4) Enclosures. The height of the recreational facility enclosure, if
there be one, shall not exceed 15 feet. In the event the enclosure is
greater than six feet high, the enclosure shall comply with the
setbacks applicable to recreational facilities in Subsection G(3)
above. Enclosures shall be of open chain link construction, shall not
include slats or coverings, and shall include a top rail.
(5) Lighting. No artificial lighting is permitted.
H. Antennas. Antennas are permitted and regulated as set forth in Article
28.
I. Other miscellaneous residential accessory uses and structures. The
following regulations shall apply as specified:
(1) Wading pools, sandboxes, trellises, seasonal temporary tents, dog
houses, kennel enclosures, patios, grape arbors, permanent
barbecue facilities, and other structures or uses customarily
associated with residential uses shall all be set back from any
property line at least five feet and shall not be located in the front
or side yards; provided, however, that patios may be located in any
side yard. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth
herein, temporary structures for religious services may be located
in the front, side and/or rear yards.
(2) Bocci courts shall not be located in the front or side yards and shall
be at least five feet from any property line.
(3) Playground equipment shall not be located in the front or side yard,
shall be no higher than 15 feet above the ground, and shall be at
least five feet from any property line.
(4) Air conditioners and heat pumps, or portions thereof, which are not
mounted in the window or walls of a building or structure but are
placed upon the ground or on a ground-based platform outside of a
structure or building may not be located in the front yard. Such
structures shall be at least five feet from any property line. Any
ground level air conditioner, compressor, and/or heat pump shall be
screened.
§ 120-24.1 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-24.1
1:554
§ 120-24.2. Bulk storage of flammable or hazardous chemicals.
All aboveground and underground bulk storage of liquefied petroleum
gases, gasoline, diesel fuel, kerosene, No. 2 fuel, fuel oil, chemicals or
similar hazardous, flammable or combustible liquids in any amount is
prohibited in all zone districts. Underground or basement storage of up to
530 gallons of kerosene or No. 2 heating fuel used exclusively for heating
purposes on the premises is exempted from the above prohibition.
(5) Generators shall be set back from the side lot lines a distance equal
to or greater than the distance required for principal buildings. Any
ground level generator shall be screened by an attractive and
appropriate wall, fence or planting of appropriate height and
density to obscure the generator from view of adjacent properties,
which screening shall be subject to the approval of the Zoning
Officer. Generators shall not be located in the front or front side
yard on corner properties.
(6) Basketball backboards may be fastened to the house. Movable
backboards shall not be positioned in such a manner to interfere
with either pedestrian or vehicular traffic. No basketball
backboards shall be located anywhere but on the individual
owner's property and not in the public right-of-way.
(7) Mailboxes, artwork, gate posts, portable barbecues and planters
shall be exempt from the provisions of this article and any other
provision of this chapter.
(8) Skateboard ramps. Any structure or ramp designed for use with
skateboards, whether on a temporary or permanent foundation, is
prohibited in all residential zone districts.
(9) Other uses and structures. The Zoning Officer shall determine the
applicability of this chapter to accessory uses and structures for
residential use which are not specifically regulated herein.
A. Furthermore, and notwithstanding the above prohibition, aboveground
and underground bulk storage of the following materials is permitted at
public garages, gasoline service stations, gasoline filling stations and
automobile sales operations, if the use of such materials is accessory to
the principal use on the site:
(1) Gasoline, diesel fuel and other approved fuels for motor vehicles,
stored in accordance with all applicable state and federal
regulations, and intended to be dispensed from pumps to motor
vehicles operated by the general public;
(2) Up to 275 gallons of motor oil, transmission fluid or other similar
automotive fluids, all of which must be stored above ground in
approved storage tanks; provided, however, that outdoor storage of
such materials in 55 gallon drums shall not be permitted, and
§ 120-24.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-24.2
1:555
§ 120-24.3. Storage and dispensing of liquefied petroleum gas.
The above-ground storage of liquefied petroleum gas shall be prohibited in
all zone districts except the I Industrial Zone District. In the I Zone District,
the following regulations shall apply to such storage and dispensing:
further provided that only such fluids with a flash point at or above
200° F. shall be permitted to be stored above ground in bulk; and
(3) Up to 350 gallons of waste motor oil, waste transmission fluid or
other similar automotive waste fluids, all of which must be stored
above ground in approved storage tanks; provided, however, that
outdoor storage of such materials in 55 gallon drums shall not be
permitted, and further provided that only such waste fluids with a
flash point at or above 200° F. shall be permitted to be stored above
ground in bulk.
B. Notwithstanding anything herein contained to the contrary, this section
is not intended to conflict with the Uniform Construction Code but to
govern the land use nature of the bulk storage of such chemicals, and in
the event of a conflict, the Uniform Construction Code shall prevail.
A. Any such storage tank shall not exceed 1,100 gallons water capacity.
B. Any such storage of liquefied petroleum gas shall only be used to refill
liquefied petroleum gas tanks of less than 50 pounds.
C. The plans for the installation of any such tank shall be approved by the
New Jersey Department of Labor and Workforce Development prior to
installation. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 120-24.2 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-24.3
1:556
ARTICLE 25
Home Occupations
§ 120-25.1. Home occupations permitted.
Except as may be otherwise prohibited in this article, home occupations
are permitted, subject to the requirements and limitations set forth in this
article.
§ 120-25.2. Requirements applicable to home occupations.
The following requirements shall apply to home occupations:
A. Must be accessory to the dwelling unit and subordinate to the dwelling
unit. The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be
clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by
its occupants. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
B. Maximum portion of dwelling unit that may be used. Not more than
30% of the habitable floor area of the dwelling unit shall be used in the
conduct of the home occupation.
C. Outside appearance. Dwelling units that contain a home occupation
shall retain the appearance of a residence. There shall be no change in
the outside appearance of the building or property, or other visible
evidence of the conduct of such home occupation. The public display of
goods visible from the street or abutting properties and any visible
advertising on the premises shall be prohibited, except for a single sign,
not larger than two square feet, which may identify the name of the
business and shall be no higher than six feet from entrance level and
attached to the building on the front facade. This sign is permitted for
the purpose of facilitating the identification of the home occupation for
visitors and deliveries. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
D. Sales to the public prohibited. There shall be no sale to the general
public of goods displayed on the premises.
E. Truck parking. No more than one truck of the size permitted in Article
27 and used in the home occupation shall be permitted to be parked on
the premises unless such additional vehicle or vehicles are parked
inside a garage.
F. Storage. Except for the parking of motor vehicles as permitted in this
section, outdoor storage related to a home occupation shall be
governed by the provisions of Articles 25 and 26.
G. Equipment and process limitation. No equipment or process shall be
used in any home occupation which creates noise, vibration, glare,
fumes, odors, or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses
at the property line if the occupation is conducted in a single-family
§ 120-25.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-25.2
1:557
§ 120-25.3. Prohibited uses.
The following shall not be deemed to be home occupations and are
prohibited in all residential zones and in all dwelling units located in
nonresidential zones:
detached dwelling, or outside the dwelling unit if the occupation is
conducted in a two-family or duplex dwelling. No equipment or process
shall be used in any home occupation which causes electrical, visual or
audible interference in any radio or television receiver located off the
premises or causes fluctuations in line voltage off the premises.
H. Nuisance. There shall be no noise, dust, smoke, fumes, odor, glare,
flashes, vibrations, shock waves, heat, electronic or atomic radiation,
objectionable effluent, unusual risks of fire, explosion or activity
otherwise prohibited by law or this chapter in connection with such
home occupation.
A. Any medical, nursing, convalescent, or treatment facilities, including
but not limited to:
(1) Operation of clinics, hospitals, alcohol rehabilitation facilities and
outpatient dispensaries;
(2) The services of a doctor, dentist, veterinarian, psychiatrist,
psychologist or other health services any of which involve patient
or client visitation to the premises;
(3) The providing of nursing or convalescent care;
(4) The furnishing of narcotic, drug or alcohol abuse treatment; and
(5) The performing of abortions.
B. Embalming, undertaking, funeral parlors or funeral homes;
C. Barber shops, beauty parlors, massage parlors, tanning salons, tattoo
parlors, the provision of pedicures, manicures, electrolysis or any
similar personal services;
D. Pet care/grooming, kennels, animal hospitals or animal recuperation or
rehabilitation services, or any similar services for animals;
E. The furnishing of home care services for more than five children at any
one time in a dwelling unit for a monetary consideration;
F. Music or dancing schools other than for individual instruction of one
pupil at a time, with no more than two pupils waiting;
G. The dispensing of food for consumption on the premises;
H. Tea rooms, or tourist homes, or bed-and-breakfasts;
§ 120-25.2 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-25.3
1:558
I. The operation of a taxi service, or the operation of a limousine service
having more than two limousines parked on the premises;
J. The operation of a business which results in the storage or maintenance
of construction equipment such as, but not limited to, backhoes, dump
trucks, flatbed trucks, equipment trailers, tractors, compressors,
cement mixers and similar equipment on the residential premises;
K. The storage, maintenance, repair or sale of motor powered equipment
such as, but not limited to, automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, motor
bikes or lawn mowers, provided, however, that such activities if
otherwise lawful may be conducted by residents of the property in
connection with motorized equipment owned by such residents for their
own personal use;
L. The assembly or storage of motor vehicles for shipment;
M. Sales at retail to the public;
N. Public warehouse; and
O. Psychic or other paranormal services.
§ 120-25.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-25.3
1:559

ARTICLE 26
Outdoor Storage
§ 120-26.1. Outdoor storage permitted.
Storage of certain items outside of buildings or structures and parking of
certain vehicles outside buildings and structures is permitted in all zones
subject to the limitations and restrictions of this article. Notwithstanding
any provision of this chapter to the contrary, the storage of materials
which are deemed to be flammable, explosive, radioactive or otherwise
detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare by the Zoning Officer,
Construction Official, Board of Health or Fire Department is prohibited in
or outside a structure or a vehicle regulated by this article, except for the
following:
§ 120-26.2. Certain motor vehicle parking in all zones. [Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
Motor vehicles used exclusively for personal private transportation of the
occupant of the premises thereof or other members of the occupant's
household may be parked outside of a building in a permitted parking space
on the premises in question at all times in all zones without limitation,
except as provided in the Borough Code for regulation of inoperable motor
vehicles.
§ 120-26.3. Parking of motor vehicles not for personal private use
of occupant in residential zones.
Certain motor vehicles and other vehicles as set forth below may be parked
outside a building in a permitted parking space on any premises devoted
primarily to a residential use; provided, however, that the vehicle is owned
or operated by the occupant of said residence, and subject to the conditions
and limitations specified below.
A. Up to 15 gallons of Class I flammable liquids may be stored or carried.
Class I flammable liquids are defined as having a flash point below 100°
F. Examples include gasoline, gas/oil mixtures, propane, acetylene,
Varsol, turpentine, most organic paint thinners, and similar flammable
liquids.
B. Flammable liquids shall be stored in containers of a type approved by
the Fire Subcode Official or Fire Official, and the container shall have
the name of the liquid displayed conspicuously.
A. Number and type of vehicles permitted. Only the number and type of
vehicle permitted in one of the following subsections may be parked on
a residential premises. The parking of a vehicle from more than one of
these categories such as a vehicle from Subsection B and/or Subsection
C shall be prohibited.
§ 120-26.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-26.3
1:561
B. Trucks and vans. One truck or van used for commercial purposes with a
load carrying capacity of 1.5 tons or less may be parked on a permitted
parking space on the residential premises of the owner or operator
thereof. The truck or van length shall not exceed 18 feet in length, nor
10 feet in height above the ground.
C. Self-propelled recreational vehicles. One self-propelled recreational
vehicle may be parked on grass in the rear yard of the residential
premises of the owner or operator thereof. Such vehicles shall not
exceed 18 feet in length or 10 feet in height as measured from the
surface of the ground. This section shall also apply to campers,
removable or otherwise mounted on a truck.
D. Buses. One vehicle designed and licensed to transport up to 10 people
excluding the driver may be parked on the premises of the owner or
operator thereof.
E. Limousines. Two licensed limousines may be parked on the residential
premises of the owner or operator thereof. No limousine parked on a
residential premises shall exceed 25 feet in length. Any such limousine
may have a sign or signs affixed thereto if required by law, but in no
event shall the sign be more than two square feet in origin.
F. Taxicabs. One licensed taxicab may be parked on the premises of the
owner or operator thereof. Such taxicab may have a sign affixed thereto
if required by law, but in no event shall the taxicab contain more than
two such signs. The display area of any such sign shall not exceed two
square feet in origin. Such sign(s) shall not be mounted on the roof of
the taxicab.
G. Boats. One boat may be parked or stored on the residential premises of
the owner or operator thereof. The boat, including any trailer upon
which the boat is parked or stored, shall not exceed a height of 10 feet
above the ground, nor shall the boat or trailer exceed a length of 18
feet. The boat shall be parked or stored in the rear yard.
H. Trailers. One trailer, including but not limited to trailers used for
carrying equipment, motor vehicles or materials, and trailer campers,
all of which are designed and intended to be pulled behind a motor
vehicle, may be parked or stored outside a building on the residential
premises of the owner or operator thereof, subject to the following
requirements:
(1) The trailer shall be properly licensed for road use.
(2) The trailer shall not be used in any commercial enterprise.
(3) The trailer shall not exceed 18 feet in length or 10 feet in height
above the ground.
(4) The trailer shall be stored in the rear yard, behind the principal
structure and shall be screened from adjacent properties.
§ 120-26.3 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-26.3
1:562
§ 120-26.4. Prohibited outdoor storage in all residential zones and
on all residential property.
The following outdoor storage is prohibited in all residential zones.
I. Motorized landscape equipment or construction equipment. No
motorized landscape equipment shall be parked or stored on any
residential premises except as set forth below:
(1) Landscape equipment such as mowers and tractors used
exclusively on the premises where they are parked or stored.
(2) Landscape equipment of landscape contractors performing
landscape services on the premises, but only so long as it is
necessary to perform such work and such work is being actively
performed.
J. Motorized construction equipment. No motorized construction
equipment shall be parked or stored on a residential premises except as
needed to perform work on that premises and only so long as it is
necessary to perform such work and while such work is being actively
performed.
K. Equipment and materials stored in vehicles. Equipment and materials
may be stored in or on a motor vehicle regulated by this section, subject
to the following:
(1) The equipment or materials shall not be visible from outside the
motor vehicle. In the case of equipment or materials stored in the
open bed of a truck and similar cases, this provision shall be
deemed to be complied with if the equipment and materials are
completely covered by a solid opaque tarp. Exposed ladders shall
not be permitted to remain on a vehicle overnight, but shall be
required to be removed and stored out of view.
(2) The storage of materials which gives off offensive odors, such as
but not limited to decaying vegetation, manure, etc., is prohibited.
(3) The storage of pesticides, herbicides, fertilizer and similar
materials shall comply with applicable regulations of the NJDEP.
A. Construction materials, paving materials and landscaping materials
except those being used for a current, active construction or
landscaping project on the premises and for which a valid building
permit or zoning approval, as applicable, is in effect;
B. Tires, wheels, other motor vehicle parts or truck caps;
C. Appliances and machinery, such as but not limited to: refrigerators,
freezers, washing machines, dryers, dishwashers, water heaters, and
plumbing fixtures;
§ 120-26.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-26.4
1:563
§ 120-26.5. Outdoor storage in nonresidential zones.
The following regulations shall apply to outdoor storage in all nonresidential
zone districts; provided, however, that outdoor storage of garbage, rubbish,
debris and recyclables intended for periodic removal and stored in approved
containers for pickup shall be permitted in all nonresidential zone districts:
D. Furniture, except furniture designed and intended to be used outdoors
on the premises;
E. More than one extension ladder.
F. Snowplows;
G. Garbage, waste material or debris of any kind, except for typical
household trash or recyclables generated on the premises and stored in
approved containers for pickup, and except for temporary storage,
stockpiling or composting of leaves and grass clippings generated on
the premises and more than two cords of firewood unless screened by a
solid fence or shrubbery; and
H. Unlicensed and uninsured motor vehicles of any kind.
A. In the nonresidential zones no outdoor storage shall be permitted
except operable motor vehicles actually used in the business conducted
on the premises, except that on premises where the principal use is
residential, the outdoor storage permitted for residential zones shall
also be permitted for that premises. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
B. In the I Industrial Zone the following outdoor storage is permitted;
provided, however, that on premises in these zones where the principal
use is residential, the outdoor storage permitted for residential zones
shall also be permitted for that premises:
(1) Operable motor vehicles actually used in the business conducted
on the premises.
(2) Motor vehicles held for sale, rental or repair subject to the
conditions imposed by this chapter for particular conditional uses.
(3) Mobile storage structures subject to the conditions imposed by the
definition of "mobile storage structures" in Article 1.
C. On premises containing a mixed residential/nonresidential
development, outdoor storage for the residential use shall be limited to
customary and ancillary storage of typical household waste and
recyclables for pickup.
§ 120-26.4 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-26.5
1:564
ARTICLE 27
Off-Street Parking
§ 120-27.1. Policy.
To facilitate the smooth flow of traffic, reduce traffic hazards and provide for
maximum security of life and property, it is the policy of the Borough that
off-street parking shall be provided for all premises to the maximum extent
possible.
§ 120-27.2. General design considerations.
Off-street parking, loading, circulation and access improvements shall be
designed to:
§ 120-27.3. General provisions.
Parking spaces, off-street parking areas or off-street loading spaces shall
be provided for any principal building or other structure erected or
constructed upon a lot or for any lot or area of land put into use after
the date of the enactment of this Part 3 in accordance with the following
provisions:
A. Provide adequate on-site space in appropriate locations for vehicles of
employees, patrons, and visitors and for shipping and delivery vehicles,
including future space needs;
B. Be compatible with the internal circulation system of a site and avoid
unusual risks of traffic congestion, public safety or hazards;
C. Avoid substantial negative impacts to adjacent properties;
D. Discourage illegal and improper parking of vehicles;
E. Provide only the minimum area of pavement necessary to meet site
needs, and to break up large areas of pavement with landscaping;
F. Ensure proper drainage;
G. Provide for access by disabled persons that is suitably located and
designed to meet current state and federal ADA requirements;
H. Enable appropriate property maintenance and security;
I. In the case of residential development, comply with the RSIS;107 and
J. Provide a parking area that meets minimum lighting requirements to
ensure security and safety.
A. General design standards.
(1) All single-family detached homes shall contain a garage.
107. Editor's Note: See N.J.A.C. 5:21-1.1 et seq.
§ 120-27.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-27.3
1:565
(2) Each parking space, as hereinbefore defined, shall have the
minimum dimensions of nine feet by 18 feet. Tandem stalls shall not
be permitted.
(3) For the purpose of determining the land requirement of an offstreet
parking area, as hereinbefore defined, each parking space to
be provided in accordance with the parking schedule in Article 27,
or as recommended by the Planning Board, pursuant to Parts 1 and
2, shall be allotted not less than 350 square feet of area, which shall
be sufficient to include the area or the parking space plus area to
be devoted to interior drives, backup areas or turning areas. In
addition, sufficient entrance and exit driveways shall be provided.
(4) All off-street parking areas shall be separated from sidewalks,
streets or alleys by curbing, except at entrances and exits, and all
such sidewalks, streets or alleys shall be protected from vehicular
overhang by wheel bumpers, curbs, planted strips, walls, fences or
other appropriate method where the yard depth for accessory uses
is not sufficient to accomplish this purpose. Curbing may be
designed as flush curbing when being incorporated into a
stormwater management scheme utilizing natural vegetation or
grassed swales.
(5) Entrance and exit driveways to and from all off-street parking areas
shall be at least 12 feet in width to allow for free one-way
movement, and at least 22 feet in width for two-way movement,
provided that two-way entrances and exits shall be no wider than
28 feet in width. Parking aisles shall be at least 24 feet in width for
two-way traffic, except that for retail business and personal service
uses, the minimum dimensions shall be 25 feet. Whenever possible,
one-way movement should be provided for all entrance and exit
driveways as well as interior driveways.
(6) Wherever practicable and not prohibited in this Part 3, access to
off-street parking areas shall be gained from local streets or service
streets rather than from streets designated on the Master Plan as
arterial streets. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
(7) No required off-street parking shall be encroached upon by
buildings, other structures, open storage areas or other uses.
(8) No layout of an off-street parking area shall be acceptable if such
layout would require vehicles to back out onto a street to exit from
such off-street parking or loading area.
(9) When any land or building is used for two or more purposes, the
number of parking spaces required shall be the sum of the
requirements for the various individual uses computed separately
in accordance with this article. Parking spaces for one use shall not
§ 120-27.3 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-27.3
1:566
§ 120-27.4. Off-street parking schedule.
All developments shall be required to provide at least the minimum number
of off-street parking and loading spaces required by this section, unless
a greater number of parking and loading spaces is required by other
provisions of this chapter.
be considered as providing the required parking spaces for any
other use.
(10) Requirements for the provision of parking facilities with respect to
two or more property uses of the same or different types may be
satisfied by the permanent allocation of the requisite number of
spaces for each use in a common off-street parking area,
cooperatively established and operated, provided that the total
number of spaces designated is not less than the sum of the
individual requirements.
(11) All public garages or roof space allocated for the parking of
vehicles shall be considered part of the required off-street parking
area.
(12) When off-street parking areas shall be used at night, they shall be
adequately lighted. Such lighting shall be installed and maintained
in a manner not to reflect or cause glare into abutting or facing
residential properties.
(13) All parking areas and loading areas shall be paved with hard,
durable asphaltic paving in accordance with Borough standards,
except that alternate designs utilizing permeable material, such as
pavers, porous concrete, or a combination of 45% concrete and
55% holes filled with grass distributed uniformly (commonly known
as "grasscrete"), may be used, subject to the approval of the
Borough Engineer.
(14) Required off-street parking spaces may be provided on a nearby
lot, provided that the distance between the parking lot and the
entrance to the use it serves shall not exceed 200 feet.
(15) In residential zones, off-street parking shall be prohibited for all
commercially registered vehicles whose empty gross weight
exceeds 6,500 pounds and for all commercially registered vehicles
whose loaded gross weight exceeds 8,000 pounds, other than those
vehicles temporarily parked for the purpose of making deliveries.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
A. General. In calculating the number of off-street parking and loading
spaces required or provided, the following general provisions shall
apply:
§ 120-27.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-27.4
1:567
(1) Change of use. A change of use or modification of utilization shall
be subject to the required number of parking spaces for the new
use or utilization. Anything in this chapter to the contrary
notwithstanding, approval shall be valid only for the particular
utilization for which it was granted.
(2) More than one utilization. When one or more utilizations are
proposed on one lot, the minimum number of parking spaces shall
be the aggregate of the number of parking spaces required for each
utilization, computed separately for each utilization and summed,
unless specified otherwise herein.
(3) Primary and minor utilizations. If the primary utilization includes
minor elements of other types of utilizations (e.g., as with home
occupations or as with an office associated with a nursing home),
the entire parking required shall be calculated based on the
requirements from the primary utilization.
(4) Basement space. If basement space is used as part of the primary
utilization of the building either as a result of being a permitted use
or by variance or by meeting the requirements of a preexisting
nonconforming use, such basement space shall be included in
determining the number of parking spaces to be provided based on
the aforesaid requirements. Basement space which is vacant, used
to contain utility equipment serving the building or for storage
alone shall not be included in the calculation of basement space
being used.
(5) Fractions of spaces. Requirements for a fraction of a parking or
loading space shall be rounded down if the fraction is 1/2 space or
less and rounded up if the fraction is greater than 1/2 space.
(6) Garage parking. Parking spaces located inside garages shall be
counted toward the number of required parking spaces only if they
are included as such on a parking plan. Garaging as an accessory
use capable of storing motor vehicles shall not be designed or used
to store more than two motor vehicles on a single lot in any
residential zone district.
B. Minimum number of parking spaces required for each utilization. Each
utilization of land shall provide off-street parking in accordance with
the following requirements, unless more stringent requirements are
provided in other articles of this chapter.
(1) Residential uses.
(a) Single-family or two-family dwellings:
[1] Two-bedroom unit: 1.5 spaces.
[2] Three-bedroom unit: 2.0 spaces.
[3] Four-bedroom unit: 2.5 spaces.
§ 120-27.4 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-27.4
1:568
[4] Five-bedroom unit: 3.0 spaces.
(b) Townhouse dwellings/condominium:
[1] One-bedroom unit: 1.8 spaces.
[2] Two-bedroom unit: 2.3 spaces.
[3] Three-bedroom unit: 2.4 spaces.
(c) Community shelters and residences: one off-street parking
space for each employee during the shift employing the largest
number of persons plus one off-street parking space for each
other five persons or fraction thereof residing on the site.
(d) Dwellings units in the same building as a nonresidential use:
one parking space for each dwelling unit, in addition to the
parking spaces required for the nonresidential use.
(2) Lodging and assembly.
(a) Hotel/motel: one space per guest room, plus one space per
employee on maximum shift, plus one space per four fixed
seats in any meeting rooms or one space for each 100 square
feet GFA in any meeting rooms without fixed seats.
(b) Private clubs, lodges: one space per 100 square feet GFA.
(c) Public theater, auditorium with fixed seats: one space per three
seats, plus one space per meeting hall with fixed employee
seats.
(d) Public theater, auditorium without fixed seats: one space per
100 square feet GFA or meeting hall without fixed seats.
(3) Educational or religious uses.
(a) House of worship: one space per three fixed seats or one space
per 90 square feet GFA of all buildings on the property,
whichever is greater, provided that the calculation of parking
spaces shall be based upon the maximum floor area or seats, as
applicable, which may reasonably be occupied at any one time
in the foreseeable future, as determined by the Board.
(b) Preschool, day care or nursery school: one space per each staff
or employee.
Note: In considering an application for development approval
for a nonresidential development that is to include a childcare
center that is located on the business premises, is owned
or operated by employers or landlords for the benefit of their
employees, their tenants' employees, or employees in the area
surrounding the development, and is required to be licensed
by the Department of Human Services pursuant to P.L. 1983,
§ 120-27.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-27.4
1:569
c. 492 (N.J.S.A. 30:5B-1 et seq.), an approving authority may
exclude the floor area to be occupied in any building or
structure by the child-care center in calculating the density
of that building or structure for the purposes of determining
whether or not the density is allowable under any applicable
municipal zoning ordinance. N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.7.
(c) Elementary/middle junior high/senior high school: one parking
space for each staff member or employee for schools
containing grades under the 10th grade. For schools
containing grades 10th and/or 11th and/or 12th, off-street
parking, in addition to that required for staff or employees,
shall be provided at the rate of one space for each four
students. The Board may require additional parking if, in its
opinion, the parking spaces prescribed above are not sufficient
to ensure that the use will not cause parking in a public street
during the course of normal education programs.
(4) Industrial or warehouse uses.
(a) Light industry, assembly: one space per 400 square feet GFA or
one space per employee on maximum shift, whichever is
greater.
(b) Warehouse, storage: one space per 1,000 square feet GFA or
one space per employee on maximum shift, whichever is
greater.
(5) Office uses.
(a) Medical office: four spaces per doctor present at one time plus
one space per employee other than doctor, or one space per
175 square feet GFA, whichever is greater.
(b) Other professional office: one space per 200 square feet GFA.
(c) Business/administrative: one space per 250 square feet GFA
(under 50,000 square feet office GFA) or one space per 300
square feet GFA (50,000 square feet GFA or greater).
(d) Research offices: one space per 350 square feet GFA.
(6) Health-related uses.
(a) Veterinary hospitals: three spaces per examination room or
doctor present at one time, or one space for each 200 square
feet GFA (but not including kennel space), whichever is
greater.
(b) Nursing/convalescent home/assisted living: one space per
three beds.
(7) Retail/wholesale sales and services.
§ 120-27.4 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-27.4
1:570
(a) General retail sales/service: one space per 300 square feet
GFA.
(b) Auto/truck sales: one space per 30 square feet GFA of all
buildings or two spaces per employee, whichever is greater.
(c) Bank: one space per 250 square feet GFA.
(d) Bar/tavern: one space per two seats.
(e) Barber/beauty shop: three spaces per barber or beautician
present at one time.
(f) Funeral homes: one space per 100 square feet GFA.
(g) Furniture store: one space per 800 square feet GFA.
(h) Gasoline filling station and/or public garage: one space per two
pumps, plus five spaces per service bay, if applicable.
(i) Supermarkets (greater than 10,000 square feet GFA): one
space per 250 square feet GFA.
(j) Hardware store: one space per 300 square feet GFA.
(k) Laundromat: one space per four washing machines, plus one
space per four dryers.
(l) Liquor store: one space per 300 square feet GFA.
(m) Lumber and building supply: one space per 400 square feet
GFA supply store space.
(n) Mini warehouse/commercial storage: two spaces per manager,
plus one space per 10 storage units, plus one visitor space per
25 storage units.
(o) Plant, nursery garden store: one space per 400 square feet
sales area center.
(p) Restaurant, predominantly seating, full service: one space per
three seats.
(q) Restaurant, all others: one space per 75 square feet GFA or one
space per three seats, whichever is greater.
(r) Shopping center or strip mall: the greater number of parking
spaces based upon one space per 225 square feet GFA or the
total number of spaces computed based upon each retail
store's requirement. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
(8) Recreation, cultural uses.
§ 120-27.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-27.4
1:571
§ 120-27.5. Off-street loading.
(a) Health/sports club: one space per 250 square feet of
nonstorage floor area.
(9) Utilization not specified above. The minimum parking requirement
for any utilization not otherwise specified shall be as determined by
the Board.
C. Minimum number of barrier-free spaces. Provisions are to be made for
the disabled for any parking facility as required by law. In any parking
lot designed to accommodate the public, the minimum number of
designated parking spaces accessible to disabled persons shall be
provided as required by the provisions of the Americans with
Disabilities Act or the New Jersey Barrier-Free Subcode.108
D. Shared parking. Subject to the provision of §§ 120-27.7 and 120-27.8
below (location of parking), which shall control, any owners of property
in the nonresidential zone districts may provide the required number of
parking spaces by participating in a joint parking program involving
two or more business uses, provided the plans for such a joint program
shall have been approved by the Board.
E. Nonresidential properties in the BD Boulevard Downtown District
between 18th and 24th Streets, inclusive, shall provide 1/2 of the
required parking spaces per this section. This measure has been
adopted as an economic development policy and shall remain in effect
until the Borough Mayor and Council choose to reinstate the normal
standards.
F. If it can be shown that a particular applicant can demonstrate that
fewer spaces would be required and that an area can be set aside for
additional spaces if necessary, the number of spaces required herein
can be reduced by up to 20% of the required spaces.
G. Should a proposed use not have a matching parking requirement listed
herein, the applicant shall provide a parking analysis based on accepted
industry standards, such as the Institute of Traffic Engineers or other
published standard satisfactory to the Zoning Officer.
A. An off-street loading space shall have minimum dimensions of 12 feet by
25 feet for standard two-axle commercial vehicles and 14 feet by 50 feet
for standard three-or-more-axle vehicles. A minimum clear height of 14
feet shall be required.
B. Off-street loading spaces for commercial and industrial uses shall be
provided in accordance with the following:
108. Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq., and N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.16 et seq., respectively.
§ 120-27.4 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-27.5
1:572
§ 120-27.6. Screening requirements.
§ 120-27.7. Street access regulations.
Floor Area Devoted to Use
(square feet) Number of Spaces Required
Less than 5,000 None
5,000 to 30,000 1
30,000 to 70,000 2
70,000 to 120,000 3
Each additional 60,000 1
A. All off-street parking areas with provision for more than five vehicles, or
establishments with more than two loading bays or spaces for the
temporary parking of commercial vehicles, shall be effectively screened
on each side which adjoins or faces a residential district or an
institutional premises, except that such screening shall not be required
where the parking or loading area is already effectively screened by a
natural terrain feature or a street classified in the major street portion
of the Master Plan as a major arterial street requiring a right-of-way of
80 feet or more.
B. Such screening shall be a solid wall or a solid fence, not less than five
feet in height, together with a three-foot planting strip on the outside of
such wall or fence, planted in shrubs and evergreens. In lieu of such
wall, fence and planting strip, a compact evergreen hedge of not less
than three feet in height at the time of planting may be used. The fence,
wall, planting strip or hedge shall be maintained in good condition, and
no advertising shall be placed thereon. Where appropriate, native
vegetation shall be favored over types of ground cover that may require
fertilizers to sustain a hearty life.
C. The screening shall be so designed that vehicle sight distance shall not
be affected by entrances, exits and street intersections. Where an offstreet
parking area abuts or adjoins another, a five-foot-wide planting
strip, maintained in good condition, may be used in lieu of the required
screening. Separation in impervious areas with the use of vegetative
strips of land is encouraged to minimize runoff and to enhance water
quality.
A. Any portion of any entrance or exit driveway shall not be any closer
than 20 feet to the curbline of an intersecting street.
B. Any two driveways leading from a street to a single lot shall not be
within 30 feet of each other at their intersections with the front lot line
for an interior lot and 40 feet for a corner lot.
§ 120-27.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-27.7
1:573
§ 120-27.8. Waiver or modification of requirements.
§ 120-27.9. Plot plan review by Planning Board.
C. No lot shall have more than two driveway entrances or exits along the
same street. Not more than one such driveway shall be provided unless
traffic circulation on the site and to and from the street will be
facilitated.
D. All signs and traffic control devices required hereunder shall be in
accord with and shall be of a design and construction as provided for in
the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, current edition, which
is incorporated herein by reference.
A. Off-street parking or loading requirements for uses other than those
cited above shall be determined in consultation with the Planning
Board.
B. The Planning Board may waive the requirements of Article 27 or may
require additional spaces if the particular use so warrants.
A. No application for a building permit or certificate of occupancy for a
building or use in any district shall be approved unless there is a plot
plan for such building or use provided showing the required space
designated for off-street parking or loading purposes to be provided as
accessory uses to such building or use and in accordance with the
provisions of this article.
B. The design and layout of any off-street parking area hereinbefore
defined as having spaces for five or more automobiles and loading areas
in which two or more spaces are required shall be reviewed by the
Planning Board with respect to the adequacy of such areas to serve the
principal use of the lot and the layout and design of exits and entrances
to such areas with respect to the ease of traffic movement in and out of
such off-street areas. The plot plan of the lot shall show in detail the
location and extent of such off-street areas; the locations and types of
screening provided; the layout of parking and loading spaces,
driveways and other maneuvering areas; and other requirements of this
Part 3.
C. The Planning Board may recommend a reasonable number of parking
spaces for those uses not listed in the parking schedule above, in
accordance with the standards set forth in Subsection B above.
§ 120-27.7 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-27.9
1:574
ARTICLE 28
Wireless Telecommunications Facilities
§ 120-28.1. Definitions.109
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANTENNA — Any exterior apparatus designed for telephonic, radio or
television communications through the sending and/or receiving of
electromagnetic waves.
GOVERNING AUTHORITY — The governing body of the Borough of
Kenilworth.
§ 120-28.2. Wireless telecommunications towers and antennas.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish guidelines for the
siting of wireless communications towers and antennas.
B. Goals. The Borough shall give due consideration to the Master Plan,
Zoning Map, existing land uses and environmentally sensitive areas in
approving sites for the location of towers and antennas in order to
effectuate the following goals:
(1) Protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse
impacts of towers and antennas;
(2) Encourage the location of towers in nonresidential zones;
(3) Minimize the total number of towers throughout the Borough;
(4) Strongly encourage the joint use of new and existing tower sites as
a primary option rather than construction of additional single use
towers;
(5) Encourage users of towers and antenna to locate them, to the
extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the Borough
is minimal;
(6) Encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a way
that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and
antennas through careful design, siting, landscape screening, and
innovative camouflaging techniques;
(7) Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services
to provide such services to the Borough quickly, effectively, and
efficiently;
109. Editor's Note: The definitions of "alternative tower structure," "FAA," "FCC," "height,"
"preexisting towers and antennas" and "towers," which were previously included in this
section, were repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
The same terms are defined in § 120-1.4, Definitions.
§ 120-28.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-28.2
1:575
(8) Consider the public health and safety of communication towers;
and
(9) Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure
through engineering and careful siting of tower structures.
C. Applicability.
(1) New towers and antennas. All new towers or antennas in the
Borough shall be subject to this section, except as provided in
§ 120-28.2C(2) through (4), and except for those antennas, etc.,
governed by § 120-28.2C(5).
(2) Amateur radio station operators/receive only antennas. This
section shall not govern any tower, or the installation of any
antenna, that is under 70 feet in height and is owned and operated
by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator or is used
exclusively for receive only antennas.
(3) Preexisting towers or antennas. Preexisting towers and preexisting
antennas shall not be required to meet the requirements of this
section, absent any enlargement or structural modification or the
addition of any structures.
(4) AM array. For purposes of implementing this section, an AM array,
consisting of one or more tower units and supporting ground
system which functions as one AM Broadcasting antenna, shall be
considered one tower. Measurements for setbacks and separation
distances shall be measured from the outer perimeter of the towers
included in the AM array. Additional tower units may be added
within the perimeter of the AM array by right.
(5) Satellite dish antennas. This section shall not govern any satellite
dish antennas.
(6) All towers and antennas shall be required to receive site plan
approval and a conditional use permit from the Planning Board,
except that an application for co-location which meets the
requirements of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-46.2 shall not be subject to site
plan review. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
D. General requirements.
(1) Principal or accessory use. Antennas and towers may be considered
either principal or accessory uses. Notwithstanding any other
section of this chapter, a different existing structure on the same lot
shall not preclude the installation of an antenna or tower on such
lot. If a tower and its appurtenant structures constitute the sole use
of the lot, the tower shall be deemed to be the principal use.
(2) Lot size. For the purposes of determining whether the installation
of a tower or antenna complies with this chapter, including but not
§ 120-28.2 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-28.2
1:576
limited to setback requirements, lot coverage requirements and
other such requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot shall
control, even though the antennas or towers may be located on
leased parcels within such lot.
(3) Inventory of existing sites. Each applicant for an antenna and/or
tower shall provide to the Zoning Officer an inventory of its existing
towers, antennas, or sites approved for tower or antennas, that are
either within the jurisdiction of the Borough or within three miles
of the borders thereof, including specific information about the
location, height and design of each tower. The Zoning Officer may
share such information with other applicants applying for
administrative approvals or permits under this section or other
organizations seeking to locate antennas within the jurisdiction of
the Borough; provided, however, that the Zoning Office is not, by
sharing such information, in any way representing or warranting
that such sites are available or suitable.
(4) Aesthetics. Towers and antennas shall meet the following
requirements:
(a) Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or,
subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a
neutral color so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness.
(b) At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related
structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors,
textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend them into
the natural setting and surrounding buildings.
(c) If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the
antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment
must be of a neutral color that is identical to or closely
compatible with the color of the supporting structure so as to
make the antenna and related equipment as visually
unobtrusive as possible.
(d) Under no circumstances shall a wireless telecommunications
tower, antenna, or any appurtenance be situated so that the
same is within 200 feet and facing the front door of any
residence on property adjacent to the proposed
telecommunications facility. [Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
(5) Lighting. Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by
the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the
lighting alternatives and design chosen must cause the least
disturbance to the surrounding views.
(6) State or federal requirements. All towers must meet or exceed
current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any
other agency of the state or federal government with the authority
§ 120-28.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-28.2
1:577
to regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations
are changed, then the owners of the towers and antennas governed
by this section shall bring such towers and antennas into
compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six
months of the effective date of such standards and regulations,
unless a different compliance schedule is mandated by the
controlling state or federal agency. Failure to bring towers and
antennas into compliance with such revised standards and
regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or
antenna at the owner's expense.
(7) Building codes: safety standards. To ensure the structural integrity
of towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in
compliance with standards contained in applicable state or local
building codes and the applicable standards for towers that are
published by the Electronic Industries Association as amended
from time to time. If, upon inspection, the Borough concludes that a
tower fails to comply with such codes and standards and
constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon notice being
provided to the owner of the tower, the owner shall have 30 days to
bring such tower into compliance with such standards. Failure to
bring such tower into compliance within said 30 days shall
constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at the
owner's expense.
(8) Not essential services. Towers and antennas shall be regulated and
permitted pursuant to this section and shall not be regulated or
permitted as essential services, public utilities or private utilities.
(9) Franchises. Owners and/or operators of towers or antennas shall
certify that all franchises required by law for the construction and/
or operation of a wireless communication system in the Borough
have been obtained and shall file a copy of all required franchises
with the appropriate Zoning Officer.
(10) Public notice. For purposes of this section, any conditional use
request, variance request or appeal of an administratively
approved use or conditional use shall require public notice to all
abutting property owners and all property owners of properties
that are located within 200 feet, in addition to any notice otherwise
required by this chapter.
(11)No signs, except for identification and warning signs, shall be
allowed on an antenna or tower.
(12) Buildings and support equipment. Buildings and support
equipment associated with antennas or towers shall comply with
the requirements of Article 28.
(13) Multiple antenna/tower plan. The Borough encourages and
mandates the users of towers and antennas to co-locate antennas.
§ 120-28.2 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-28.2
1:578
Applications for approval of co-location sites shall be given priority
in the review process.
(14) Municipal emergency services communications equipment. Any
telecommunications tower constructed or erected in the Borough
must be able to accommodate Borough emergency services,
including but not limited to police, fire and rescue squad, antennas.
Adjacent space to accommodate supporting equipment shall also
be provided. Any costs associated with such accommodation shall
be borne by the owner of such tower. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, such requirement may be waived by the Borough if such
accommodation is not needed by the Borough emergency services
departments.
E. Permitted uses.
(1) General. The uses listed hereafter are deemed to be permitted uses
and shall not require administrative approval or a conditional use
permit.
(2) Permitted uses. The following use is specifically permitted:
antennas or towers located on property owned, leased, or
otherwise controlled by the Borough, provided a license or lease
authorizing such antenna or tower has been approved by the
Borough. Notwithstanding the foregoing, telecommunications
towers shall not be permitted at any Borough park; however, the
Borough may, as a condition of such lease, require site plan
approval. The decision to extend such lease(s) to an applicant shall
be vested solely with the Borough and shall not be governed by this
section.
F. Conditional use permits.
(1) List of conditional uses. The following uses may be approved by the
Board as conditional uses and a conditional use permit issued:
(a) Antennas on existing structures or towers consistent with the
terms of Subsections F(1)(a)[1][a] and [b] below:
[1] Antennas on existing structures. Any antenna which is not
attached to a tower may be attached to any existing
business, industrial, office or institutional structure not
located in a residential zone, provided:
[a] The antenna does not extend more than the maximum
building height for the zone wherein the structure is
located;
[b] The antenna complies with all applicable FCC and FAA
regulations; and
[c] The antenna complies with the Uniform Construction
Code and the Fire Safety Code.
§ 120-28.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-28.2
1:579
(2) Antennas on existing towers. An antenna may be attached to an
existing tower in a nonresidential zone and, to minimize adverse
visual impacts associated with the proliferation and clustering of
towers, co-location of antennas by more than one carrier on
existing towers shall take precedence over the construction of new
towers, provided such co-location is accomplished in a manner
consistent with the following:
(a) A tower which is modified or reconstructed to accommodate
the co-location of an additional antenna shall be of the same
tower type as the existing towers.
(b) Height.
[1] An existing tower may be modified or rebuilt to a taller
height, not to exceed the maximum tower height
established by this section.
[2] The height change referred to in Subsection F(2)(b)[1]
may only occur one time per communication tower.
[3] The additional height referred to in Subsection F(2)(b)[1]
shall not require an additional distance separation as set
forth in Article 28. The tower's premodification height
shall be used to calculate such distance separations.
(c) On-site location.
[1] A tower which is being rebuilt to accommodate the colocation
of an additional antenna may be moved on site
within 50 feet of its existing location.
[2] After the tower is rebuilt to accommodate co-location, only
one tower may remain on the site.
[3] A relocated on-site tower shall continue to be measured
from the original tower location for purposes of calculating
separation distances between towers pursuant to
§ 120-28.2F(5). The relocation of a tower hereunder shall
in no way be deemed to cause a violation of § 120-28.2F(5).
(d) New towers. New towers may be constructed to hold antennas.
In addition to any information required for applications for
conditional use permits pursuant to this chapter, applicants for
a conditional use permit for a tower shall submit the following
information:
[1] A sealed site plan clearly indicating the location, type and
height of the proposed tower, on-site land uses and zoning,
adjacent land uses and zoning (including when adjacent to
other municipalities), Master Plan classification of the site
and all properties within the applicable separation
distances set forth in § 120-28.2F(5), adjacent roadways,
§ 120-28.2 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-28.2
1:580
proposed means of access, setbacks from property lines,
elevation drawings of the proposed tower and any other
structures, topography, parking, and other information
deemed by the Zoning Officer to be necessary to assess
compliance with this section.
[2] Legal description of the entire tract and leased parcel (if
applicable).
[3] The setback distance between the proposed tower and the
nearest residential unit, platted residentially zoned
properties and unplatted residentially zoned properties.
[4] The separation distance from other towers described in
the inventory of existing sites submitted pursuant to
§ 120-28.2D(3) shall be shown on an updated site plan or
map. The applicant shall also identify the type of
construction of the existing tower(s) and the owner/
operator of the existing tower(s), if known.
[5] A landscape plan showing specific landscape materials.
[6] Method of fencing and finished color and, if applicable, the
method of camouflage and illumination.
[7] A description of compliance with §§ 120-28.2D(3) through
(7), (10), (12), and (13) and §§ 120-28.2F(4) and (5) and all
applicable federal, state and local laws.
[8] A notarized statement by the applicant as to whether
construction of the tower will accommodate co-location of
additional antennas for future users.
[9] Identification of the entities providing the backhaul
network for the tower(s) described in the application and
other cellular sites owned or operated by the applicant in
the Borough.
[10] A description of the suitability of the use of existing
towers, other structures or alternative technology not
requiring the use of towers or structures to provide the
services to be provided through the use of the proposed
new tower.
[11] A description of the feasible location(s) of future towers or
antennas within the Borough based upon existing physical,
engineering, technological or geographical limitations in
the event the proposed tower is erected.
[12] A visual study depicting where, within a three-mile radius,
any portion of the proposed tower could be seen.
§ 120-28.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-28.2
1:581
[13] A statement of intent on whether excess space will be
leased.
(3) Factors considered in granting conditional use permits for towers.
In addition to any standards for consideration of conditional use
permit applications pursuant to this chapter, the Board shall
consider the following factors in determining whether to issue a
conditional use permit.
(a) Height of the proposed tower;
(b) Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential
district boundaries;
(c) Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties;
(d) Surrounding topography;
(e) Surrounding tree coverage and foliage;
(f) Design of the tower, with particular reference to design
characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating
visual obtrusiveness;
(g) Proposed ingress and egress;
(h) Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures, or
alternative technologies not requiring the use of towers or
structures as discussed in § 120-28.2F(4); and
(i) Availability of proposed tower to other potential users.
(4) Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures, or
alternative technology. No new tower shall be permitted unless the
applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the Board
that no existing tower, structure or alternative technology that does
not require the use of towers or structures can accommodate the
applicant's proposed antenna. An applicant shall submit
information requested by the Board related to the availability of
suitable existing towers, other structures or alternative technology.
Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower,
structure or alternative technology can accommodate the
applicant's proposed antenna may consist of any of the following
(although meeting one, some, or all of the following shall entitle the
applicant to approval):
(a) No existing towers or structures are located within the
geographic area which meet applicant's engineering
requirements.
(b) Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to
meet applicant's engineering requirements.
§ 120-28.2 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-28.2
1:582
(c) Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural
strength to support applicant's proposed antenna and related
equipment.
(d) The applicant's proposed antenna would cause
electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the existing
tower or structures, or the antenna on the existing towers or
structures would cause interference with the applicant's
proposed antenna.
(e) The fees, costs or contractual provisions required by the owner
in order to share an existing tower or structure or to adapt an
existing tower or structure for sharing are unreasonable. Costs
exceeding new tower development are presumed to be
unreasonable.
(f) The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting
factors that render existing towers and structures unsuitable.
(g) The applicant demonstrates that an alternative technology that
does not require the use of towers or structures, such as a
cable micro cell network using multiple low powered
transmitters/receivers attached to a wire line system, is
suitable. Costs of alternative technology that exceed new
tower or antenna development shall not be presumed to render
the technology unsuitable.
(5) Setbacks. The following minimum setback requirements shall apply
to all towers for which a conditional use permit is required:
(a) Towers must be set back a distance equal to at least 100% of
the height of the tower from any adjoining lot line and all
nonappurtenant buildings.
(b) Guys and accessory buildings must satisfy the minimum zoning
district setback requirements.
(c) No tower shall exist within required buffer areas, if adjacent to
residential zones and as prescribed elsewhere in this chapter.
(d) Towers located in nonresidential districts adjacent to
residential districts shall be set back from all residential lot
lines by a minimum distance equal to 1 1/2 times the height of
the tower, including all antennas and attachments, or a fivehundred-
foot minimum setback, whichever is more.
(e) Towers shall not be located between a principal structure and a
public street. An improved driveway shall be provided for
access to each tower site from the nearest open public street.
(f) A tower's setback may be reduced or its location in relation to
the public street varied, at the sole discretion of the Board, to
allow the integration of a tower into an existing or proposed
§ 120-28.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-28.2
1:583
structure, such as a church steeple, light standard, power line
support device, or similar structure.
(g) Towers shall meet all buffer and landscaping requirements of
the underlying zone district.
(h) Telecommunications towers or antennas shall not be located on
any dwelling.
(6) Security fencing. Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing not
less than six feet in height and shall also be equipped with an
appropriate anti-climbing device.
(7) Landscaping. The following requirements shall govern the
landscaping surrounding towers for which a conditional use permit
is required:
(a) Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant
materials that effectively screens the view of the tower
compound from property used for residences or planned
residences. The standard buffer shall consist of a landscaped
strip at least four feet wide outside the perimeter of the
compound.
(b) In locations where the visual impact of the tower is minimal,
the landscaping requirement may be reduced.
(c) Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site
shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some
cases, such as towers sited on large, wooded lots, natural
growth around the property perimeter may be sufficient buffer.
(d) Height. The maximum height of a new tower shall be:
[1] For single user, up to 90 feet in height;
[2] For two users, up to 120 feet in height;
[3] For three or more users up to 150 in height.
(8) General requirements. The following provisions shall govern the
issuance of conditional use permits for towers or antennas by the
Board:
(a) If the tower or antenna is not a permitted use under
§ 120-28.2E, then a conditional use permit shall be required for
the construction of a tower or the placement of an antenna in
designated zoning districts.
(b) Applications for conditional use permits under this section
shall be subject to the procedures and requirements contained
elsewhere in this chapter, except as modified by this section.
§ 120-28.2 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-28.2
1:584
(c) In granting a conditional use permit, the Board may impose
conditions to the extent the Board concludes such conditions
are necessary to minimize any adverse effect of the proposed
tower on adjoining properties.
(d) Any information of an engineering nature that the applicant
submits, whether civil, mechanical, or electrical, shall be
certified by a licensed professional engineer.
(e) An applicant for a conditional use permit shall submit the
information described in this section and a nonrefundable
application fee and an escrow deposit as required by this
chapter for conditional use applications.
(f) Locating a tower or antenna, including the placement of
additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in
connection with said tower or antenna, is permitted as
conditional uses only in the Industrial Zone and the G
Government Zone. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
(g) An application fee and escrows shall be paid as required by the
Borough.
G. Buildings or other equipment storage.
(1) Antennas mounted on structures or rooftops. The equipment
cabinet or structure used in association with antennas shall comply
with the following:
(a) The cabinet or structure shall not contain more than 200
square feet of gross floor area or be more than 10 feet in
height. In addition, for buildings and structures which are less
than 40 feet in height, the related unmanned equipment
structure, shall be located on the ground and shall not be
located on the roof of the structure.
(b) Equipment storage buildings or cabinets shall comply with all
applicable building codes.
(2) Antennas mounted on utility poles or light poles. The equipment
cabinet or structure used in association with antennas shall be
located in accordance with the following:
(a) In a front or side yard, provided the cabinet or structure is no
greater than six feet in height or 100 square feet of gross floor
area and the cabinet/structure is located a minimum of 75 feet
from all lot lines. The cabinet/structure shall be screened by an
evergreen hedge with an ultimate height of at least 42 inches
to 48 inches and a planted height of at least 36 inches.
(b) In a rear yard, provided the cabinet or structure is no greater
than eight feet in height or 120 square feet in gross floor area.
§ 120-28.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-28.2
1:585
§ 120-28.3. Antennas, earth stations, satellite dishes and similar
equipment.
Radio and television antennas, including satellite dish antennas, accessory
to a permitted principal structure on the same premises may be installed,
erected and maintained within all districts, but only in accordance with
the provisions of this section. Cellular telecommunications antennas are
regulated as a conditional use in Article 28 and shall be exempt from the
provisions of this section and governed by the provisions of § 120-28.2.
The cabinet/structure shall be screened by an evergreen hedge
with an ultimate height of eight feet and planted height of at
least 48 inches.
(3) Antennas located on utility poles and towers. The related
unmanned equipment structure shall not contain more than 200
square feet of gross floor area or be more than 10 feet in height,
and shall be located in accordance with the minimum yard
requirements of the zoning district in which located.
(4) Structures or cabinets shall be screened from view of all residential
properties which abut or are directly across the street from the
structure or cabinet by an evergreen hedge with an ultimate height
of eight feet and a planted height of at least six feet.
H. Removal of abandoned antennas and towers. Any antenna or tower that
is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be
considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna or tower shall
remove the same within 90 days of receipt of notice from the Borough
notifying the owner of such abandonment. Failure to remove an
abandoned antenna or tower within said 90 days shall be grounds to
remove the tower or antenna at the owner's expense. If there are two or
more users of a single tower, then this provision shall not become
effective until all users cease using the tower. The Borough may
condition the issuance of any permit to demolish or remove a tower or
antenna on the posting of an appropriate performance bond or other
suitable guarantee in a face amount of not less than 120% of the cost
(as determined by the Borough Engineer) of such removal, grading and
restoration to a state required under the Borough Code, including but
not limited to the Borough Property Maintenance Code.
I. Rebuilding damaged or destroyed nonconforming towers and antennas.
Nonconforming towers or antennas that are damaged or destroyed may
not be rebuilt without first obtaining a conditional use permit. The type,
height and location of the tower on site shall be of the same type and
intensity as the original facility approval. Building permits to rebuild
the facility shall comply with the then applicable building codes and
shall be obtained within 180 days from the date the facility is damaged
or destroyed. If no permit is obtained or if said permit expires, the
tower or antenna shall be deemed abandoned.
§ 120-28.2 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-28.3
1:586
A. Review and approval procedure. All antennas shall be subject to the
review and approval of the Zoning Officer. Applications shall be subject
to the following procedure:
(1) Each application shall be accompanied by a report prepared by the
installer of the antenna explaining why the proposed location was
selected over other locations and the reasons, with supporting
data, for any requested deviation from the requirements of this
section as to location or screening.
(2) When deemed necessary by the Zoning Officer, the Borough may
consult, at the applicant's expense, with an expert in the field of
antenna installations for guidance in evaluating an applicant's
report when a deviation from the requirements of this section is
requested. The applicant shall post a fee calculated by the Zoning
Officer, but not to exceed $500, to cover such expense, in the form
of cash or a certified check, and against which such review
expenses shall be charged. All sums not actually so expended shall
be returned to the applicant at the time the permit is either issued
or denied.
(3) The Zoning Officer may permit deviations from the requirements of
this section when it is demonstrated by the applicant that such
deviations are necessary to enable proper antenna reception.
B. General regulations. The following general regulations shall apply to
antennas in residential or nonresidential districts.
(1) No portion of an antenna array shall extend beyond the property
lines or into any front yard area. Guy wires shall not be anchored
within any front yard area but may be attached to the building.
(2) Ground-mounted antennas shall be any antenna with its base
mounted directly in the ground, even if such antenna is supported
or attached to the wall of a building. Fixed-guyed antenna tower
shall be fascia-mounted or guyed according to approved standards.
Wire antennas that are not self-supporting shall be supported by
objects within the property lines but not within any front yard
areas.
(3) The antenna, including guy wires, supporting structures and
accessory equipment, shall be located and designed so as to
minimize to the greatest extent possible the visual impact on
surrounding properties and from public streets. Antennas shall be
screened from view through the addition of anti-climb fencing and
architectural features or evergreen landscaping that harmonizes
with the elements and characteristics of the property; provided,
however, that no screening shall be required which would inhibit
adequate reception. Screening by fencing or plantings may be
waived if natural terrain and landscaping provide adequate
screening. The materials used in constructing the antenna shall not
§ 120-28.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-28.3
1:587
be unnecessarily bright, shiny, garish or reflective, and all antennas
shall blend with the surrounding environment.
(4) Antennas shall meet all manufacturers specifications. The mast or
tower shall be of noncombustible and noncorrosive hardware, such
as brackets, turn buckles, clips and similar type equipment not
subject to rust or corrosion, and shall be protected with a zinc or
cadmium coating by either galvanizing or a similar process after
forming. These finishes are selected to guard against corrosion and
to protect the element against electrolytic action due to the use of
adjoining dissimilar metals. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
(5) Power control and signal cables to or from the antenna shall be by
underground conduit.
(6) All antennas shall be located, designed, constructed, treated and
maintained in compliance with the requirements of the Uniform
Construction Code and the requirements set forth below. The
requirements below have been designed with the intent of
advancing and achieving health, safety and aesthetic interests and
objectives and are further intended to operate so as not to impose
unreasonable limitations on, or prevent, reception of satellite
delivered signals or to impose costs on the users which are
excessive in light of the cost of purchase and installation.
(7) No antenna or antenna structure located in the Borough,
regardless of when it was erected, shall be used as a sign or as a
supporting structure for any sign or lettering.
C. Antennas in residential districts. Antennas in the residential districts
shall be subject to the following additional regulations:
(1) No lot shall contain more than two antennas, not more than one of
which may be a satellite dish antenna.
(2) Antennas shall be located in the rear yard only and shall be located
at least 10 feet from any property line.
(3) Roof-mounted antennas of any type shall not extend higher than
five feet above the highest point of the roof, provided the satellite
dish antennas shall not be permitted on the roof unless necessary
for reception. In such instances, no roof-mounted satellite dish
antenna shall exceed three feet in diameter nor extend higher than
six feet above the highest point of the roof. A roof-mounted satellite
dish antenna shall be of mesh construction. Such satellite dish
antenna shall be located, if reception is possible at such location,
on roofs when the satellite dish is shielded from view from the
street or by other portions of the roof or structure.
(4) Ground-mounted accessory antennas of any type shall not extend
higher than 50 feet above adjacent ground level, except that
§ 120-28.3 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-28.3
1:588
ground-mounted satellite dish antennas shall not exceed three feet
in diameter nor five feet in height.
D. Antennas in nonresidential districts. Antennas in the nonresidential
districts shall be subject to the following additional regulations.
(1) Antennas shall be located in the rear yard and shall be located at
least 10 feet from any property line.
(2) An antenna may be erected on the roof of a building, provided that
the building, including the antenna, falls within the height limits
established for the district, provided that satellite dish antennas
subject to this article shall not be permitted on the roof.
(3) Ground-mounted antennas shall not exceed five feet in height,
provided that no ground-mounted dish antenna shall exceed a
diameter of 16 feet nor extend above the ground more than 18 feet.
§ 120-28.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-28.3
1:589

ARTICLE 29
Nonconforming Uses, Lots, Buildings and Structures
§ 120-29.1. Nonconforming lots.
No lot, yard, parking area or other open space which is already less than
the minimum required under this chapter shall be further reduced in area
or dimension.
§ 120-29.2. Continuance of nonconforming uses, buildings or
structures.
Any nonconforming use, building or structure which lawfully existed at the
time of the passage of this chapter may be continued and any such existing
nonconforming building or structure may be reconstructed or structurally
altered, provided it shall meet the requirements of this article.
§ 120-29.3. Alteration, extension or enlargement of nonconforming
uses, buildings or structures.
Nonconforming uses, buildings or structures in all zone districts shall
conform to the following requirements:
A. Any building, structure or use of land which is nonconforming because
of use shall not be enlarged, extended or changed to another
nonconforming use in any manner whatsoever.
B. There shall be no structural alterations made to any nonconforming
building or structure that is nonconforming because of use. Structural
alterations may be made in a building or structure which is
nonconforming because it fails to comply with height, area, yard, offstreet
parking or other like requirements of this chapter, so long as the
structural alteration does not extend or enlarge the nonconformance.
C. In the event that there shall be a cessation of operation of any
nonconforming use for a period of 12 consecutive calendar months, the
same shall be presumed an abandonment of such nonconforming use.
Any subsequent attempt to rely upon, exercise or reinstate such
abandoned nonconforming use, notwithstanding anything contained in
this chapter, shall be a violation of the terms of this chapter.
D. Nothing in this chapter shall require any change in plans, construction
or designated use of a structure or building for which a building permit
has been heretofore validly issued if construction has been started and
diligently prosecuted at the time of the adoption of this chapter.
E. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as authorization for or
approval of the continuance of the use of a building, structure or lot in
violation of this chapter and/or rules or regulations in effect
immediately preceding the time of the effective date of this chapter.
§ 120-29.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-29.3
1:591
§ 120-29.4. Restoration of existing buildings or structures which
are nonconforming because of use.
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the restoration or continuance of a
nonconforming building or structure which is nonconforming because of
its use and which is partially destroyed by fire, explosion, act of God, or
of any public enemy, or the like, if the extent of the destruction be not
more than 50% of either the true value or cubical contents of the whole
building or structure at the time of the partial destruction, provided that all
required repairs or restoration shall be commenced within two years after
the damages occur and shall be completed within four years of such date
of the damage occurring. Failure to comply within these time limits shall
require the rebuilding and use to be conforming in all respects. If, however,
any such building or structure shall be destroyed in the manner aforesaid
to an extent exceeding 50% of either the true value or cubical contents of
the whole building or structure at the time of such destruction, then the
same may only be reconstructed and thereafter used in such a manner as to
conform to all the requirements, terms and conditions of this chapter.
§ 120-29.5. Restoration of existing buildings or structures which
are nonconforming because of reasons other than use.
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the restoration or continuance of
a nonconforming building or structure which is nonconforming because
it fails to comply with any height, area, yard, off-street parking or other
like requirements of this chapter, and which is partially destroyed by fire,
explosion, act of God, or of any public enemy, or the like (less than 50%
of total structure); provided, however, that any restoration of any such
building or structure shall not enlarge the previously existing
nonconformance.
§ 120-29.6. Certification of nonconforming use, building or
structure. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
The prospective purchaser, prospective mortgagee, or any other person
interested in any land upon which a nonconforming use or structure exists
may apply in writing for the issuance of a certificate certifying that the
use or structure existed before the adoption of the chapter or any portion
thereof which rendered the use or structure nonconforming. The applicant
shall have the burden of proof. Application pursuant hereto may be made
to the Zoning Officer within one year of the adoption of this chapter or
any portion thereof which rendered the use or structure nonconforming
or at any time to the Planning Board. Denial by the Zoning Officer shall
F. A nonconforming use changed or altered to a conforming use may not
thereafter be changed back to a nonconforming use. Nothing
hereinbefore stated shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a
safe and lawful condition part of any building or structure declared
unsafe by the Construction Official or the Borough Engineer.
§ 120-29.3 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-29.6
1:592
be appealable to the Board. N.J.S.A. 40:55D-72 to 40:55D-75 shall apply to
applications or appeals.
§ 120-29.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-29.6
1:593

ARTICLE 30
Conditional Uses
§ 120-30.1. Authority.
The Planning Board shall have the authority to receive applications for
conditional uses and to approve such applications where the considerations
and conditions are met as hereinafter outlined in this article.
§ 120-30.2. Purpose.
Recognizing that certain uses, activities and structures may be necessary
to serve the needs and convenience of the Borough and its residents, and
at the same time recognizing that such uses may be or become detrimental
to the public health, safety and general welfare if located and operated
without proper consideration being given to existing conditions and the
character of the surrounding area, such uses are hereby designated as
conditional uses. The conditional uses indicated in this section shall be
permitted only upon a showing that such use in a specified location will
comply with the conditions and standards for the location or operation of
such use as contained in this article, and only upon the issuance of an
authorization therefor by the Board.
§ 120-30.3. Criteria for approval.
The following criteria shall be considered by the Planning Board in
reviewing applications for conditional uses:
§ 120-30.4. Conditions of approval.
The approval of a conditional use may be subject to conditions, which may
include or relate to, but are not limited to, design of buildings, aesthetics
and appearance, plantings and their maintenance as screens between
dissimilar uses, other landscaping features, hours of operation of the
proposed use, lighting, density or extent of use, nuisance factors and public
health measures.
§ 120-30.5. List of conditional uses; zones where permitted.
The conditional uses indicated below shall be permitted only upon a
showing that such use in a specified location will comply with the conditions
and standards for the location or operation of such use as contained in
this article, and only upon the issuance of an authorization therefor by the
A. The type and location of the proposed use in relation to the needs and
growth pattern of the Borough.
B. The adequacy of the site area for the use proposed.
C. The arrangement of buildings and structures, driveways, parking and
loading areas and other site plan features, with respect to compatibility
with adjoining present and prospective uses as permitted by this Part 3.
§ 120-30.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-30.5
1:595
Board. The conditional uses and the zones in which they are permitted are
limited to the following:
§ 120-30.6. Nonprofit chartered membership organizations.
Buildings operated by chartered membership organizations for the benefit
of the public and not for profit, and the office or offices of charitable
organizations are permitted only in nonresidential zone districts and only if
all of the following requirements are complied with:
A. Residential public utility facilities, excluding wireless
telecommunications facilities: in residential zones.
B. Community shelters for victims of domestic violence, community
residences for the terminally ill, and community residences for persons
with head injuries, either of the foregoing which house fewer than 16
persons, excluding resident staff, as regulated in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.1
and 40:55D-66.2: in residential zones.
C. Renewable energy facilities, which must comply with all bulk standards
of the zone; facilities may be attached to the primary residence,
provided no new variances are created: in residential zones.
D. Nonprofit chartered membership organizations: in nonresidential
zones.
E. Residential-type public utility facilities: in nonresidential zones.
F. Gasoline and automotive service stations presently existing: in
nonresidential zones.
G. Private commercial parking lots as a principal use: in nonresidential
zones.
H. Multifamily apartment buildings with a density of less than 26 units per
acre: in the C Commercial Zone District.
A. Certificate of incorporation. The application shall be accompanied by
the existing or proposed certificate of incorporation and bylaws of the
organization and such material as may be required to guarantee to the
satisfaction of the Planning Board the following:
(1) The organization is, or will be, a bona fide nonprofit group
organized solely for charitable purposes or for the benefit and
enjoyment of its members who shall primarily be residents of the
Borough and the surrounding communities.
(2) The organization will not engage in sales of products or materials
to the general public or otherwise engage in activities normally
carried on as a business or commercial activity, except that:
(a) The premises may be made available on a rental basis for
meetings of other groups, private social functions and the like.
§ 120-30.5 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-30.6
1:596
§ 120-30.7. Additional motor vehicle and service station
requirements.
(b) The organization may conduct intermittent commercial
activities open to the general public designed solely to raise
funds to support the purposes of the organization or for related
or affiliated organizations with charitable, educational or
religious purposes, provided such activities are conducted
inside of a building or structure. Such activities shall also be
permitted outside of a building or structure under the
authority of a special license granted by the governing body,
which shall contain such conditions as are considered
necessary for the public health, safety and welfare. This
subsection shall not prevent the organization from hiring or
otherwise engaging profit-making organizations to conduct
fund-raising activities, even though a portion of the funds
raised is taken by such profit-making organization as a fee.
(c) Sales of items, products, or materials related to or accessory to
the primary function or activities of the organization conducted
on the premises, such as, but not limited to, food or alcoholic
beverages (if the organization holds a license for the sale of
same), athletic equipment, and the like, are permitted on a
continuous basis, provided such sales are conducted inside the
building or structure.
(3) Overnight accommodations shall not be provided.
(4) The hours of use are fixed in a manner in which the property rights
of nearby property owners will not be adversely affected.
(5) Activities of the organization will be carried on primarily within an
enclosed building or structure.
A. In addition to any other requirements for certain specific motor vehicle
uses contained in this chapter, all motor vehicle uses shall comply with
the following requirements:
(1) All outdoor fuel pumps and lubricating and other devices, if
provided, shall be located at least 25 feet from any property line.
(2) All fuel, oil, gasoline or similar substances shall be stored
underground and at least 12 feet from any and all property lines.
Such facilities shall be installed and maintained in accordance with
the standards of the National Board of Fire Underwriters.
(3) All dismantled automobiles, trucks, tractors, trailers and similar
equipment and parts and accessories thereof shall be stored within
a building or behind a solid screen fence no less than six feet high.
(4) Adequate receptacles shall be provided for the deposit of all motor
vehicle waste material. There shall be adequate provision for
§ 120-30.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-30.7
1:597
disposal of trash and refuse left on the premises relating to such
motor vehicle use.
(5) Adequate space shall be provided on the site for all the elements of
the motor vehicle use to be incorporated on the site, including
provision for off-street parking for the maximum number of motor
vehicles, and off-street loading and unloading. No loading shall
occur across curbs and sidewalks. Adequate access and egress with
appropriate turning radii to the site shall be provided as well as
adequate queuing and turnaround space on the site so that at no
time is street traffic disrupted or blocked by vehicles entering or
leaving the site. Queuing of vehicles on the street or shoulder
waiting to enter the site shall not be permitted. All service and
repair work shall be performed within enclosed buildings.
(6) All loading and parking areas for motor vehicles shall be paved,
curbed and drained in accordance with the Borough Code.
(7) Curbs shall be constructed so as to channelize all traffic to
permitted curb cuts. There shall be no more than two curb cuts on
any street frontage.
(8) A fence of at least six feet shall be provided along all property
boundary lines, except along public street frontage.
(9) When located adjacent to a residential district or use, a dense
planting of evergreen bushes or trees to a width of at least 10 feet
in addition to a fence shall be provided to block headlight glare and
muffle noise from motor vehicles.
(10) All service, storage and trash areas, and such facilities as packer
units, RPZ valves, LP tanks, transformers and condensers, shall be
completely screened from view from any public street or adjacent
property.
(11) Display lighting shall be shielded and shall be so located and
maintained as not to constitute a hazard or nuisance to the
traveling public or neighbors.
B. Automobile service stations.
(1) A motor vehicle service station shall have all of its pumps, tanks
and other facilities and space for the serving of motor vehicles
located entirely upon private property. No facilities shall be
installed for the servicing of motor vehicles standing upon a public
street, and the fuel pumps shall not be located less than 25 feet
from any property lines. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
(2) Outdoor storage and display of accessories and outdoor servicing,
except for the filling of tires with compressed air and the
§ 120-30.7 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-30.7
1:598
§ 120-30.8. Residential type public utility facilities.
Residential-type public utility facilities and uses are permitted in residential
zones only if they comply with the following requirements:
§ 120-30.9. Community shelters and residences.
Community shelters for victims of domestic violence, and community
residences for persons with head injuries, any of which house fewer than 16
persons, excluding resident staff, are permitted in residential zone districts
and shall satisfy all of the requirements of the zone. The term "community
shelters and residences" as used in this section shall mean community
residence for persons with head injuries or community shelter for victims of
domestic violence pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.1 et seq.
dispensing of fuel, motor oil or other fluids while the vehicle is
being refueled, shall be prohibited at all times.
(3) When the lot upon which a motor vehicle service station is located
is within 100 feet of a lot that is used, intended or suitable for use
as, or zoned for use as, a residence, the filing station or service
station shall not be permitted to operate or to be open to the public
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on any day.
A. Proof of need. Proof shall be furnished that the proposed installation in
the specific location is necessary for the proper functioning of the
public utility system and for the satisfactory and convenient provision of
service to the neighborhood in which the facility is to be located.
B. Maximum height of structures. Buildings shall not exceed 15 feet in
height. Other structures or equipment shall not exceed 35 feet in
height.
C. Minimum front yard. There shall be a minimum front yard equal to the
front yard required in the zone in which the site is located.
D. Minimum side yard. There shall be a minimum side yard equal to the
height of the building or above-grade structure or equipment, or 15
feet, whichever is greater.
E. Minimum rear yard. There shall be a minimum rear yard equal to the
height of the building or above-grade structure or equipment, or the
rear yard required in the zone in which the site is located, whichever is
greater.
F. Trip generation. The proposed use, structure or equipment shall not
generate more than 10 trips per day for any purpose, including but not
limited to the operation, maintenance servicing or monitoring of any
improvements on the site.
A. Basement utilization. Basement areas shall not be utilized to house
persons but may be used for recreation areas.
§ 120-30.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-30.9
1:599
B. Proof of licensing. Each community residence shall submit proof of
licensing by the New Jersey Department of Human Services.
C. Exterior appearance. The exterior appearance of any building or site
utilized as a community residence shall be constructed or altered so as
to be harmonious with the residential character of adjacent structures
in the residential zone. Fire escapes are permitted but must be located
in the rear of the structure.
§ 120-30.9 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-30.9
1:600
ARTICLE 31
Signs
§ 120-31.1. Compliance required.
No sign shall be hung, placed or painted in any district except as hereinafter
provided.
§ 120-31.2. Permit requirements.
All signs, except for temporary signs, shall require a permit. Applications
for permits shall be submitted in triplicate to the Construction Official.
Each application shall be accompanied by a description of the sign and/or a
sketch or plan showing the size, location and other pertinent data required
by the Construction Official.
§ 120-31.3. Unsafe signs.
Any sign in a sight triangle shall not create any unsafe condition for
vehicular traffic. Whenever a freestanding, overhanging or attached sign
becomes structurally unsafe, the Construction Official shall order that such
sign be made safe or removed. Such order shall be complied with within 10
days of receipt thereof by the person, corporation or other body owning the
sign or owning the building or structure to which it is attached.
§ 120-31.4. Existing signs.
Any sign erected, hung or otherwise displayed prior to the adoption of this
article which does not conform to these provisions shall not be altered by
changing the overall dimensions. If deteriorated or damaged to the extent
of 1/2 of its replacement value, such sign shall not be rebuilt and shall
be removed within 60 days following notice to do so by the Construction
Official; provided, however, that nothing contained herein shall prevent
maintenance, repainting or posting of such signs.
§ 120-31.5. Illumination of signs.
A. In all cases where illumination of signs is necessary and is permitted
under the terms of this article, such sign shall not be illuminated by
other than a shielded or otherwise indirect, nonflashing light,
preferably a white light, or a light from the interior of a sign with a
translucent face.
B. In no event will red or green illumination be permitted, whether
flashing or not, on any sign located in the same line of vision as a traffic
control signal. The Borough shall have the authority to compel the
removal or correction of such sign within 60 days of notification of its
decision, whether or not such sign existed at the time of enactment of
this Part 3.
§ 120-31.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-31.5
1:601
§ 120-31.6. Temporary signs.
A temporary sign is one which shall remain standing for a period not to
exceed six months, provided that, in the case where such a sign advertises
an event or occurrence, including political campaigns, charitable drives,
rental of apartments, sale of homes and like activities, such signs shall be
removed within 15 days of the closing of the event or occurrence advertised
thereon. Any temporary sign that remains in place for 12 months or more
shall not be deemed a temporary sign.
§ 120-31.7. Determination of sign area.
§ 120-31.8. Setback and height requirements.
§ 120-31.9. Exempted signs.
Nothing herein shall be construed to affect in any way any directional,
informational or street name signs erected by any municipal, county, state
or federal government agency or utility in connection with street
C. In no event will any illumination of any sign be so arranged as to
produce undue glare or offensive light annoying to residents in the
surrounding area. The Borough shall have the authority to compel the
removal or correction of such sign within 60 days of notification of its
decision, whether or not such sign existed at the time of enactment of
this Part 3.
A. For a sign, either freestanding or attached, the area shall be considered
to include all lettering, wording and accompanying designs and
symbols, together with the background, whether open or enclosed, on
which they are displayed, but not including any supporting framework
and bracing which are incidental to the display itself.
B. For a sign painted upon or applied to a building, the area shall be
considered to include all lettering, wording and accompanying designs
or symbols, together with any backing of a different color than the
finished material of the building face.
C. Where the sign consists of individual letters or symbols attached to or
painted on a surface, building, wall or window, the area shall be
considered to be that of the smallest quadrangle which encompasses all
of the letters and symbols.
A. In the case of a sign attached flat against the face of a building or other
structure, such signs shall not extend or project beyond the face of such
building or other structure located in any residential district a distance
of more than six inches, and in no event shall such projection be any
greater than 18 inches in any other district where signs are permitted.
B. No freestanding sign in excess of 10 square feet shall be located within
five feet of any lot line.
§ 120-31.5 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-31.9
1:602
identifications, public buildings, railroad crossings, electric utility lines and
installations and other like uses, buildings or activities or any
nonilluminated nameplate or plaque of less than two square feet in area,
or any directional signs on premises, less than one square foot in area,
indicating traffic movements, exits and entrances.
§ 120-31.10. Obstruction prohibited.
No sign shall be located so as to obstruct any door, fire escape, stairway
or opening intended to provide light, air, ingress or egress for any building
or structure. No sign shall be permitted where such sign would obstruct
vision at a street intersection or at any curve in any street. Such signs where
they exist are subject to action by the Borough and must be corrected or
removed within 60 days of the notification to do so.
§ 120-31.11. Number of signs permitted.
Unless otherwise provided, no more than one ground sign on any street
frontage shall be permitted on any premises in a residential, commercial
or industrial district. This section shall not apply to signs indicating the
entrance to or exit from a premises, or any such similar permitted signs.
For properties on corner lots, one sign may be permitted on each street
frontage, providing that the aggregate area of signs is not greater than 1 1/
2 times the area of a single sign as hereinafter specified. In addition to any
permanent ground sign, one temporary sign up to 10 square feet shall be
permitted on each frontage.
§ 120-31.12. Prohibited signs.
A. The following types of signs shall not be permitted in any zone:
(1) A flashing, fluttering, animated, moving, vibrating, sequential,
tracer, electronic or rotating sign.
(2) Signs with any lighting or control mechanism that may cause radio
or television interference.
(3) Any sign so erected, constructed or maintained as to obstruct or be
attached to any fire escape, window, door or opening used as a
means of egress or ingress or for firefighting purposes or placed so
as to interfere with any opening required for legal ventilation.
(4) Any sign which is of such a form, character or shape as to confuse
or dangerously distract the attention of the operator of a motor
vehicle, including but not limited to signs visible from the street
using the word "stop" or "danger" or any other word, phrase,
symbol or character with the effect of simulating a public safety
warning or traffic sign.
(5) Any advertisement which uses a series of two or more signs or units
placed in a line parallel to the highway, or in similar fashion, all
§ 120-31.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-31.12
1:603
carrying a single advertising message, part of which is contained
on each sign.
(6) Signs which in any way simulate official, directional or warning
signs erected or maintained by the State of New Jersey, a county or
municipality thereof, or by any railroad or public utility or similar
agency concerned with the protection of the public health or safety.
(7) Billboard and/or outdoor display structures not associated with a
business on the same lot.
(8) Roof signs and signs on the side of any structure extending above
the edge of the roof.
(9) Signs on railroad or vehicular overpasses.
(10) Any use of flags or similar displays, not otherwise referenced in this
section, to attract attention, except in connection with a particular
holiday or season of the year.
(11) Any use of pennants or similar displays, not otherwise referenced
in this section, to attract attention.
(12) Any commercial exterior use of outdoor icicle or string lighting.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, icicle or string lighting is permitted
when such lights are used to illuminate merchandise on display or
for purposes of indicating that a commercial establishment is open,
subject to the following:
(a) Such lights are to be small, white and unblinking.
(b) No such lights may be used when the exterior of the building is
floodlit, "floodlit" being defined as a strong beam of light that is
used to illuminate a substantial portion of a building exterior or
grounds.
(c) All such lights must be turned off at the close of business for an
establishment using such lights.
(13) Signs tacked, pasted, painted or otherwise attached to or inserted
into public buildings, poles, posts, trees, fences, sidewalks or
curbs.
(14) Signs which obstruct driving vision, traffic signals, sight triangles
and traffic direction and identification signs.
(15) Ionized inert gas sign lighting where the light source tubing is
directly exposed to view, except neon "open" signs as permitted by
§ 120-31.13B(9).
(16) (Reserved)110
(17) Signs projected by light onto the facade of a building.
§ 120-31.12 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-31.12
1:604
§ 120-31.13. Permitted signs.
(18) Banner-type signs, except in celebration of a public event or to call
attention to holidays of public significance and, in such cases, only
when erected by the Borough itself or authorized by the Mayor and
Council and to announce a "grand opening" of a business, provided
that the banner is affixed to the building of the business celebrating
its grand opening, the banner is erected for a period not to exceed
30 days, and the banner is no more than two feet high and no
longer than 3/4 of the width of the side of the building to which it is
affixed.
B. The term "internally illuminated sign" shall include awnings and
vending machine displays which are translucent or transparent and
which meet the definition of sign as contained herein which are
illuminated from the rear so that such awning or vending machine
display acts as an internally illuminated sign.
C. Any sign advertising a use or business that is no longer in existence at
that location shall be removed within 30 days of the close of the
business.
D. Any sign indicating commercial property is for rent or for sale shall
conform to the size limitations as if it were a permanent sign.
E. Any type of sign not specifically permitted is hereby prohibited.
A. Residential districts.
(1) Signs advertising a premises for sale or rent, provided that such
sign shall not exceed 10 square feet in area. No permit fee shall be
required.
(2) One temporary sign, not exceeding 16 square feet, identifying a
project, provided such sign shall be removed promptly after
completion of the project and shall be set back at least five feet. No
permit fee shall be required.
(3) One sign or bulletin board for a permitted nonresidential use,
provided that such sign shall not exceed 16 square feet and shall be
set back at least 1/2 the required front yard depth.
(4) One sign identifying a permitted accessory professional office or
home occupation, provided that such sign shall not exceed two
square feet.
(5) Decorative, nonilluminated signs showing the name and/or address
of the house or family, not to exceed two square feet in area and
shall be attached to the dwelling. Not more than one such sign shall
110. Editor's Note: Original § 225-388P, regarding banner-type signs, previously included in
this subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. II). See § 120-31.12A(18).
§ 120-31.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-31.13
1:605
be erected for each dwelling unit, up to a total of two for any one
lot.
(6) A sign indicating parking lot usage and tow company information of
no less than nine square feet and no more than 12 square feet is
allowed in any residential zone at each entry to any parking area.
(7) One sign announcing the sale of an individual's personal property.
Such signs shall not exceed 12 square feet and shall not be
displayed for a period exceeding 31 days in any calendar year.
(8) Any sign not expressly permitted above is prohibited.
B. Nonresidential zone districts.
(1) Any sign permitted in residential districts shall be permitted.
(2) One sign advertising services offered or goods sold or produced on
the premises shall be permitted. Such sign shall not exceed 10% of
the area of the facade of the building on which the sign is located,
up to a maximum of 200 square feet.
(3) No roof signs shall be permitted.
(4) Freestanding signs shall only be permitted for the purpose of
identifying automobile filling stations or integrated shopping units
consisting of four or more individual shops or offices. Such signs
shall not have an area of more than 24 square feet; for automobile
filling stations, a height in excess of 20 feet; and for integrated
units, a height of greater than 10 feet.
(5) One temporary sign, not exceeding 16 square feet, identifying a
project, provided such sign shall be removed promptly after
completion of the project and shall be set back at least five feet. No
permit fee shall be required.
(6) A permanent sign or rigid awning sign shall be mounted above the
front entrance. Such sign must indicate the trade name of the
establishment. Office buildings may include a directory of all
tenants. Businesses must have a street number on the front of the
building visible from the street. A sign mounted above the front
entrance shall not exceed a height of 36 inches nor an area equal to
1.5 square feet per linear foot of building width, with a maximum of
50 square feet. No sign mounted above the front entrance shall be
closer than 2 1/2 feet to the end of the front wall to which it is
attached. A rigid awning may extend the entire front of the
building, but no signage on the awning shall be within 2 1/2 feet of
each end of the awning or 20 feet, whichever shall be the lesser.
(7) In addition to a sign or rigid awning sign on the front facade of a
building, a sign on each other side of a building visible from a
public street is permitted. Such sign shall not be larger than eight
square feet unless there is an entrance accessible from a rear
§ 120-31.13 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-31.13
1:606
parking lot, in which case such sign shall comply with the
requirements of § 120-31.13B(6).
(8) A sign centered above the rear entrance door is permitted on any
building with an entrance accessible from a rear parking lot
intended for patron parking. Such sign shall not be larger than four
square feet.
(9) One nonflashing sign of neon tubing stating only the word "open" is
permitted in a window near the principal entrance. The word
"open" may be enclosed in a border of neon tubing. Such sign,
including any border, shall not exceed six inches high by 12 inches
wide.
(10) Any office building is permitted to display a directory sign visible
from the roadway listing the names and/or types of business of all
tenants. Each sign shall be no larger than eight square feet and
each listing shall be not more than six inches high.
(11) A directory sign bearing the name and/or type of business of the
principal tenants renting space in the rear or the upper floors of the
building may be located at the principal entrance of such rented
areas. The area of such sign devoted to each such tenant shall not
exceed four square feet.
(12) Credit card signs and trading stamp signs may be displayed on
windows, provided that the total area of all such signs shall not
exceed two square feet in area.
(13) Signs required by law to be exhibited by the occupant of the
premises may be displayed, provided that the same do not exceed
six square feet in total area.
(14) Special signs indicating public conveniences, such as "notary
public," "public telephone," "public restrooms" or words or
directions of similar import may be displayed, provided that each
such sign does not exceed 72 square inches in total area and only
one sign of each type is displayed.
(15) Nonilluminated signs displayed on the interior of windows to give
notice of sales or special functions shall be permitted. No more
25% of the total area of the window on which such signs are
displayed shall be covered. Such temporary signs shall be removed
after 30 days.
(16)On parking lots or parking facilities which are not adjacent to the
business or commercial buildings or structures which they serve, a
freestanding sign for the entrance to the separate parking lot or
parking facility, which shall not exceed eight square feet in area,
shall be permitted. In no case shall the base of such sign be less
than eight feet from ground level, and in no case shall the top of
such sign be greater than 11 feet from ground level. The purpose of
§ 120-31.13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-31.13
1:607
§ 120-31.14. Fees.
this sign shall be to show that the parking lot or parking facility
is available for use by the patrons or employees of the business or
commercial enterprise so identified.
(17) A sign indicating parking lot usage and tow company information of
no less than nine square feet and no more than 12 square feet is
allowed in any zone at each entrance to the parking area.
(18) Gasoline stations. A gasoline station may have one freestanding,
stationary sign identifying only the company name or brand name
of the gasoline sold, including any associated insignia or emblem,
provided that such sign shall not exceed 45 square feet in area and
that the top of such sign shall not be more than 20 feet above the
ground surface. Such sign may be two-sided. Signs affixed to the
exterior surfaces of gasoline pumps shall be permitted, limited to
identification of the company name or brand name of the gasoline
sold, including any associated insignia or emblem, gasoline type
and/or grade and such other information as may be required by law.
Such signs shall not extend or project beyond the surfaces on which
affixed more than 15 inches. In addition, price indicator signs not
exceeding 150 square inches in area may be attached to, supported
by or suspended from each gasoline pump.
(19) Painted window signs. Signs may be permanently painted on
windows so long as the letters are not painted on any background
and no more than 25% of the window surface consists of the
painted sign.
(20) Any sign not expressly permitted above is prohibited.
(21) Any sign advertising a use that is no longer in existence shall be
removed within 30 days.
(22) Signage may be replaced on a one-for-one basis without site plan or
other relief required. Any change to a sign in size, shape,
illumination or style shall require a commercial sign permit and any
other relief necessary.
A. Each application filed with the Construction Official for a sign permit
shall be accompanied by a fee payable to the Borough in accordance
with the schedule of fees set forth in Article 6.
B. There shall be no fee charged for permits for temporary signs
advertising school board elections, municipal elections, and charitable
functions or activities; provided, however, that such signs shall only be
permitted to be posted for a period 15 days prior to and seven days
after the date of the election, event or occurrence advertised thereon.
§ 120-31.13 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-31.14
1:608
ARTICLE 32
Clothing Bins
§ 120-32.1. Donation clothing bins.
The placement of clothing bins within the Borough of Kenilworth shall
be limited to only the following locations and only if properly maintained
and signed. Clothing bins may be placed at churches, schools, nonprofit
facilities, and religious institutions. The total number of bins at any location
may not exceed three. Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary,
no person shall place, use or employ a donation clothing bin, for solicitation
purposes unless all of the following requirements are met:
A. The donation clothing bin is owned or leased by a charitable
organization registered with the Attorney General of the State of New
Jersey pursuant to P.L. 1994, c. 16,111 or any person; and
B. The registered charitable organization or the person has obtained a
permit valid for a period of one year from the Zoning Officer in
accordance with the following:
(1) In applying for such a permit, the registered charitable
organization shall include:
(a) The size of the bin (not larger than six feet by six feet by six
feet) and the location where the bin would be situated as
precisely as possible with an informal sketch of where the bin
will be located in relationship to buildings and lot lines;
(b) The manner in which the charitable organization or person
anticipates any clothing or other donations collected via the
bin would be used, sold or dispersed, and the method by which
the proceeds of collected donations would be allocated or
spent;
(c) The name, address, and telephone number of the bona fide
office of the applicant and of any entity which may share or
profit from any clothing or other donations collected via the
bin;
(d) The schedule of pickups for removing the articles from the
bins, which can be no less often than once per week, and the
name and telephone number of the person to be notified if the
bin is overflowing prior to the scheduled date of pickup;
(e) The clothing bin is clearly labeled on three of the four sides
with the name, address and telephone number of the
charitable organization seeking to have people donate used
clothing; and
111. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 45:17A-18 et seq.
§ 120-32.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-32.1
1:609
(f) Written consent from the property owner, or the owner's
authorized representative, to place the bin on his/her property.
(2) The Zoning Officer shall not grant an application for a permit to
place, use, or employ a donation clothing bin if he/she determines
that the placement of the bin is either in the front yard setback or
could constitute a safety hazard. Such hazards may include, but are
not limited to, the placement of a donation clothing bin in parking
spaces, in any area that interferes with pedestrian or vehicular
traffic, or within 100 yards of any place which stores large amounts
of, or sells, fuel or other flammable liquids or gases. [Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II)]
(3) The fee for such application for the zoning permit shall be set forth
in § 120-6.2, Schedule of fees. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
(4) An expiring permit for a donation clothing bin may be renewed by a
charitable organization or person upon payment of the renewal fee
set forth in § 120-6.2, Schedule of fees, and by application that shall
include the following information: [Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
(a) The location where the bin is situated, as precisely as possible,
and, if applicant intends to move it, the new location where the
bin would be situated after the renewal is granted;
(b) The manner in which the person has used, sold or dispersed
any clothing or other donations collected via the bin, the
method by which the proceeds of collected donations have
been allocated or spent, and any changes the person
anticipates it may make in these processes during the period
covered by the renewal;
(c) The name, address and telephone number of the bona fide
office of the applicant and any entity which shared or profited
from any clothing or other donations collected via the bin, and
of any entities which may do so during the period covered by
the renewal;
(d) The schedule of pickups for removing the articles from the bin,
which can be no less often than once per week, and the name
and telephone number of the person to be notified if the bin is
overflowing prior to the date of pickup; and
(e) Written consent from the property owner, or the owner's
authorized representative, to place the bin on his/her property.
(5) The following information shall be clearly and conspicuously
written in either paint or permanent marker on the exterior of the
donation clothing bin:
§ 120-32.1 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-32.1
1:610
(a) The name and address of the registered charitable
organization or person that owns the bin, and of any other
entity which may share or profit from any clothing or other
donations collected via the bin.
(b) The telephone number of the organization's bona fide office
and, if applicable, the telephone number of the bona fide office
of any other entity which may share or profit from any clothing
or other donations collected via the bin. The telephone number
of an answering machine or service unrelated to the charitable
organization does not satisfy this requirement.
(c) The charitable organization's registration number, permit
number and its date of expiration.
(d) In cases when any entity other than the person who owns the
bin may share or profit from any clothing or other donations
collected via the bin, a notice, written in a clear and easily
understandable manner, indicating that clothing or other
donations collected via the bin, their proceeds, or both, may be
shared, or given entirely to, an entity other than the person
who owns the bin, and identifying all such entities which may
share or profit from such donations.
(e) A statement indicating the manner in which the charitable
organization or person anticipates any clothing or other
donations collected via the bin would be used, sold or
dispersed, and the method by which the proceeds of collected
donations would be allocated or spent.
(6) Any clothing bin permitted hereunder shall be properly painted and
maintained and shall be free of material defects.
(7) The Zoning Officer or his designee shall receive and investigate,
within 45 days, any complaints from the public about the bin.
(a) Whenever it appears to the Zoning Officer or his designee that
an organization or a person has engaged in or is engaging in
any act or practice in violation of this article, the organization
or person who placed the bin shall be issued a warning, stating
that if the violation is not rectified or an appeal taken within 15
days, then the bin, any clothing or other donations collected via
the bin will be sold at public auction. In addition to any other
means used to notify the person who placed the bin, a warning
shall be affixed to the exterior of the bin itself.
(b) In the event that the person who placed the bin does not rectify
the violation or request a hearing within 15 days of the posting
of the warning, the Borough may seize the bin, remove it or
have it removed at the expense of the person who placed the
bin and sell it at public auction or otherwise dispose of any
clothing or other donations collected via the bin. Any proceeds
§ 120-32.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-32.1
1:611
from the sale of the donations collected via the bin shall be
paid to the Borough.
(c) In addition to any other penalties or remedies under this
article, any person who violates any provision which results in
the seizure of the donation clothing bin shall be subject to a
penalty for each violation as specified in Chapter 1, Article I,
General Penalty, of the Borough of Kenilworth Code.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
(8) Any existing clothing bin within the Borough shall be permitted a
grace period of 45 days from the publication of this article to come
into compliance or be removed.
§ 120-32.1 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-32.1
1:612
ARTICLE 33
Bulk Standards Charts
§ 120-33.1. Residential Zones Bulk Standards Chart.
Residential Zones Bulk Standards
Standard R-5 R-5A R-6
Minimum lot size (square
feet)
5,000 5,0001
7,5002
6,000
Minimum lot width (feet) 50 50 60
Front yard setback (feet) 253
234
25
23
25
23
One side yard setback
(feet)
5 5 8
Two side yard setbacks 20% of width 20% of width 25% of width
Rear yard setback (feet) 20 20 20
Maximum height (feet/
stories)
35
2.5 stories
35
2.5 stories
35
2.5 stories
Maximum building cover 50% 50% 50%
Maximum impervious
cover
75% 75% 75%
Floor area ratio 0.75 0.75 0.75
NOTES:
1 Single-family homes
2 Two-family homes
3 First floor
4 Second floor
§ 120-33.2. Commercial Zones Bulk Standards Chart.
Commercial Zones Bulk Standards
Standard BD AC C OR I
Minimum lot area
(square feet)
2,500 40,000 20,000 10,000 20,000
Minimum lot width (feet) 25 100 100 100 100
Minimum lot frontage
(feet)
25 100 100 100 100
Minimum lot depth (feet) 100 200 100 100 100
§ 120-33.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-33.2
1:613
Commercial Zones Bulk Standards
Standard BD AC C OR I
Front yard setback (feet) 0 50 10 40 10
One side yard setback
(feet)
0
51
15 5 15 5
Two side yard setbacks
(feet)
0 40 15 30 15
Rear yard setback (feet) 10 or
10%2
30 10 25 10
Maximum height (feet/
stories)
35 40
3 stories
35
3 stories
40
3 stories
40
3 stories
Maximum building cover 80% 40% 50% 25% 50%
Maximum impervious
cover
90% 80% 80% 75% 80%
Floor area ratio 250% 100% 125% 125% 125%
Open space ratio 10% 20% 20% 25% 20%
BD = Boulevard Downtown Zone
AC = Area Commercial Zone
C = Commercial Zone
OR = Office Research Zone
I = Industrial Zone
Notes:
1 To residential zone.
2 Whichever is greater.
§ 120-33.2 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-33.2
1:614
Part 4
Stormwater Control
ARTICLE 34
Stormwater Control Standards
§ 120-34.1. Scope and purpose.
A. Policy statement. Flood control, groundwater recharge, and pollutant
reduction through nonstructural or low-impact techniques shall be
explored before relying on structural BMPs.112 Structural BMPs should
be integrated with nonstructural stormwater management strategies
and proper maintenance plans. Nonstructural strategies include both
environmentally sensitive site design and source controls that prevent
pollutants from being placed on the site or from being exposed to
stormwater. Source control plans should be developed based upon
physical site conditions and the origin, nature, and the anticipated
quantity or amount of potential pollutants. Multiple stormwater
management BMPs may be necessary to achieve the established
performance standards for water quality, quantity, and groundwater
recharge.
B. Purpose. It is the purpose of this article to establish minimum
stormwater management requirements and controls for "major
development," as defined in § 120-34.2.
C. Applicability.
(1) This article shall be applicable to all site plans and subdivisions for
the following major developments that require preliminary or final
site plan or subdivision review:
(a) Nonresidential major developments; and
(b) Aspects of residential major developments that are not
preempted by the Residential Site Improvement Standards at
N.J.A.C. 5:21.
(2) This article shall also be applicable to all major developments
undertaken by the Borough of Kenilworth.
D. Compatibility with other permit and ordinance requirements.
Development approvals issued for subdivisions and site plans pursuant
to this article are to be considered an integral part of development
approvals under the subdivision and site plan review process and do not
relieve the applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or
approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable code, rule,
act, or ordinance. In their interpretation and application, the provisions
of this article shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
112. Editor's Note: "BMP" refers to best management practice.
§ 120-34.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-34.1
1:615
§ 120-34.2. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall
be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this article its most reasonable application. The definitions
below are the same as or based on the corresponding definitions in the
Stormwater Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.2.
CAFRA CENTERS, CORES OR NODES — Those areas within boundaries
accepted by the Department pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:7-13.16.113[Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
CAFRA PLANNING MAP — The geographic depiction of the boundaries for
Coastal Planning Areas, CAFRA Centers, CAFRA Cores and CAFRA Nodes
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:7-13.[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
COMPACTION — The increase in soil bulk density.
CORE — A pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic uses serving
the surrounding municipality, generally including housing and access to
public transportation.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — An agency designated by the County Board
of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal stormwater management plans
and implementing ordinance(s). The county review agency may either be:
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGNATED CENTER — A state development and redevelopment plan
center as designated by the State Planning Commission, such as urban,
regional, town, village, or hamlet.
DESIGN ENGINEER — A person professionally qualified and duly licensed
in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may include, but not
necessarily be limited to, development of project requirements, creation
promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. This article
is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other
ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law, except
that, where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different
from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other
provision of law, the more restrictive provisions or higher standards
shall control.
A. A county planning agency; or
A county water resource association created under N.J.S.A.
58:16A-55.5, if the ordinance or resolution delegates authority to
approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove municipal stormwater
management plans and implementing ordinances.
B.
113. Editor's Note: "CAFRA" refers to the Coastal Area Facility Review Act, N.J.S.A. 13:19-1 et
seq.
§ 120-34.1 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-34.2
1:616
and development of project design and preparation of drawings and
specifications.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or structure, any mining
excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of any building or
other structure, or land or extension of use of land, by any person, for which
permission is required under the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
et seq. In the case of development of agricultural lands, "development"
means any activity that requires a state permit, any activity reviewed by the
County Agricultural Board (CAB) and the State Agricultural Development
Committee (SADC), and municipal review of any activity not exempted by
the Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq.
DRAINAGE AREA — A geographic area within which stormwater,
sediments, or dissolved materials drain to a particular receiving water body
or to a particular point along a receiving water body.
EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD — A neighborhood designated by the
Urban Coordinating Council "in consultation and conjunction with" the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-69.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREAS — An area or feature which is
of significant environmental value, including but not limited to: stream
corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat of endangered or
threatened species; large areas of contiguous open space or upland forest;
steep slopes; and wellhead protection and groundwater recharge areas.
Habitats of endangered or threatened species are identified using the
Department's Landscape Project as approved by the Department's
Endangered and Nongame Species Program.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice or gravity.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer of
material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
INFILTRATION — The process by which water seeps into the soil from
precipitation.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Any development that provides for ultimately
disturbing one or more acres of land. "Disturbance" for the purpose of this
article is the placement of impervious surface or exposure and/or movement
of soil or bedrock or clearing, cutting, or removing of vegetation.
MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Kenilworth, New Jersey.[Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
NODE — An area designated by the State Planning Commission
concentrating facilities and activities which are not organized in a compact
form.
§ 120-34.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-34.2
1:617
NUTRIENT — A chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen or
phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the development of
organisms.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, the municipality, or political subdivision of this state subject
to municipal jurisdiction pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge, munitions,
chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes, radioactive
substance [except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as
amended (42 U.S.C. § 2011 et seq.)], thermal waste, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal, agricultural, and
construction waste or runoff, or other residue discharged directly or
indirectly to the land, groundwaters or surface waters of the state, or
to a domestic treatment works. "Pollutant" includes both hazardous and
nonhazardous pollutants.
RECHARGE — The amount of water from precipitation that infiltrates into
the ground and is not evapotranspired.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is
being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water or
gravity as a product of erosion.
SITE — The lot or lots upon which a major development is to occur or has
occurred.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin.
STATE DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT PLAN METROPOLITAN
PLANNING AREA (PA1) — An area delineated on the State Plan Policy Map
and adopted by the State Planning Commission that is intended to be the
focus for much of the state's future redevelopment and revitalization efforts.
STATE PLAN POLICY MAP — The geographic application of the State
Development and Redevelopment Plan's goals and statewide policies, and
the Official Map of these goals and policies.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, or is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or drainage facilities,
or conveyed by snow removal equipment.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — An excavation or embankment
and related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A stormwater
management basin may either be normally dry (that is, a detention basin or
infiltration basin), retain water in a permanent pool (a retention basin), or
be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (most constructed stormwater
wetlands).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Any structural or
nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program, or other
§ 120-34.2 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-34.2
1:618
method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated
pollutants, or to induce or control the infiltration or groundwater recharge
of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal nonstormwater discharges into
stormwater conveyances.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Water flow on the surface of the ground or in
storm sewers, resulting from precipitation.
TIDAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — A flood hazard area which may be
influenced by stormwater runoff from inland areas, but which is primarily
caused by the Atlantic Ocean.
URBAN COORDINATING COUNCIL EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD
— A neighborhood given priority access to state resources through the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority.
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONES — A zone designated by the New Jersey
Enterprise Zone Authority pursuant to the New Jersey Urban Enterprise
Zones Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27H-60 et seq.
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA — Previously developed portions of
areas:
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams,
wetlands, and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether natural or
artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
WETLANDS or WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence
of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
commonly known as "hydrophytic vegetation."
§ 120-34.3. General standards.
Design and performance standards for stormwater management measures:
Delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPM) as the Metropolitan
Planning Area (PA1), Designated Centers, Cores or Nodes;
A.
B. Designated as CAFRA Centers, Cores or Nodes;
C. Designated as Urban Enterprise Zones; and
Designated as Urban Coordinating Council Empowerment
Neighborhoods.
D.
A. Stormwater management measures for major development shall be
developed to meet the erosion control, groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality standards in
§ 120-34.4. To the maximum extent practicable, these standards shall
be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater management
strategies into the design. If these strategies alone are not sufficient to
meet these standards, structural stormwater management measures
§ 120-34.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-34.3
1:619
§ 120-34.4. Stormwater management requirements for major
development.
necessary to meet these standards shall be incorporated into the
design.
B. The standards in this article apply only to new major development and
are intended to minimize the impact of stormwater runoff on water
quality and water quantity in receiving water bodies and maintain
groundwater recharge. The standards do not apply to new major
development to the extent that alternative design and performance
standards are applicable under a regional stormwater management
plan or water quality management plan adopted in accordance with
Department rules.
A. The development shall incorporate a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of a
major development in accordance with § 120-34.10.
B. Stormwater management measures shall avoid adverse impacts of
concentrated flow on habitat for threatened and endangered species as
documented in the Department's Landscape Project or Natural
Heritage Database established under N.J.S.A. 13:1B-15.147 through
13:1B-15.150, particularly Helonias bullata (swamp pink) and/or
Clemmys muhlenbergii (bog turtle).
C. The following linear development projects are exempt from the
groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater
runoff quality requirements of § 120-34.4F and G:
(1) The construction of an underground utility line, provided that the
disturbed areas are revegetated upon completion;
(2) The construction of an aboveground utility line, provided that the
existing conditions are maintained to the maximum extent
practicable; and
(3) The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a sidewalk
or trail with a maximum width of 14 feet, provided that the access
is made of permeable material.
D. A waiver from strict compliance with the groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
requirements of § 120-34.4F and G may be obtained for the
enlargement of an existing public roadway or railroad, or the
construction or enlargement of a public pedestrian access, provided
that the following conditions are met:
(1) The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the
project that cannot be accomplished by any other means;
§ 120-34.3 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-34.4
1:620
(2) The applicant demonstrates, through an alternatives analysis, that
through the use of nonstructural and structural stormwater
management strategies and measures, the option selected
complies with the requirements of § 120-34.4F and G to the
maximum extent practicable;
(3) The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the requirements
of § 120-34.4F and G, existing structures currently in use, such as
homes and buildings, would need to be condemned; and
(4) The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other
rights to areas, including the potential to obtain through
condemnation lands not falling under Subsection D(3) above,
within the upstream drainage area of the receiving stream that
would provide additional opportunities to mitigate the
requirements of § 120-34.4F and G that were not achievable on
site.
E. Nonstructural stormwater management strategies.
(1) To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in § 120-34.4F
and G shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater
management strategies set forth at § 120-34.4E into the design.
The applicant shall identify the nonstructural measures
incorporated into the design of the project. If the applicant
contends that it is not feasible for engineering, environmental, or
safety reasons to incorporate any nonstructural stormwater
management measures identified in Subsection E(2) below into the
design of a particular project, the applicant shall identify the
strategy considered and provide a basis for the contention.
(2) Nonstructural stormwater management strategies incorporated
into site design shall:
(a) Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas
particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss.
(b) Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect the
flow of runoff over impervious surfaces.
(c) Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and
vegetation.
(d) Minimize the decrease in the time of concentration from
preconstruction to postconstruction. "Time of concentration" is
defined as the time it takes for runoff to travel from the
hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to the point
of interest within a watershed.
(e) Minimize land disturbance, including clearing and grading.
(f) Minimize soil compaction.
§ 120-34.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-34.4
1:621
(g) Provide low-maintenance landscaping that encourages
retention and planting of native vegetation and minimizes the
use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides.
(h) Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas.
(i) Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the use or
exposure of pollutants at the site, in order to prevent or
minimize the release of those pollutants into stormwater
runoff. Such source controls include, but are not limited to:
[1] Site design features that help to prevent accumulation of
trash and debris in drainage systems, including features
that satisfy § 120-34.4E(3) below;
[2] Site design features that help to prevent discharge of trash
and debris from drainage systems;
[3] Site design features that help to prevent and/or contain
spills or other harmful accumulations of pollutants at
industrial or commercial developments; and
[4] When establishing vegetation after land disturbance,
applying fertilizer in accordance with the requirements
established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and implementing rules.
(3) Site design features identified under § 120-34.4E(2)(i)[2] above
shall comply with the following standard to control passage of solid
and floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For purposes of
this subsection, "solid and floatable materials" means sediment,
debris, trash, and other floating, suspended, or settleable solids.
For exemptions to this standard see § 120-34.4E(3)(c) below.
(a) Grates.
[1] Design engineers shall use either of the following grates
whenever they use a grate in pavement or another ground
surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a
storm drain or surface water body under that grate:
[a] The New Jersey Department of Transportation
(NJDOT) bicycle safe grate, which is described in
Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT Bicycle Compatible
Roadways and Bikeways Planning and Design
Guidelines (April 1996); or
[b] A different grate, if each individual clear space in that
grate has an area of no more than seven square
inches, or is no greater than 0.5 inch across the
smallest dimension.
§ 120-34.4 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-34.4
1:622
[2] Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates
in grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening
portion) of combination inlets, grates on storm sewer
manholes, ditch grates, trench grates, and grates of spacer
bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground surfaces
include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields,
open channels, and stormwater basin floors.
(b) Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear
space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if
the curb opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an
area of no more than seven square inches, or be no greater
than two inches across the smallest dimension.
(c) This standard does not apply:
[1] Where the review agency determines that this standard
would cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could
not practicably be overcome by using additional or larger
storm drain inlets that meet these standards;
[2] Where flows from the water quality design storm as
specified in § 120-34.4G(1) are conveyed through any
device (e.g., end of pipe netting facility, manufactured
treatment device, or a catch basin hood) that is designed,
at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid and floatable
materials that could not pass through one of the following:
[a] A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches
wide (this option does not apply for outfall netting
facilities); or
[b] A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inch;
[3] Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the bars, to
the elevation of the water quality design storm as specified
in § 120-34.4G(1); or
[4] Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey
Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that
action to meet this standard is an undertaking that
constitutes an encroachment or will damage or destroy the
New Jersey Register listed historic property.
(4) Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater management
measure to meet the performance standards in § 120-34.4F and G
shall be dedicated to a government agency, subjected to a
conservation restriction filed with the appropriate County Clerk's
office, or subject to an approved equivalent restriction that ensures
§ 120-34.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-34.4
1:623
that measure or an equivalent stormwater management measure
approved by the reviewing agency is maintained in perpetuity.
(5) Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management strategies is
available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in § 120-34.7, or found on the Department's
website at www.njstormwater.org.
F. Erosion control, groundwater recharge and runoff quantity standards.
(1) This subsection contains minimum design and performance
standards to control erosion, encourage and control infiltration and
groundwater recharge, and control stormwater runoff quantity
impacts of major development.
(a) The minimum design and performance standards for erosion
control are those established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and
implementing rules.
(b) The minimum design and performance standards for
groundwater recharge are as follows:
[1] The design engineer shall, using the assumptions and
factors for stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge
calculations at § 120-34.5, either:
[a] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the site and its stormwater management
measures maintain 100% of the average annual
preconstruction groundwater recharge volume for the
site; or
[b] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the increase of stormwater runoff volume
from preconstruction to postconstruction for the twoyear
storm is infiltrated.
[2] This groundwater recharge requirement does not apply to
projects within the urban redevelopment area, or to
projects subject to Subsection F(1)(b)[3] below.
[3] The following types of stormwater shall not be recharged:
[a] Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading. High
pollutant loading areas are areas in industrial and
commercial developments where solvents and/or
petroleum products are loaded/unloaded, stored, or
applied; areas where pesticides are loaded/unloaded
or stored; areas where hazardous materials are
expected to be present in greater than "reportable
quantities" as defined by the United States
§ 120-34.4 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-34.4
1:624
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR
302.4; areas where recharge would be inconsistent
with a Department-approved remedial action work
plan or landfill closure plan; and areas with high risks
for spills of toxic materials, such as gas stations and
vehicle maintenance facilities; and
[b] Industrial stormwater exposed to source material.
"Source material" means any material(s) or machinery
located at an industrial facility that is directly or
indirectly related to process, manufacturing or other
industrial activities, which could be a source of
pollutants in any industrial stormwater discharge to
groundwater. Source materials include, but are not
limited to, raw materials; intermediate products; final
products; waste materials; by-products; industrial
machinery and fuels; and lubricants, solvents, and
detergents that are related to process, manufacturing,
or other industrial activities that are exposed to
stormwater.
[4] The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on
the groundwater table and design the site so as to avoid
adverse hydraulic impacts. Potential adverse hydraulic
impacts include, but are not limited to, exacerbating a
naturally or seasonally high water table so as to cause
surface ponding, flooding of basements, or interference
with the proper operation of subsurface sewage disposal
systems and other subsurface structures in the vicinity or
downgradient of the groundwater recharge area.
(c) In order to control stormwater runoff quantity impacts, the
design engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors for
stormwater runoff calculations at § 120-34.5, complete one of
the following:
[1] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that for stormwater leaving the site, postconstruction
runoff hydrographs for the two-, ten-, and one-hundredyear
storm events do not exceed, at any point in time, the
preconstruction runoff hydrographs for the same storm
events;
[2] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that there is no increase, as compared to the
preconstruction condition, in the peak runoff rates of
stormwater leaving the site for the two-, ten-, and onehundred-
year storm events and that the increased volume
or change in timing of stormwater runoff will not increase
flood damage at or downstream of the site. This analysis
shall include the analysis of impacts of existing land uses
§ 120-34.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-34.4
1:625
and projected land uses assuming full development under
existing zoning and land use ordinances in the drainage
area;
[3] Design stormwater management measures so that the
postconstruction peak runoff rates for the two-, ten-, and
one-hundred-year storm events are 50%, 75% and 80%,
respectively, of the preconstruction peak runoff rates. The
percentages apply only to the postconstruction
stormwater runoff that is attributable to the portion of the
site on which the proposed development or project is to be
constructed. The percentages shall not be applied to
postconstruction stormwater runoff into tidal flood hazard
areas if the increased volume of stormwater runoff will not
increase flood damages below the point of discharge; or
[4] In tidal flood hazard areas, stormwater runoff quantity
analysis in accordance with Subsection F(1)(c)[1], [2] and
[3] above shall only be applied if the increased volume of
stormwater runoff could increase flood damages below the
point of discharge.
(2) Any application for a new agricultural development that meets the
definition of major development at § 120-34.2 et seq., shall be
submitted to the appropriate Soil Conservation District for review
and approval in accordance with the requirements of this section
and any applicable Soil Conservation District guidelines for
stormwater runoff quantity and erosion control. For the purposes of
this section, "agricultural development" means land uses normally
associated with the production of food, fiber and livestock for sale.
Such uses do not include the development of land for the
processing or sale of food and the manufacturing of agriculturally
related products.
G. Stormwater runoff quality standards.
(1) Stormwater management measures shall be designed to reduce the
postconstruction load of total suspended solids (TSS) in stormwater
runoff by 80% of the anticipated load from the developed site,
expressed as an annual average. Stormwater management
measures shall only be required for water quality control if an
additional 1/4 acre of impervious surface is being proposed on a
development site. The requirement to reduce TSS does not apply to
any stormwater runoff in a discharge regulated under a numeric
effluent limitation for TSS imposed under the New Jersey Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules, N.J.A.C. 7:14A, or in
a discharge specifically exempt under a NJPDES permit from this
requirement. The water quality design storm is 1.25 inches of
rainfall in two hours. Water quality calculations shall take into
account the distribution of rain from the water quality design
storm, as reflected in Table 1. The calculation of the volume of
§ 120-34.4 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-34.4
1:626
runoff may take into account the implementation of nonstructural
and structural stormwater management measures.
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
0 0.0000 65 0.8917
5 0.0083 70 0.9917
10 0.0166 75 1.0500
15 0.0250 80 1.0840
20 0.0500 85 1.1170
25 0.0750 90 1.1500
30 0.1000 95 1.1750
35 0.1330 100 1.2000
40 0.1660 105 1.2250
45 0.2000 110 1.2334
50 0.2583 115 1.2417
55 0.3583 120 1.2500
60 0.6250
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice TSS Percent Removal Rate
Bioretention systems 90%
Constructed stormwater wetland 90%
Infiltration structure 40% to 60%
Extended detention basin 80%
Manufactured treatment device See § 120-34.6C
Sand filter 80%
Vegetative filter strip 60% to 80%
Wet pond 50% to 90%
R = A + B - (A x B)/100
Where:
R = Total TSS percent load removal from application of
both BMPs.
A = The TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first
BMP.
§ 120-34.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-34.4
1:627
B = The TSS percent removal rate applicable to the
second BMP.
(2) If there is more than one on-site drainage area, the 80% TSS
removal rate shall apply to each drainage area, unless the runoff
from the subareas converge on site, in which case the removal rate
can be demonstrated through a calculation using a weighted
average.
(3) Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to
reduce, to the maximum extent feasible, the postconstruction
nutrient load of the anticipated load from the developed site in
stormwater runoff generated from the water quality design storm.
In achieving reduction of nutrients to the maximum extent feasible,
the design of the site shall include nonstructural strategies and
structural measures that optimize nutrient removal while still
achieving the performance standards in § 120-34.4F and G.
(4) Additional information and examples are contained in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, which may
be obtained from the address identified in § 120-34.7.
(5) In accordance with the definition of FW1 at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.4,
stormwater management measures shall be designed to prevent
any increase in stormwater runoff to waters classified as FW1.
(6) Special water resource protection areas shall be established along
all waters designated Category One at N.J.A.C. 7:9B, and perennial
or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
One waters as shown on the USGS Quadrangle Maps or in the
County Soil Surveys, within the associated HUC 14 drainage area.
These areas shall be established for the protection of water quality,
aesthetic value, exceptional ecological significance, exceptional
recreational significance, exceptional water supply significance,
and exceptional fisheries significance of those established Category
One waters. These areas shall be designated and protected as
follows:
(a) The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special water
resource protection area in accordance with one of the
following:
[1] A three-hundred-foot special water resource protection
area shall be provided on each side of the waterway,
measured perpendicular to the waterway from the top of
the bank outwards or from the center line of the waterway
where the bank is not defined, consisting of existing
vegetation or vegetation allowed to follow natural
succession.
§ 120-34.4 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-34.4
1:628
[2] Encroachment within the designated special water
resource protection area under Subsection G(6)(a)[1]
above shall only be allowed where previous development
or disturbance has occurred (for example, active
agricultural use, parking area or maintained lawn area).
The encroachment shall only be allowed where applicant
demonstrates that the functional value and overall
condition of the special water resource protection area will
be maintained to the maximum extent practicable. In no
case shall the remaining special water resource protection
area be reduced to less than 150 feet as measured
perpendicular to the top of bank of the waterway or center
line of the waterway where the bank is undefined. All
encroachments proposed under this subsection shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(b) All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow through
the special water resource protection area and shall comply
with the standard for off-site stability in the Standards for Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey, established under
the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et
seq.
(c) If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through the
special water resource protection area cannot comply with the
standard for off-site stability in the Standards for Soil Erosion
and Sediment Control in New Jersey, established under the Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.,
then the stabilization measures in accordance with the
requirements of the above standards may be placed within the
special water resource protection area, provided that:
[1] Stabilization measures shall not be placed within 150 feet
of the Category One waterway;
[2] Stormwater associated with discharges allowed by this
section shall achieve a 95% TSS postconstruction removal
rate;
[3] Temperature shall be addressed to ensure no impact on
the receiving waterway;
[4] The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection
area will be maintained to the maximum extent
practicable;
[5] A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with the
appropriate Department staff and Soil Conservation
District staff to identify necessary stabilization measures;
and
§ 120-34.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-34.4
1:629
§ 120-34.5. Calculation of stormwater runoff and groundwater
recharge.
[6] All encroachments proposed under this section shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(d) A stream corridor protection plan may be developed by a
regional stormwater management planning committee as an
element of a regional stormwater management plan, or by a
municipality through an adopted municipal stormwater
management plan. If a stream corridor protection plan for a
waterway subject to Subsection G(6) has been approved by the
Department of Environmental Protection, then the provisions
of the plan shall be the applicable special water resource
protection area requirements for that waterway. A stream
corridor protection plan for a waterway subject to Subsection
G(6) shall maintain or enhance the current functional value
and overall condition of the special water resource protection
area as defined in Subsection G(6)(a) above. In no case shall a
stream corridor protection plan allow the reduction of the
special water resource protection area to less than 150 feet as
measured perpendicular to the waterway subject to this
subsection.
(e) Subsection G(6) does not apply to the construction of one
individual single-family dwelling that is not part of a larger
development on a lot receiving preliminary or final subdivision
approval on or before February 2, 2004, provided that the
construction begins on or before February 2, 2009.
A. Stormwater runoff shall be calculated in accordance with the following:
(1) The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the
following methods:
(a) The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation and
Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as described in the NRCS
National Engineering Handbook Section 4, Hydrology, and
Technical Release 55, Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds;
or
(b) The Rational Method for peak flow and the Modified Rational
Method for hydrograph computations.
(2) For the purpose of calculating runoff coefficients and groundwater
recharge, there is a presumption that the preconstruction condition
of a site or portion thereof is a wooded land use with good
hydrologic condition. The term "runoff coefficient" applies to both
the NRCS methodology at § 120-34.5A(1)(a) and the Rational and
Modified Rational Methods at § 120-34.5A(1)(b). A runoff
§ 120-34.4 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-34.5
1:630
§ 120-34.6. Standards for structural stormwater management
measures.
coefficient or a groundwater recharge land cover for an existing
condition may be used on all or a portion of the site if the design
engineer verifies that the hydrologic condition has existed on the
site or portion of the site for at least five years without interruption
prior to the time of application. If more than one land cover has
existed on the site during the five years immediately prior to the
time of application, the land cover with the lowest runoff potential
shall be used for the computations. In addition, there is the
presumption that the site is in good hydrologic condition (if the
land use type is pasture, lawn, or park), with good cover (if the
land use type is woods), or with good hydrologic condition and
conservation treatment (if the land use type is cultivation).
(3) In computing preconstruction stormwater runoff, the design
engineer shall account for all significant land features and
structures, such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows, or
culverts that may reduce preconstruction stormwater runoff rates
and volumes.
(4) In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms, the design
engineer shall consider the relative stormwater runoff rates and/or
volumes of pervious and impervious surfaces separately to
accurately compute the rates and volume of stormwater runoff
from the site. To calculate runoff from unconnected impervious
cover, urban impervious area modifications as described in the
NRCS Technical Release 55, Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds, and other methods may be employed.
(5) If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater management
measure is below the flood hazard design flood elevation as defined
at N.J.A.C. 7:13, the design engineer shall take into account the
effects of tailwater in the design of structural stormwater
management measures.
B. Groundwater recharge may be calculated in accordance with the
following:
(1) The New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32, A Method for
Evaluating Ground-Water Recharge Areas in New Jersey,
incorporated herein by reference as amended and supplemented.
Information regarding the methodology is available from the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual; at
http://www.nj.gov/dep/njgs/; or at New Jersey Geological Survey, 29
Arctic Parkway, P.O. Box 427, Trenton, New Jersey 08625-0427;
(609) 292-1185.
A. Standards for structural stormwater management measures are as
follows:
§ 120-34.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-34.6
1:631
§ 120-34.7. Sources for technical guidance.
(1) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
take into account the existing site conditions, including, for
example, environmentally critical areas; wetlands; flood-prone
areas; slopes; depth to seasonal high water table; soil type,
permeability and texture; drainage area and drainage patterns; and
the presence of solution-prone carbonate rocks (limestone).
(2) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance and repairs, and
ensure proper functioning. Trash racks shall be installed at the
intake to the outlet structure as appropriate, and shall have parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars to the elevation of the
water quality design storm. For elevations higher than the water
quality design storm, the parallel bars at the outlet structure shall
be spaced no greater than 1/3 the width of the diameter of the
orifice or 1/3 the width of the weir, with a minimum spacing
between bars of one inch and a maximum spacing between bars of
six inches. In addition, the design of trash racks must comply with
the requirements of § 120-34.8B.
(3) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed,
constructed, and installed to be strong, durable, and corrosion
resistant. Measures that are consistent with the relevant portions
of the Residential Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3,
5:21-7.4, and 5:21-7.5 shall be deemed to meet this requirement.
(4) At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management basin,
the orifice size shall be a minimum of 2 1/2 inches in diameter.
(5) Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the
minimum safety standards for stormwater management basins at
§ 120-34.8.
B. Stormwater management measure guidelines are available in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Other
stormwater management measures may be utilized, provided the
design engineer demonstrates that the proposed measure and its
design will accomplish the required water quantity, groundwater
recharge and water quality design and performance standards
established by § 120-34.4 of this article.
C. Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the requirements
of § 120-34.4 of this article, provided the pollutant removal rates are
verified by the New Jersey Corporation for Advanced Technology and
certified by the Department.
A. Technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be
found in the documents listed at Subsection A(1) and (2) below, which
are available from Maps and Publications, New Jersey Department of
§ 120-34.6 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-34.7
1:632
§ 120-34.8. Safety standards for stormwater management basins.
Environmental Protection, 401 East State Street, P.O. Box 420, Trenton,
New Jersey, 08625; telephone (609) 777-1038.
(1) Guidelines for stormwater management measures are contained in
the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual,
as amended. Information is provided on stormwater management
measures, such as bioretention systems, constructed stormwater
wetlands, dry wells, extended detention basins, infiltration
structures, manufactured treatment devices, pervious paving, sand
filters, vegetative filter strips, and wet ponds.
(2) The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Manual, as
amended.
B. Additional technical guidance for stormwater management measures
can be obtained from the following:
(1) The Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey
promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee and
incorporated into N.J.A.C. 2:90. Copies of these standards may be
obtained by contacting the State Soil Conservation Committee or
any of the Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)3.
The location, address, and telephone number of each Soil
Conservation District may be obtained from the State Soil
Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey 08625;
(609) 292-5540;
(2) The Rutgers Cooperative Extension Service, (732) 932-9306; and
(3) The Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)3. The
location, address, and telephone number of each Soil Conservation
District may be obtained from the State Soil Conservation
Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey, 08625, (609)
292-5540.
A. This section sets forth requirements to protect public safety through
the proper design and operation of stormwater management basins.
This section applies to any new stormwater management basin. [Note
to the applicant: The provisions of this section are not intended to
preempt more stringent municipal or county safety requirements for
new or existing stormwater management basins. Municipal and county
stormwater management plans and ordinances may, pursuant to their
authority, require existing stormwater management basins to be
retrofitted to meet one or more of the safety standards in Subsection
B(1), (2) and (3) for trash racks, overflow grates, and escape provisions
at outlet structures.]
B. Requirements for trash racks, overflow grates and escape provisions.
§ 120-34.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-34.8
1:633
(1) A trash rack is a device designed to catch trash and debris and
prevent the clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks shall be
installed at the intake to the outlet from the stormwater
management basin to ensure proper functioning of the basin
outlets in accordance with the following:
(a) The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater than
six-inch spacing between the bars.
(b) The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely affect
the hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe or structure.
(c) The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is not to
exceed 2.5 feet per second under the full range of stage and
discharge. Velocity is to be computed on the basis of the net
area of opening through the rack.
(d) The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be rigid,
durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per
square foot.
(2) An overflow grate is designed to prevent obstruction of the
overflow structure. If an outlet structure has an overflow grate,
such grate shall meet the following requirements:
(a) The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure but
removable for emergencies and maintenance.
(b) The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two inches
across the smallest dimension.
(c) The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per
square foot.
(3) For purposes of this Subsection B(3), "escape provisions" means
the permanent installation of ladders, steps, rungs, or other
features that provide easily accessible means of egress from
stormwater management basins. Stormwater management basins
shall include escape provisions as follows:
(a) If a stormwater management basin has an outlet structure,
escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the structure.
With the prior approval of the reviewing agency identified in
Subsection C, a freestanding outlet structure may be exempted
from this requirement.
(b) Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
stormwater management basins having a permanent pool of
water deeper than 2 1/2 feet. Such safety ledges shall be
comprised of two steps. Each step shall be four to six feet in
§ 120-34.8 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-34.8
1:634
§ 120-34.9. Requirements for site development stormwater plan.
width. One step shall be located approximately 2 1/2 feet below
the permanent water surface, and the second step shall be
located one to 1 1/2 feet above the permanent water surface.
(c) In new stormwater management basins, the maximum interior
slope for an earthen dam, embankment, or berm shall not be
steeper than three horizontal to one vertical.
C. Variance or exemption from safety standards. A variance or exemption
from the safety standards for stormwater management basins may be
granted only upon a written finding by the appropriate reviewing
agency (municipality, county or Department) that the variance or
exemption will not constitute a threat to public safety.
A. Submission of site development stormwater plan.
(1) Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a development
subject to this article, the applicant shall submit all of the required
components of the checklist for the site development stormwater
plan at § 120-34.9C below as part of the submission of the
applicant's application for subdivision or site plan approval.
(2) The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the
standards set forth in this article.
(3) The applicant shall submit five copies of the materials listed in the
checklist for site development stormwater plans in accordance with
§ 120-34.9C of this article. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
B. Site development stormwater plan approval. The applicant's site
development project shall be reviewed as a part of the subdivision or
site plan review process by the municipal board or official from whom
municipal approval is sought. That municipal board or official shall
consult the engineer retained by the Planning Board to determine if all
of the checklist requirements have been satisfied and to determine if
the project meets the standards set forth in this article. [Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
C. Checklist requirements. The following information shall be required:
(1) Topographic base map. The reviewing engineer may require
upstream tributary drainage system information as necessary. It is
recommended that the topographic base map of the site be
submitted which extends a minimum of 200 feet beyond the limits
of the proposed development, at a scale of one inch equals 200 feet
or greater, showing two-foot contour intervals. The map, as
appropriate, may indicate the following: existing surface water
drainage, shorelines, steep slopes, soils, erodible soils, perennial or
intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
§ 120-34.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-34.9
1:635
One waters, wetlands and floodplains along with their appropriate
buffer strips, marshlands and other wetlands, pervious or
vegetative surfaces, existing man-made structures, roads, bearing
and distances of property lines, and significant natural and manmade
features not otherwise shown.
(2) Environmental site analysis. A written and graphic description of
the natural and man-made features of the site and its environs. This
description should include a discussion of soil conditions, slopes,
wetlands, waterways and vegetation on the site. Particular
attention should be given to unique, unusual, or environmentally
sensitive features and to those that provide particular
opportunities or constraints for development.
(3) Project description and site plan(s).
(a) A map (or maps) at the scale of the topographical base map
indicating the location of existing and proposed buildings,
roads, parking areas, utilities, structural facilities for
stormwater management and sediment control, and other
permanent structures. The map(s) shall also clearly show areas
where alterations occur in the natural terrain and cover,
including lawns and other landscaping, and seasonal high
groundwater elevations.
(b) A written description of the site plan and justification of
proposed changes in natural conditions may also be provided.
(4) Land use planning and source control plan. This plan shall provide
a demonstration of how the goals and standards of §§ 120-34.3
through 120-34.6 are being met. The focus of this plan shall be to
describe how the site is being developed to meet the objective of
controlling groundwater recharge, stormwater quality and
stormwater quantity problems at the source by land management
and source controls whenever possible.
(5) Stormwater management facilities map. The following information,
illustrated on a map of the same scale as the topographic base map,
shall be included:
(a) Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface
contours, land area to be occupied by the stormwater
management facilities and the type of vegetation thereon, and
details of the proposed plan to control and dispose of
stormwater.
(b) Details of all stormwater management facility designs, during
and after construction, including discharge provisions,
discharge capacity for each outlet at different levels of
detention and emergency spillway provisions with maximum
discharge capacity of each spillway.
§ 120-34.9 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-34.9
1:636
§ 120-34.10. Maintenance and repair.
(6) Calculations.
(a) Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations
for the predevelopment and postdevelopment conditions for
the design storms specified in § 120-34.4 of this article.
(b) When the proposed stormwater management control measures
(e.g., infiltration basins) depend on the hydrologic properties
of soils, then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report
shall be based on on-site boring logs or soil pit profiles. The
number and location of required soil borings or soil pits shall
be determined based on what is needed to determine the
suitability and distribution of soils present at the location of the
control measure.
(7) Maintenance and repair plan. The design and planning of the
stormwater management facility shall meet the maintenance
requirements of § 120-34.10.
(8) Waiver from submission requirements. The municipal official or
board reviewing an application under this article may, in
consultation with the Borough Engineer, waive submission of any of
the requirements in § 120-34.9C(1) through (6) of this article when
it can be demonstrated that the information requested is
impossible to obtain or it would create a hardship on the applicant
to obtain and its absence will not materially affect the review
process.
A. Applicability. Projects subject to review as in § 120-34.1 et seq., of this
article shall comply with the requirements of § 120-34.10B and C.
B. General maintenance.
(1) The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
a major development.
(2) The maintenance plan shall contain specific preventative
maintenance tasks and schedules; cost estimates, including
estimated cost of sediment, debris, or trash removal; and the name,
address, and telephone number of the person or persons
responsible for preventative and corrective maintenance (including
replacement). Maintenance guidelines for stormwater
management measures are available in the New Jersey Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual. If the maintenance plan
identifies a person other than the developer (for example, a public
agency or homeowners' association) as having the responsibility for
maintenance, the plan shall include documentation of such
person's agreement to assume this responsibility, or of the
§ 120-34.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-34.10
1:637
developer's obligation to dedicate a stormwater management
facility to such person under an applicable ordinance or regulation.
(3) Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or transferred
to the owner or tenant of an individual property in a residential
development or project, unless such owner or tenant owns or
leases the entire residential development or project.
(4) If the person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above is not a public agency, the maintenance plan
and any future revisions based on Subsection B(7) below shall be
recorded upon the deed of record for each property on which the
maintenance described in the maintenance plan must be
undertaken.
(5) Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to
maintain the function of the stormwater management measure,
including repairs or replacement to the structure; removal of
sediment, debris, or trash; restoration of eroded areas; snow and
ice removal; fence repair or replacement; restoration of vegetation;
and repair or replacement of nonvegetated linings.
(6) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above shall maintain a detailed log of all
preventative and corrective maintenance for the structural
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
the development, including a record of all inspections and copies of
all maintenance-related work orders.
(7) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above shall evaluate the effectiveness of the
maintenance plan at least once per year and adjust the plan and the
deed as needed.
(8) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above shall retain and make available, upon
request by any public entity with administrative, health,
environmental, or safety authority over the site, the maintenance
plan and the documentation required by Subsection B(6) and (7)
above.
(9) The requirements of Subsection B(3) and (4) do not apply to
stormwater management facilities that are dedicated to and
accepted by the municipality or another governmental agency.
(10) In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a
danger to public safety or public health, or if it is in need of
maintenance or repair, the municipality shall so notify the
responsible person in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the
responsible person shall have 14 days to effect maintenance and
repair of the facility in a manner that is approved by the municipal
engineer or his designee. The municipality, in its discretion, may
§ 120-34.10 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-34.10
1:638
§ 120-34.11. Violations and penalties.
Any person who erects, constructs, alters, repairs, converts, maintains, or
uses any building, structure or land in violation of this article shall be
subject to the following penalties: a fine of up to $1,500 or imprisonment of
up to 90 days, or both; each day that a violation continues shall be deemed
a separate violation.
extend the time allowed for effecting maintenance and repair for
good cause. If the responsible person fails or refuses to perform
such maintenance and repair, the municipality or county may
immediately proceed to do so and shall bill the cost thereof to the
responsible person.
(11) A two-year maintenance guarantee in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53 shall be posted for the maintenance of the stormwater
facilities.
(12) Guidelines for developing a maintenance and inspection program
are provided in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual and the NJDEP Ocean County Demonstration
Study, Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Manual,
dated June 1989, available from the NJDEP Watershed
Management Program.
C. Nothing in this section shall preclude the municipality in which the
major development is located from requiring the posting of a
performance or maintenance guarantee in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.
§ 120-34.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-34.11
1:639

Part 5
Affordable Housing
ARTICLE 35
Development Fees
[Added 9-28-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-08]
§ 120-35.1. When effective.
This article shall take effect upon approval by the Superior Court of the
State of New Jersey or appropriate state regulatory agency of the State of
New Jersey.
§ 120-35.2. Findings and purposes.
§ 120-35.3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AFFORDABLE HOUSING — Any housing unit with an acquisition price or
rent level not exceeding the maximum resale or rent level for low- and
moderate-income housing as set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:94 et seq.
COAH — The New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing, established under
the Fair Housing Act of 1985,114 and which has primary jurisdiction for
the administration of low- and moderate-income housing obligations in
accordance with sound regional planning considerations in the state.
A. The New Jersey Supreme Court, in Holmdel Builders Ass'n v. Twp. of
Holmdel, 121 N.J. 550 (1990), determined that mandatory development
fees are both statutorily and constitutionally permissible. The Court
further anticipated that COAH would promulgate appropriate
development fee rules specifying, among other things, the standards for
these development fees. The purpose of this article is to provide such
rules pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:94 et seq.
B. The Borough Council finds and declares that the creation and
preservation of affordable housing in the Borough serves the public
interest. Maintaining and improving a stock of sound affordable
housing requires affirmative steps by local government working
cooperatively with public bodies at all levels and with the private sector.
The purpose of this article is to create in the Borough of Kenilworth a
trust fund from payment of development fees to assist in the marshaling
of public and private monies dedicated to affordable housing projects
and programs.
114. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq.
§ 120-35.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-35.3
1:641
DEVELOPMENT FEES — Money paid by an individual, person, partnership,
association, company, or corporation for the improvement of property as
permitted in N.J.A.C. 5:94 et seq.
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE — The value of a property determined
by the Borough Tax Assessor through a process designed to ensure that
all property in the Borough is assessed at the same assessment ratio or
ratios required by law. Estimates at the time of building permit may be
obtained by the Tax Assessor utilizing estimates for construction cost. Final
equalized assessed value will be determined at project completion by the
Tax Assessor.
SUBSTANTIVE CERTIFICATION — A determination by COAH approving
the Borough of Kenilworth's Housing Element and Fair Share Plan in
accordance with the provisions of the Fair Housing Act115 and the rules and
criteria as set forth therein. A grant of substantive certification shall be
valid for a period of 10 years in accordance with the terms and conditions
contained therein.
§ 120-35.4. Development fee schedule. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
A. Residential development.
(1) Residential development fees shall be 1% of the equalized assessed
value for residential development within the OR Zone District,
which is not exempt from the provisions of this article as set forth
below, provided no increase in density is permitted.
(2) If a "D" variance is granted by the Borough of Kenilworth Planning
Board pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d(5), the additional residential
units realized (above what is permitted by right under the existing
zoning) will incur a bonus development fee of 6% rather than the
development fee of 1%. However, if the zoning on a site has
changed during the two-year period preceding the filing of the "D"
variance application, the base density for the purposes of
calculating the bonus development fee shall be the highest density
permitted by right during the two years preceding the filing with
the Borough of Kenilworth Planning Board of the "D" variance
application.
B. Nonresidential development.
(1) Nonresidential development fees shall be 2% of the equalized
assessed value for nonresidential development within the BD, AC,
C, OR and I Zone Districts, which is not exempt from the provisions
of this subsection as set forth in this article.
(2) If a "D" variance is granted by the Borough of Kenilworth Planning
Board, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d(4), then the additional floor
115. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq.
§ 120-35.3 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-35.4
1:642
§ 120-35.5. Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions.
§ 120-35.6. Collection of development fees.
The Borough shall collect 50% of the fee on any specific development prior
to and as a condition of the issuance of the building permit therefor. The
remaining portion shall be collected prior to and as a condition of the
issuance of the certificate of occupancy. Once the final equalized assessed
value of a particular development has been determined by the Tax Assessor,
area ration (FAR) realized (above what is permitted by right under
the existing zoning) will incur a bonus development fee of 6%
rather than the development fee of 2%. However, if the zoning on a
site has changed during the two-year period preceding the filing of
the "D" variance application, the base density for the purposes of
calculating the bonus development fee shall be the highest density
permitted by right during the two years preceding the filing with
the Borough of Kenilworth Planning Board of the "D" variance
application.
A. Except as provided in § 120-35.4A(2) above, developers of low- and
moderate-income units shall be exempt from development fees.
B. Development fees may only be collected for any residential structure
which requires the installation of a new foundation (excluding
foundations required for an addition to or renovation of an existing
residential structure or a foundation required for an accessory
structure to an existing residential structure).
C. All forms of new nonresidential construction shall be subject to
development fees; provided, however, that development fees may only
be collected for improvements which add usable or rentable footage to
an existing nonresidential structure. In the event that a development
fee is collected for a nonresidential structure and thereafter usable or
rentable footage is obtained through modification of the said structure,
a development fee may be collected for the additional usable or
rentable footage based upon the increase in the equalized assessed
value of the improved structure.
D. Developments that have received preliminary or final approval prior to
the adoption and final publication of this article shall be exempt from
development fees unless the developer seeks a substantial change in
the approval.
E. The Borough exempts the following types of development from
imposition of development fees:
(1) Development by the Borough or any of its instrumentalities; and
(2) Development by charitable or not-for-profit entities formed and
legally established in accordance with the laws of the State of New
Jersey.
§ 120-35.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-35.6
1:643
and such final equalized assessed value is greater than the estimated
equalized assessed value, the developer shall, within 10 business days from
receipt of notification from the Borough, pay to the Borough the difference
between the development fees required to be paid by the developer once
such final equalized assessed value has been determined and the estimated
development fees actually paid by the developer. The failure of the
developer to make timely payments of the aforesaid deficiency shall entitle
the Borough to file, without notice to the developer, a lien against the
subject development. In the event that the Borough shall file such lien, the
Borough may add to the aforesaid deficiency amount reasonable attorney
fees to file and discharge such lien, together with any and all costs incurred
to file and discharge said lien. In the event that the estimated equalized
assessed value proves to have been too high, the Borough shall promptly
refund the difference between the estimated development fees actually paid
by the developer and the development fees required to be paid by the
developer once such final equalized assessed value has been determined.
§ 120-35.7. Contested fees.
Imposed and collected development fees that are challenged shall be placed
in an interest-bearing escrow account by the Chief Financial Officer of
the Borough. If all or a portion of the contested fees are returned to
the developer, the accrued interest on the returned amount shall also be
returned.
§ 120-35.8. Housing trust fund.
All development fees shall be deposited with the Chief Financial Officer of
the Borough in a separate designated interest-bearing housing trust fund.
The development fees placed in the housing trust fund shall be deemed
"dedicated revenues" as such term is defined in N.J.S.A. 40A:4-36. In
establishing the housing trust fund, the Borough shall provide written
authorization in the form of a three-party escrow agreement between the
Borough, the bank and COAH to permit COAH to direct the disbursement of
the funds as provided for in N.J.A.C. 5:94-6.16(b). This three-party escrow
agreement shall be submitted to COAH within seven days from the opening
of the trust fund account. All interest accrued in the housing trust fund shall
only be used on eligible affordable housing activities approved by COAH.
§ 120-35.9. Use of money.
A. The Borough shall use revenues collected from development fees for
any activity approved by COAH for addressing the Borough's fair share
obligation. Such activities include, but are not limited to, rehabilitation,
new construction, regional contribution agreements, purchase of new
land for low- and moderate-income housing, improvement of land to be
used for low- and moderate-income housing, extension and/or
improvements of roads and infrastructure to low- and moderate-income
housing sites, assistance designed to render units to be more affordable
and administration of the implementation of the Housing Element and
§ 120-35.6 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-35.9
1:644
§ 120-35.10. Monitoring.
The Borough shall complete and return to COAH all monitoring forms
related to the collection of development fees, expenditures of revenues,
and implementation of the spending plan (discussed in § 120-35.11 below)
certified by COAH. Financial reports, annual program implementation, and
monitoring reports shall be completed by the Borough on forms designed by
COAH.
Fair Share Plan. The expenditure of all money shall conform to a
spending plan approved by COAH.
B. Funds shall not be expended to reimburse the Borough for past housing
activities.
C. After subtracting development fees collected to finance a regional
contribution agreement, a rehabilitation program or a new construction
project that are necessary to address the municipality's affordable
housing obligation, at least 30% of the balance remaining shall be used
to provide affordability assistance to low- and moderate-income
households in affordable units included in a municipal Fair Share Plan.
One-third of the affordability assistance portion of development fees
collected shall be used to provide affordability assistance to those
households earning 30% or less of median income by region.
(1) Affordability assistance programs may include down payment
assistance, security deposit assistance, low interest loans, and
rental assistance.
(2) Affordability assistance to households earning 30% or less of
median income may include buying down the cost of low-income
units in a municipal Fair Share Plan to make them affordable to
households earning 30% or less than median income. The use of
development fees in this manner shall entitle a municipality to
bonus credits pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:94-4.22.
(3) Payments in lieu of constructing affordable units on site and funds
from the sale of units with extinguished controls shall be exempt
from the affordability assistance requirement.
D. No more than 20% of the revenues collected from development fees
shall be expended on administration, including, but not limited to,
salaries and benefits for Borough employees or consultant fees
necessary to develop or implement a rehabilitation program, a new
construction program, a regional contribution agreement, a Housing
Element and Fair Share Plan, and an affirmative marketing program.
Administrative funds may be used for income qualification of
households, monitoring the turnover of sale and rental units, and
compliance with COAH's monitoring requirements. Development fees
shall not be used to defray the costs of existing staff.
§ 120-35.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-35.11
1:645
§ 120-35.11. Spending plans.
The Borough shall submit to COAH a spending plan for the development
fees collected by it prior to the expiration of its substantive certification
period. Plans to spend development fees shall consist of the following
information:
§ 120-35.12. Violations and penalties.
A. A projection of revenues anticipated from imposing fees on
development, based on historic activity;
B. A description of the administrative mechanism that the Borough will
use to collect and distribute revenues;
C. A description of the anticipated use of all development fees;
D. A schedule for the creation or rehabilitation of housing units;
E. In the event the Borough envisions being responsible for public sector
or nonprofit construction of housing, a pro forma statement of the
anticipated costs and revenues associated with the development;
F. The manner through which the Borough will address any expected or
unexpected shortfall if the anticipated revenues from development fees
are not sufficient to implement the plan;
G. A description of the funds anticipated; and
H. A schedule for spending.
A. In the event that any of the conditions set forth in Subsection B of this
section occur, COAH shall be authorized, on behalf of the Borough, to
direct the manner in which all development fees collected pursuant to
§ 120-35.8 shall be expended. Should any such condition occur, such
revenues shall immediately become available for expenditure at the
direction of COAH upon the Borough Clerk's receipt of written
notification from COAH that such a condition has occurred.
B. Occurrence of the following may result in COAH taking an action
pursuant to Subsection A of this section:
(1) Failure to submit a spending plan pursuant to § 120-35.11 above
within the time limits imposed by COAH;
(2) Failure to meet deadlines for information required by COAH in its
review of the Borough's Housing Element and Fair Share Plan or its
spending plan;
(3) Failure to proceed through COAH's administrative process toward
substantive certification in a timely manner;
(4) Failure to address COAH's conditions for approval of a plan to
spend development fees within the deadlines imposed by COAH;
§ 120-35.11 KENILWORTH CODE § 120-35.12
1:646
§ 120-35.13. Ongoing collection of development fees.
The ability for the Borough of Kenilworth to impose, collect and expend
development fees shall expire with the expiration of its substantive
certification unless the Borough has filed a revised and adopted Housing
Element and Fair Share Plan, has petitioned for substantive certification
for the succeeding round, and has received COAH's approval of a revised
development fee ordinance prior to the expiration. If the Borough of
Kenilworth fails to act before the expiration of its substantive certification,
the Borough may only resume the imposition and collection of development
fees by filing a revised and adopted Housing Element and Fair Share
Plan, petitioning for substantive certification for the succeeding round, and
after receiving COAH's approval of a revised development fee ordinance.
The Borough of Kenilworth shall not impose a development fee on a
development that receives preliminary or final approval after the expiration
of its substantive certification, nor shall the Borough of Kenilworth
retroactively impose a development fee on such a development. The
Borough of Kenilworth shall not expend development fees after the
expiration of its substantive certification.
(5) Failure to address COAH's conditions for substantive certification
within the deadlines imposed by COAH;
(6) Failure to submit accurate monitoring reports within the time limits
imposed by COAH;
(7) Failure to implement the spending plan for development fees within
the time limits imposed by COAH, or within reasonable extensions
granted by COAH;
(8) Expenditure of development fees on activities not permitted by
COAH;
(9) Revocation of the Borough's substantive certification; or
(10) Other good cause demonstrating that the revenues are not being
used for the intended purpose.
§ 120-35.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-35.13
1:647
Chapter 121
LIBRARY
§ 121-1. Detention or failure to return items prohibited.
No person shall detain or fail to return any book or article borrowed from
the Kenilworth Free Public Library contrary to the rules and regulations of
said Free Public Library after 30 days have elapsed from the date of posting
by certified mail, return receipt requested, of a notice demanding return
thereof, addressed to said person at the last address furnished to the library.
§ 121-2. Damaging or defacing of library property prohibited.
No person shall willfully or maliciously cut, tear, deface, disfigure, damage
or destroy any book or article or any part thereof which is owned by or in
the custody of the Kenilworth Free Public Library.
§ 121-3. Use of card.
No person with intent to defraud shall register or furnish a false name or
address or use any card other than the one issued to said person for the
purpose of borrowing any book or article from the Kenilworth Free Public
Library.
§ 121-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-11-1979 by Ord. No.
79-19; at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. II)]
Every person convicted of a violation of this chapter or any supplement
or amendment thereto shall, upon conviction, be subject to the general
penalty set forth in Chapter 1, Article I, General Penalty, of the Borough of
Kenilworth Code, for each and every offense.
Chapter 125
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 106.
§ 125-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish requirements to control littering
in the Borough of Kenilworth so as to protect public health, safety and
welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 120-35.13 KENILWORTH CODE § 125-2
1:648
§ 125-2. Definitions and word usage.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
LITTER — Any used or unconsumed substance or waste material which
has been discarded, whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic, rubber,
paper, or other natural or synthetic material, or any combination thereof,
including but not limited to any bottle, jar or can, or any top cap or
detachable tab of any bottle, jar or can, any unlighted cigarette, cigar,
match or any flaming or glowing material or any garbage, trash, refuse,
debris, rubbish, grass clippings or other lawn or garden waste, newspapers,
magazines, glass, metal, plastic or paper containers or other packaging
or construction material, but does not include the waste of the primary
processes of mining or other extraction processes, logging, sawmilling,
farming or manufacturing.
LITTER RECEPTACLE — A container suitable for the depositing of litter.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
§ 125-3. Prohibited acts and regulated activities.
§ 125-4. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Police Department, Board of Health
and code enforcement officials of the Borough of Kenilworth.
§ 125-5. Violations and penalties. [Added at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than
$100 nor more than $500.
Chapter 127
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, discard or otherwise
place any litter of any nature upon public or private property other than
in a litter receptacle, or having done so, to allow such litter to remain.
B. Whenever any litter is thrown or discarded or allowed to fall from a
vehicle or boat in violation of this chapter, the operator or owner, or
both, of the motor vehicle or boat shall also be deemed to have violated
this chapter.
§ 125-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 125-5
1:649
LOITERING
§ 127-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LOITERING — Remaining idle in essentially one location and shall include
the concepts of spending time idly, loafing or walking about aimlessly, and
shall also include the colloquial expression "hanging around."
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the public has access and shall
include any street, highway, road, alley or sidewalk. It shall also include the
front or neighborhood of any store, shop, restaurant, tavern or other place
of business, and public grounds, areas, and parks, as well as parking lots
or other vacant private property not owned by or under the control of the
person charged with violating this chapter or, in the case of a minor, not
owned or under the control of his parent or guardian.
§ 127-2. Restrictions.
No person shall loiter in a public place in such a manner as to:
§ 127-3. Power of police officer.
Whenever any police officer shall, in the exercise of reasonable judgment,
decide that the presence of any person in any public place is causing or is
likely to cause any of the conditions enumerated in § 127-2, he may, if he
deems it necessary for the preservation of the public peace and safety, order
that person to leave that place. Any person who shall refuse to leave after
being ordered to do so by a police officer shall be guilty of a violation of this
chapter.
A. Create or cause to be created a danger of a breach of the peace.
B. Create or cause to be created any disturbance or annoyance to the
comfort and repose of any person.
C. Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles.
D. Obstruct, molest or interfere with any person lawfully in any public
place as defined in § 127-1. This subsection shall include the making of
unsolicited remarks of an offensive, disgusting or insulting nature or
which are calculated to annoy or disturb the person to whom, or in
whose hearing, they are made.
§ 125-5 KENILWORTH CODE § 127-4
1:650
§ 127-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-11-1979 by Ord. No.
79-19; at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. II)]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction,
be subject to the general penalty set forth in Chapter 1, Article I, General
Penalty, of the Borough of Kenilworth Code.
Chapter 129
MASSAGE AND BODYWORK ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 129-1. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. The
definitions set forth in N.J.S.A. 45:11-55 (definitions relative to practice of
massage and bodywork therapies) are hereby incorporated and set forth
herein.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
§ 129-2. Registration of establishment.
No person shall operate any establishment or utilize any premises in the
Borough of Kenilworth for services related to massage and bodywork
therapies or massage and bodywork without first registering with the
Borough of Kenilworth for such establishment. Any applicant must include
a copy of a current and valid registration as required by N.J.S.A. 45:11-76
(registration required for advertising as a massage or bodywork therapist)
issued by the New Jersey Board of Massage and Bodywork Therapy and full
disclosure of any actions or proceedings against the applicant under N.J.S.A.
45:11-77 (suspension or revocation of registration).
§ 129-3. Health license.
No establishment may operate without receiving written approval from
the Health Officer of the Borough of Kenilworth indicating that the
establishment is sanitary and hygienic for its proposed purpose. The Health
Officer shall conduct at least one inspection each year and may conduct
periodic inspections at his/her discretion during regular business hours
to ensure that an establishment maintains adequate sanitary and hygienic
conditions throughout the interim periods.
§ 129-4. Licensing of individual provider required.
No person shall render or perform services related to massage and
bodywork therapies or massage and bodywork without complying with the
§ 127-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 129-4
1:651
provisions set forth in N.J.S.A. 45:11-54 et seq. (Massage and Bodywork
Therapist Licensing Act) and providing an annual copy of said license to the
Borough Clerk of Kenilworth prior to rendering or performing said services
at the establishment.
§ 129-5. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person who is found to be operating in violation of the provisions of
this chapter shall be subject to the following fines:
(1) A first offense shall carry a fine of $500.
(2) A second offense occurring within six months of a first offense shall
carry a fine of $1,000.
(3) A third offense occurring within six months of a second offense
shall carry a fine of $2,000 and the violator and/or their principal
shall be incarcerated no more than 30 days.
B. Any person, firm, corporation, or type or form of business which has
received notice of unsanitary or unhygienic conditions shall be subject
to the following penalties and conditions:
(1) If the violations set forth in the notice are not cured within three
business days of its receipt, commencing on the first business day
after receipt of the notice, a first offense shall carry a fine of $500.
(2) If a second notice under this provision is issued with six months of
the first notice and the violations are not cured within three
business days of its receipt, commencing on the first business day
after receipt of the notice, a second offense shall carry a fine of
$1,000.
(3) If a third notice under this provision is issued with six months of the
second notice and the violations are not cured within three
business days of its receipt, commencing on the first business day
after receipt of the notice, a third offense shall carry a fine of
$2,000, and all business activity related to this chapter conducted
by that person shall cease for a period of one year.
(4) An establishment shall cease all business operations in the event of
any unsanitary or unhygienic violations unless otherwise provided
for within this provision.
(5) In the event that any establishment cures any violation in
accordance with the prior subsections of this provision, the Health
Officer shall reinspect the establishment within two business days
of receiving notice from the establishment and the establishment
remitting an inspection fee of $250 to the Borough Clerk of
Kenilworth. In the event that the Health Officer fails to timely
inspect an establishment, the establishment may resume its normal
§ 129-4 KENILWORTH CODE § 129-5
1:652
§ 129-6. Severability.
Each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of this chapter is
declared to be an independent section, subsection, sentence, clause and
phrase, and the finding or holding of any such portion of this chapter to
be unconstitutional, void, or ineffective for any cause, or reason, shall not
affect any other portion of this chapter.
Chapter 131
MUNICIPAL BUILDINGS, USE OF
§ 131-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the
meanings indicated:
PERSON — Includes any and all persons other than municipal officers
performing official duties and any and all associations, organizations and
corporations other than those created by statute or ordinance.
§ 131-2. Permit required.
No person shall use any municipal building or any room therein unless he
applies and is granted a permit therefor by the Borough Clerk.
§ 131-3. Conditions for issuance of permit.
The Borough Clerk shall not issue a permit to any person for the use of any
municipal building or room therein unless it appears:
business operations. In no event may an establishment provide
notice later than the aforementioned three-business-day period.
(6) A person may file for an appeal from any violation issued by the
Health Officer with the Board of Health of the Borough of
Kenilworth within the aforementioned three-business-day period.
In the event of an appeal, an establishment may resume normal
business activities after addressing the violations unless the Health
Officer has declared an imminent danger of a communicable
disease.
A. The applicant has made application therefor in the manner prescribed
by the governing body.
B. The applicant has agreed in writing to comply with all rules and
regulations prescribed by the governing body.
C. The applicant has furnished the Borough Clerk with a certificate of
public liability insurance in amounts as may be prescribed by the
governing body.
§ 129-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-3
1:653
§ 131-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-11-1979 by Ord. No.
79-19; at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. II)]
Violations of § 131-2 of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to
the general penalty set forth in Chapter 1, Article I, General Penalty, of the
Borough of Kenilworth Code.
Chapter 134
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm devices — See Ch. 55.
Dogs — See Ch. 83.
Industrial waste — See Ch. 116.
Littering — See Ch. 125.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 142.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 207.
§ 134-1. Word usage.
The word "person," as used herein, shall, wherever appropriate in
connection with the context, include "corporation," "partnership,"
"association," "club," "society" or any other form of association or
organization and individual and shall include the plural. The masculine
pronoun shall include the feminine.
§ 134-2. Noise or sound disturbing to neighboring inhabitants.
[Amended 5-13-1998 by Ord. No. 98-13]
It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and it shall be unlawful and no person
shall make, cause, suffer or permit to be made or caused, upon any premises
owned, occupied or controlled by him or upon any public street, alley or
thoroughfare in the Borough of Kenilworth, any noise or sound, by means
of the human voice or by any other means or method, in such manner as to
disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants.
§ 134-3. Use of sound-production and sound-reproduction devices
restricted. [Amended 5-13-1998 by Ord. No. 98-13; 12-9-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-35]
It shall be unlawful and no person shall play, use or operate, or permit to
be played, used or operated, any radio receiving set, musical instrument,
phonograph or other machine or device for the production or reproduction
of sound with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing of the
D. The applicant is not engaged in any profit-making activity.
E. The place applied for is not needed for any municipal use or activity.
§ 131-3 KENILWORTH CODE § 134-3
1:654
person so playing, using or operating such instrument or device and such
persons who are voluntary listeners thereto or in such manner as to disturb
the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants.
§ 134-4. Excessive or unreasonable noise prohibited; lawn and
garden equipment. [Amended 3-25-1998 by Ord. No. 98-5]
§ 134-5. Sounding of bells and horns restricted.
It shall be unlawful and no person shall, within the Borough of Kenilworth,
ring any bell or blow any horn or make any public outcry at or for any public
sale or auction, or to advertise any goods, wares or merchandise for sale,
or to attract any attention to gain passengers for any cab, taxicab, hack or
omnibus.
§ 134-6. Sounding of warning devices restricted.
It shall be unlawful and no person shall, within the Borough of Kenilworth,
sound or cause to be sounded any horn or warning device of any automobile,
motorcycle, bus or other vehicle except when required by law or when
necessary to give timely warning of the approach of the vehicle or as
a warning of impending danger to persons driving other vehicles or to
persons upon the street. No person shall sound any horn or warning device
on any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle which shall emit an
unreasonably loud or harsh sound or for any unnecessary or unreasonable
period of time.
§ 134-7. Use of heavy equipment; commercial construction activity
restricted. [Amended 3-25-1998 by Ord. No. 98-5]
A. It shall be unlawful and no person shall, within the Borough of
Kenilworth, make or continue, or cause to be permitted, made or
continued, any unreasonable or excessive noise which shall disturb the
comfort, rest and repose of any person or persons being in his, her or
their place of abode or at any public or private meeting or at church
services.
B. The provisions of Subsection A above notwithstanding, it shall be
unlawful for any person to operate or cause to allow to be operated any
gas-powered lawn or garden equipment, to include but not be limited to
lawn mowers, leaf blowers and vacuums, mulchers and shredders,
trimmers, etc., in a residential area or within 200 feet of a residential
area on the following days and time periods:
(1) Monday through Friday between sunset and 7:00 a.m.
(2) Saturdays and Sundays between sunset and 8:00 a.m.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or use, or cause or permit
to be operated or used, any type of construction heavy equipment which
§ 134-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 134-7
1:655
§ 134-8. Excessive noise in connection with loading and unloading
prohibited.
It shall be unlawful and no person shall, within the Borough of Kenilworth,
create any excessive noises in connection with the loading or unloading of
any vehicles or the opening or destruction of bales, boxes or containers
between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
§ 134-9. Disturbance of peace by dogs.
It shall be unlawful and no person shall, within the Borough of Kenilworth,
keep or harbor any dog or other animal which shall disturb any resident or
residents in the neighborhood, by excessive barking, whining, howling or
other unnecessary noises.
§ 134-10. Exemptions.
This chapter shall not be construed to apply to activities in the public
parks, playgrounds or public buildings under the permission or authority of
the municipal officials, or to activities of the municipal departments in the
performance of their duties, drills or public demonstrations, or to the use of
bells, chimes or sound amplifiers by churches in the church activities.
§ 134-11. Dense smoke prohibited.
It shall be unlawful and no person shall cause or permit to be emitted
any dense smoke which contains soot or other substances in sufficient
quantities to permit the deposit of such soot or other substances on any
surface within the limits of the Borough of Kenilworth.
§ 134-12. Emission of dangerous fumes prohibited.
It shall be unlawful and no person shall cause or permit to be emitted
any harmful, noxious or injurious odor or any fly ash, dust, smoke, gas,
shall make any excessively loud noise or ground tremors on the
following days and times:
(1) Monday through Friday between sunset and 7:00 a.m.
(2) Saturday between sunset and 8:00 a.m.
(3) Sunday at any time.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct, perform or
cause to be performed any type of commercial construction activity in
the Borough of Kenilworth in a residential zone or within 200 feet of a
residential zone on a Sunday in such a manner or way as to cause or
create an excessive or unreasonable noise or nuisance as those terms
are defined in §§ 134-2, 134-3, 134-4, 134-5, 134-6 and 134-8 of this
chapter.
§ 134-7 KENILWORTH CODE § 134-12
1:656
carbon, soot, chemical substances, acid fumes or any other fumes which are
dangerous to public health.
§ 134-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-11-1979 by Ord. No.
79-19; at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. II)]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, or who shall permit
or do or suffer to be permitted or done any act or thing in this chapter
prohibited, shall, upon conviction, be subject to the general penalty set forth
in Chapter 1, Article I, General Penalty, of the Borough of Kenilworth Code.
§ 134-14. Payment of fines into treasury.
All fines imposed and collected under and by virtue of this chapter shall be
paid into the treasury of the Borough of Kenilworth.
Chapter 138
OBSCENE MATERIAL AND ACTS
§ 138-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EXHIBIT — The same meaning as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:34-2a(2).
OBSCENE MATERIAL — The same meaning as defined in N.J.S.A.
2C:34-2a(1).
PERSON — Includes an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association or other legal entity.
§ 138-2. Prohibition. [Amended 1-28-1998 by Ord. No. 98-1]
The sale, distribution, rental or exhibition of obscene materials anywhere
within the Borough of Kenilworth is hereby prohibited.
§ 138-3. (Reserved)116
§ 138-4. Violations and penalties.
In addition to any other penalties provided by law, any person violating
any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days or by a fine not exceeding
$1,000, or both, in the discretion of the court.
116. Editor's Note: Original § 138-3, Sexually oriented businesses, added 1-28-1998 by Ord. No.
98-1, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 134-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 138-5
1:657
§ 138-5. Remedies not exclusive. [Added 1-28-1998 by Ord. No.
98-1]
The remedy provisions of this chapter shall not be exclusive, and the state
shall have the right to prosecute a violator under any other ordinance or
statute available.
§ 138-6. Severability. [Added 1-28-1998 by Ord. No. 98-1]
If any section or portion of any section of this chapter shall be held to be
invalid for any reason, such invalidity shall not affect the validity of the
remaining sections or portions of sections of this chapter.
Chapter 140
(RESERVED)
Chapter 141
PARKS AND RECREATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Traffic Bureau — See Ch. 48. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 190.
§ 138-5 KENILWORTH CODE § 138-6
1:658
ARTICLE I
(Reserved)117
§ 141-1. through 141-4. (Reserved)
117. Editor's Note: Original Art. I, Joseph DiMario Playground, adopted 9-11-1979 by Ord. No.
79-22, as amended, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II). See now Ch. 190, Vehicles and Traffic.
§ 141-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 141-1
1:659

ARTICLE II
Trespassing
[Adopted 5-26-1981 by Ord. No. 81-7]
§ 141-4.1. Restrictions. [Amended 6-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-10]
No person other than officers or employees of the Borough of Kenilworth,
in the performance of their duties, shall enter or remain in any park or
playground owned by the Borough of Kenilworth from sunset to 6:00 a.m.
For purposes of this chapter, sunset shall be defined as:
§ 141-5. Posting of signs.
Appropriate signs setting this prohibition shall be posted at the entrance to
all parks and playgrounds of the Borough of Kenilworth to afford notice of
the provisions of this article.
§ 141-6. Violations and penalties. [Added at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
Any person, firm or corporation who or which violates any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction, be subject to the general penalty set forth in
Chapter 1, Article I, General Penalty, of the Borough of Kenilworth Code.
A. In the months of January, February, March, October, November, and
December: 5:00 p.m.
B. In the months of April, May, June, July, August, and September: 7:30
p.m.
§ 141-4.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 141-6
1:661
Chapter 142
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 144.
§ 141-6 KENILWORTH CODE § 141-6
1:662
ARTICLE I
General Regulations
[Adopted 4-25-1978 by Ord. No. 78-15; amended in its entirety
5-14-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8]
§ 142-1. Prohibited acts and conduct.
§ 142-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-12-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-14]
Any person, firm or corporation who or which violates any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction, be subject to the general penalty set forth in
Chapter 1, Article I, General Penalty, of the Borough of Kenilworth Code.
A. Expectorating or urinating in public. No person shall expectorate or
urinate on any public street, public sidewalk or in any other public
place or in any other place open to and used by the public or outdoors
upon any private property.
B. Damage or destruction of public or private property. No person shall
intentionally, knowingly or purposely damage or destroy public
property or the property of another person.
C. Violation of the public peace. No person shall commit, aid or abet
another in the commission of any act as defined in Article II, § 142-3 of
this chapter.
D. Trespass. No person shall enter into or upon any public property or
building within the Borough of Kenilworth except during normal
working hours or when the property or building is open for a specific
function or, in the case of a public park or recreation area, during the
hours as designated and posted by the Department of Recreation,
Police Department or Department of Public Works. Any person violating
the provisions of this section shall be considered a trespasser.
§ 142-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-2
1:663

ARTICLE II
Responsibility of Parents
[Adopted 6-9-1981 by Ord. No. 81-16]
§ 142-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the following meanings:
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18 years.
PARENT — Includes either or both parents of a minor, the legal guardians
of the minor, or any other person having the custody and care of the minor.
However, the term "parent" shall not include the parents or legal guardians
of a minor who has been emancipated by reason of court order, military
service or marriage.
VIOLATION OF THE PUBLIC PEACE — Includes:
§ 142-4. Notification.
Willfully defacing, damaging or destroying public or private property in
the Borough of Kenilworth.
A.
Committing an assault against the person of another as defined in
N.J.S.A. 2C:12-1. [Amended 9-24-1997 by Ord. No. 97-18]
B.
Consuming an alcoholic beverage or carrying an open container of
alcoholic beverage on public property or on any public right-of-way
within the Borough of Kenilworth. [Amended 9-24-1997 by Ord. No.
97-18]
C.
Using or possessing a controlled dangerous substance, as defined by
the laws of New Jersey, in the Borough of Kenilworth.
D.
Loitering in a public place in violation of Chapter 127 of the Code of the
Borough of Kenilworth.
E.
Littering in violation of Chapter 125 of the Code of the Borough of
Kenilworth.
F.
Committing any offense as defined in Chapters 33 and 34 of Title 2C of
the New Jersey Statutes. [Amended 9-24-1997 by Ord. No. 97-18]
G.
A. Whenever a minor shall be taken into custody or detained for the
commission of any violation of the public peace within the Borough of
Kenilworth the parent of such minor shall be immediately notified, in
writing, by the Chief of Police of such custody or detention, the reasons
therefor, and of the responsibility of the parents under this article.
B. When a minor is charged with a violation of the public peace and the
court or the Kenilworth Juvenile Conference Committee, as agent of the
court, makes an adjudication of delinquency, the Chief of Police shall
§ 142-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-4
1:665
§ 142-5. Presumption.
If at any time within 180 days of the giving of such notice mentioned in
§ 142-4 the minor shall again be convicted of a violation of the public peace,
it shall be presumed that the parent of the minor permitted or suffered said
minor to commit said violation.
§ 142-6. Prohibitions.
It shall be unlawful for any parent to assist, aid, abet, allow, permit, suffer
or encourage a minor to commit a violation of the public peace as defined
herein, either by overt act, by failure to act or by lack of supervision and
control over such minor.
§ 142-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-24-1997 by Ord. No.
97-18]
§ 142-8. Remedies not exclusive.
The remedy provisions of this article shall not be exclusive, and the state or
any other person shall have the right to proceed under any legally available
remedies.
§ 142-9. Severability.
If any section or portion of any section of this article shall be held to be
invalid for any reason, such invalidity shall not affect the validity of the
remaining sections or portions of sections of this article.
forthwith serve written notice of said adjudication of delinquency upon
the parents, setting forth the provisions of this article.
A. Any person who shall violate the terms of this article shall be punished
by a fine not to exceed $500, imprisonment for a period not to exceed
90 days, or both. However, the Municipal Court Judge may, in lieu of
imprisonment, impose a term of community service not to exceed 90
hours.
B. Any person who violates the terms of this chapter two or more times in
any twelve-calendar-month period shall, in addition to any
imprisonment or community service imposed, be subject to an
enhanced monetary fine of not less than $500 nor more than $1,000, in
the court's discretion.
§ 142-4 KENILWORTH CODE § 142-9
1:666
ARTICLE III
No Knock Registry
[Adopted 5-23-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-07118]
§ 142-10. Title.
This article shall be known as the Borough's No Knock Ordinance.
§ 142-11. No Knock Registry.
A registry shall be established in the Borough Clerk's office which contains
a list of addresses of those premises where the owner or occupant has
notified the Borough Clerk that he/she wishes to prohibit persons and
entities from canvassing, soliciting, peddling, itinerant vending or
attempting door-to-door sales on his/her premises.
§ 142-12. Display sticker.
§ 142-13. Availability of list.
§ 142-14. Violations.
Any person who appears at a property on the No Knock Registry, where
the property has been so posted in accordance with § 142-12 of this article,
shall be considered to be in violation of this article.
A. Any owner or occupant who requests his/her property be listed on the
No Knock Registry shall be able to procure at no charge from the
Borough Clerk's office a sticker for display at his/her premises which
shall serve as notice that this property is on the No Knock Registry.
There shall be no charge for registering.
B. If any premises is on the No Knock Registry, the owner or occupant
shall be obligated to post the sticker for display in a readily observable
location near the front door.
A. The list of addresses referred to in § 142-11 shall be available at the
Borough Clerk's office during normal business hours, and shall be
updated monthly.
B. Any person seeking to undertake any action referred to in § 142-11
above shall be obligated to obtain a current up-to-date copy of the
registry. It is, therefore, the obligation of the canvasser, solicitor,
peddler, itinerant vendor or door-to-door salesperson to have the most
up-to-date list from the registry.
C. The Borough Clerk shall provide any person seeking to canvass, solicit,
peddle, act as an itinerant vendor or undertake any door-to-door sale
with a copy of the current registry.
118. Editor's Note: This ordinance states it shall take effect 7-1-2018 or upon passage and
publication according to law, whichever is later.
§ 142-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-15
1:667
§ 142-15. Exceptions.
The following persons are exempt from compliance with this article:
§ 142-16. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the terms of this article shall be subject to revocation
of Borough-issued license as required by § 144-3 of the Borough Code and
the following penalties:
A. Members of religious groups who appear at the premises for those
purposes.
B. Political or political action group persons who appear at the premises
for those purposes.
C. Annual fundraising events by bona fide 501C3 organizations.
D. Halloween trick or treaters.
A. First offense: a fine of $250.
B. Second offense: a fine of $500.
C. Third or subsequent offense: a fine of not less than $1,000, nor more
than $2,000 and, in the discretion of the court, jail of not more than 90
days.
§ 142-15 KENILWORTH CODE § 142-16
1:668
Chapter 144
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees and licenses — See Ch. 91.
Food-handling establishments — See Ch. 100.
Garage sales — See Ch. 104.
Land use — See Ch. 120.
No Knock Registry — See Ch. 142, Art. III.
Food and beverage vending — See Ch. 202.
§ 144-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to prevent fraud, crime and unethical and
dishonest business practices and to protect the legitimate privacy
expectations of the citizens of the Borough while at home.
§ 144-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CANVASSER — A person who goes from place to place by travelling on the
streets or from house to house for the purpose of soliciting opinions or sales
orders.
MERCHANDISE — Includes all goods, wares, food, fruit, vegetables, farm
products, trees, shrubs, flowers, magazines, periodicals and all kinds of
articles of personal property for domestic use. Orders or contracts for
services, home improvements or alterations shall be considered
"merchandise" within the terms of this chapter.
NON-PROFIT-MAKING VENDOR — A person who sells goods or services,
the proceeds of which are devoted exclusively to the purpose of a
philanthropic, charitable or religious society on whose behalf he acts as
agent, with or without pay.
PEDDLER or HAWKER — A person who goes from place to place by
travelling on the streets or from house to house and carries with him goods,
wares or merchandise for the purpose of selling and delivering them to
consumers or buyers.
SOLICITOR — A person who:
Sells goods by sample or takes orders for services, home improvements
or alterations to be furnished, done or delivered at a future date,
with or without accepting an advance payment for the goods, wares,
merchandise or services sold or contracted for; or
A.
Seeks donations/contributions on behalf of charitable organizations or
for charitable purposes.
B.
§ 142-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-2
1:669
TRANSIENT MERCHANT or ITINERANT VENDOR — Persons, corporations
or partnerships, whether principal or agent, who engage in a merchandising
business in the Borough with intent to close or discontinue such business
within one year from the date of commencement, including those who, for
the purpose of carrying on such business, hire, lease, rent or occupy any
land, building, structure or railroad car for the exhibition and sale of such
goods, wares and merchandise. "Transient merchant" shall also include any
person who, as a private enterprise, schedules, organizes or promotes any
entertainments, concerts, athletic events, contests, competitions or beauty
pageants to be held on a nonregular basis and which requires the payment
of a fee for entry or admission, wherein such event is to take place within
the confines of the Borough of Kenilworth; provided, however, that no such
person shall be classified as "transient merchant" if he is sponsored by any
bona fide civic, fraternal, educational or religious organization having a
local chapter in the Borough of Kenilworth. Nothing in this definition shall
be construed to affect the sale of fruits, vegetables and farm products, such
as meat, poultry, butter and eggs. (Reference N.J.S.A. 45:24-1.)
§ 144-3. License required.
A. Peddler, hawker, solicitor and canvasser. It shall be unlawful for any
peddler, hawker, solicitor or canvasser to sell or offer to sell or dispose
of any goods, wares or merchandise or to contract for services to be
rendered or to take or offer to take orders for any goods, wares,
merchandise or services to be rendered or delivered in the future to any
household or from door to door within the Borough without first
obtaining a license therefor as provided in this chapter.
B. Transient merchant or itinerant vendor. It shall be unlawful for any
transient merchant or itinerant vendor to engage in a merchandising
business as defined in § 144-2 without first obtaining a license therefor
as provided in this chapter. For the purpose of this section, each
individual location shall require a separate license.
C. Charitable fund-raisers and/or drives.
(1) Before any charitable or nonprofit organization conducts or
attempts to conduct any activity permitted by this chapter at a fixed
location within the Borough of Kenilworth, that organization must
first designate a responsible person, who qualifies for exemption
under § 144-9C of this chapter, and such person shall file with the
Borough Police Department an application pursuant to § 144-4. The
Police Department shall also be provided with a list of all persons
who will participate to assist in the charitable or nonprofit
activities, and each person so listed shall be a bona fide member of
such charitable or nonprofit organization or otherwise qualify for
exempt status.
(2) With regard to § 144-9C(2), only the responsible person applying
for the license shall submit proof of exemption; however, any other
person participating or assisting in a permitted activity must be a
§ 144-2 KENILWORTH CODE § 144-3
1:670
§ 144-4. Application for license.
§ 144-5. Contents of application; accompanying information.
§ 144-6. Investigation; approval or rejection.
bona fide member of the organization qualifying for exemption and,
upon request of any member of the Police Department, provide
proof of the same. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
A. Any person desiring a license to peddle, hawk, solicit or canvass or any
transient merchant or itinerant vendor desiring a license to engage in a
merchandising business shall, at least 20 business days prior to the
event, file an application with the Police Department on a form supplied
by the Police Department. The application shall be in duplicate and
sworn to by the applicant. [Amended 3-29-1995 by Ord. No. 95-7]
B. Persons desiring an exemption from the provisions of this chapter, as
provided in § 144-9, shall be required to file the application provided for
in Subsection A above.
A. The Chief of Police of the Borough of Kenilworth is hereby authorized
and directed to draft and establish a uniform application as required by
§ 144-4 of this chapter. The Chief of Police shall also establish and
promulgate rules and regulations as to the contents of said application
and any accompanying information that the Chief of Police shall deem
necessary in order to facilitate the issuance of licenses and to enforce
the provisions of this chapter. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
B. Said application shall be accompanied by: [Amended 10-12-1994 by
Ord. No. 94-16]
(1) A copy of a valid certificate of authority empowering the applicant
to collect sales tax, unless the applicant is exempt by the Sales and
Use Tax Act119 from collecting said tax.
(2) A letter or written statement from the individual, firm, corporation,
company or group with whom or with which the applicant is
associated, certifying that the applicant is authorized to make the
application and to act as his or its representative.
(3) A property damage and/or cleanup deposit of $250, which may, in
the discretion of the Chief of Police, be required, depending upon
the activity to be performed.
(4) Fees, as hereinafter prescribed.
119. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 54:32B-1 et seq.
§ 144-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-6
1:671
§ 144-7. Issuance of license; nontransferability. [Amended at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 144-8. Possession and exhibition of license; list of employees.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
A. The Chief of Police may cause such investigation to be made of the
applicant, including but not limited to an investigation of the business
and/or stated purpose of the applicant(s) or the applicant's corporation,
company, organization or group, as he deems necessary for the
protection of the public good. Said investigation shall not include the
taking of the applicant's fingerprints unless probable cause has been
established in regard to possible criminal activity of the applicant. The
cost of fingerprinting shall be paid by the applicant.
B. In the event that the Chief of Police causes such an investigation, the
Chief of Police shall signify his approval or rejection of the application
on or before the 20th day of the date the completed application is
received. [Amended 3-29-1995 by Ord. No. 95-7]
A. Upon approval by the Chief of Police and upon payment of the required
fees, the Chief of Police shall issue all licenses and keep all necessary
records pertaining thereto.
B. Such issued licenses shall not be transferable or assignable to any other
person.
C. Each individual, whether an employer or employee, who shall
personally engage in the action set forth in § 144-3A of this chapter
shall obtain the necessary license.
D. Each employer engaged in the activities set forth in § 144-3B of this
chapter shall obtain the necessary license.
A. Every licensee shall have his license in his possession or on the
premises and prominently displayed while engaged in the business
permitted. The licensee shall produce his license at the request of any
person solicited, any Borough police officer or any official of the
Borough.
B. Every licensee shall, in person, report to the Chief of Police or, in his
absence, the officer in charge at police headquarters to notify the
Kenilworth Police Department of his presence within the community on
any date where the permitted activity takes place. While canvassing,
the canvasser shall display said license in a prominent and suitable
place on his outer garment.
C. In the case of transient merchants or itinerant vendors, at the time of
application each merchant or vendor shall provide the Police
Department with a list of all employees, which list shall include names,
addresses, telephone numbers and social security numbers. In the
§ 144-6 KENILWORTH CODE § 144-8
1:672
§ 144-9. Fees; exemptions. [Amended 3-29-1995 by Ord. No. 95-7;
9-12-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-14]
§ 144-10. Term of license; renewal. [Amended 9-12-2018 by Ord.
No. 2018-14]
A license shall be issued for a term not to exceed 30 days. Upon renewal
of the license, the payment of the application fee is waived if the license is
renewed within 60 days of the expiration of the previously issued license.
§ 144-11. General restrictions.
event that an employee is discharged, the Police Department shall
be notified within 24 hours and shall be supplied with a written
explanation setting forth the reasons for the discharge. In the event
that a new person is employed, that person's name, address, telephone
number and social security number shall be provided to the Police
Department within 24 hours of hiring.
A. An application fee as set forth in Chapter 91, Fees and Licenses, shall
be paid for the processing of each license application.
B. The license fee, which shall be valid for a period of 30 days, shall be set
forth in Chapter 91, Fees and Licenses.
C. The following persons are exempt from the payment of any license fees
upon a showing of proof satisfactory to the Chief of Police:
(1) Non-profit-making vendors.
(2) Any person honorably discharged from the military service of the
United States possessing a peddler's license issued in conformity
with N.J.S.A. 45:24-9 and 45:24-10.
(3) Any person who is an exempt fireman, as defined by N.J.S.A.
45:24-9 and 45:24-10, possessing a license in conformity with said
law.
(4) Bona fide members or representatives of any church, social, civic,
fraternal, political or philanthropic organization, so long as the
intended activity is to benefit only the organization to which the
member belongs.
(5) Any other person holding a license or permit issued under any
legislation of the United States Government or by a state agency
pursuant to statute.
A. No person licensed under this chapter shall stand in the roadway or
right-of-way of any street, highway or avenue to stop, impede, hinder or
delay the progress of a vehicle for the purpose of soliciting the purchase
of goods, merchandise or tickets or for the purpose of soliciting
contributions for any cause, and the only question of law and fact in
§ 144-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-11
1:673
§ 144-12. Revocation of license. [Amended 5-23-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-07; 9-12-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-14]
A permit granted as provided in this chapter shall be revoked by the Chief of
Police or, in his absence, the officer in charge of police headquarters on the
basis of further investigation with regard to the character of the permittee
or upon the failure or default of the permittee to observe the provisions
of this chapter or the Borough's "No Knock Ordinance," Ordinance No.
2018-06.120
§ 144-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-12-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-14]
Any person, firm or corporation who or which violates any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to the general penalty set forth in
Chapter 1, Article I, General Penalty, of the Borough of Kenilworth Code.
§ 144-14. Exceptions.
determining guilt under this section shall be whether goods,
merchandise or tickets were tendered or offered for sale or whether a
contribution was solicited.
B. No person shall sell, solicit or offer to sell or solicit within the Borough
except between the hours of: 9:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., Monday through
Friday; 10:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m., Saturday. No person shall sell, solicit or
offer to sell or solicit within the Borough on Sundays or federal
holidays. [Amended 5-23-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-07]
C. No minor under the age of 18 years of age shall peddle, hawk, solicit or
canvas within the Borough without the direct supervision of an adult
whose name, address and telephone number shall be provided in the
application for the license. Direct supervision includes the presence of
that adult within the Borough at all times that the peddling, hawking,
soliciting or canvassing is taking place. The age requirement contained
herein notwithstanding, any person licensed pursuant to this chapter
shall, at all times, comply with all state and federal child labor laws and
regulations. [Amended 9-12-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-14]
D. The provisions of this chapter notwithstanding, no person, firm,
corporation, nonprofit corporation or any persons exempt from the fee
requirements of § 144-9C of this chapter shall sell or offer to sell or
dispose of any goods, wares or merchandise at a fixed location within
the Borough of Kenilworth unless such activity is a permitted use within
the zone district where the activity is proposed to be located or unless
otherwise excepted under § 144-14 of this chapter. [Added 3-29-1995
by Ord. No. 95-7]
A. The provision of this chapter shall not apply to:
120. Editor's Note: See Ch. 142, Art. III, No Knock Registry.
§ 144-11 KENILWORTH CODE § 144-14
1:674
§ 144-15. Enforcement.
(1) Sales at wholesale to retail merchants by commercial travelers or
selling agents in the usual course of business.
(2) Wholesale trade shows and/or conventions.
(3) Sales of goods, wares or merchandise by sample catalog or
brochure for future delivery.
(4) Retail sale of ice cream and/or flavored water ice by motor vehicle
during the summer months.
(5) Any general sale, fair, auction or bazaar sponsored by any civic,
fraternal, educational or religious organization, so long as such
activity is contained wholly within the property lines of such
organization and provided, further, that all proceeds of said sale
are to be paid directly to the exempt organization sponsoring the
activity. [Amended 3-29-1995 by Ord. No. 95-7]
(6) Garage sales held on the premises devoted to residential use.
(7) Sales of crafts or items made by hand and sold or offered for sale by
the person making such crafts or handmade items, provided that
the same are offered for sale on the residential or commercial
premises owned or leased by said person.
(8) Any new home construction contractor, residential developer,
master plumber or electrical contractor who is licensed or
regulated by any state, county or municipal agency, division,
department or professional board and any contractor of home
improvements as defined in the New Jersey Administrative Code
who, in the normal course of business, advertises or performs his
services in the Borough of Kenilworth, provided that any such
tradesman complies with all state, county and municipal
regulations enforceable by the Borough Construction Official.
(9) Sale of produce, flowers or other agriculture products from
buildings or from roadside stands where the premises in question
are owned or leased by the merchant, it being the express intention
of this chapter that nothing shall prohibit the sale of agriculture
products on land owned by the merchant unless prohibited by
Chapter 120, Land Use, Part 3, Zoning. Prior to the commencement
of sales, the merchant shall apply to the Borough Zoning
Enforcement Official and Borough Building Inspector for approval
to ensure compliance with Chapter 120, Land Use, Part 3, Zoning.
B. "Leased" shall be defined as a written lease of premises for a period of
not less than one year.
A. The Municipal Court shall have jurisdiction over proceedings to enforce
and collect any penalty imposed because of a violation of this chapter.
§ 144-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-15
1:675
Chapter 150
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unfit buildings — See Ch. 71.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 78.
Fees and licenses — See Ch. 91.
Garbage, rubbish, refuse and recycling — See
Ch. 106.
Graffiti — See Ch. 109.
Littering — See Ch. 125.
Nuisances — See Ch. 134.
The proceedings shall be summary and in accordance with N.J.S.A.
2A:58-10 et seq. Process shall be in the form of a summons and shall
issue from the Police Department as plaintiff. [Amended 9-12-2018
by Ord. No. 2018-14]
B. The Borough of Kenilworth Police Department, Zoning Officer,
Construction Official and Health Department shall have the authority to
enforce the provisions of this chapter.
§ 144-15 KENILWORTH CODE § 144-15
1:676
ARTICLE I
General Provisions and Definitions
§ 150-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety and
general welfare in or upon premises in the Borough of Kenilworth, as
hereinafter set forth, by:
§ 150-2. Definitions.
A. Establishing minimum maintenance standards for premises in the
Borough of Kenilworth.
B. Affixing the responsibilities of owners, tenants, operators and
occupants of such premises.
C. Providing for proper notification for violation of this chapter.
D. Providing for collection of costs incurred by the municipality.
E. Providing for penalties for violations of this chapter.
A. All definitions of the latest editions of the International Property
Maintenance Code published by the International Code Council (ICC)
and the New Jersey State Uniform Construction Code are incorporated
by reference to this chapter. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
B. The following terms, wherever used herein or referred to in this
chapter, shall have the meaning assigned to them, unless a different
meaning clearly appears from the context:
ABANDONED VEHICLE — Any vehicle, including a trailer, which is
without a currently valid license plate and is in either a rusted,
wrecked, discarded, dismantled, partially dismantled, inoperative or an
abandoned condition.
COMMERCIAL PREMISES — A building or buildings or any part
thereof and the lot or tract of land upon which the building or buildings
are situated where commercial activity of any kind takes place.
Commercial activity shall include but is not limited to gasoline service
stations; stores for retail sales; liquor stores, taverns and inns;
restaurants, including but not limited to drive-in restaurants, snack
bars or hot dog, hamburger or ice cream stands; professional activities,
including but not limited to medical, dental, legal, architectural and
accounting; personal services, including but not limited to real estate,
insurance, barbershops and hairdressers; repair shops of all kinds; and
amusements, including but not limited to movies, skating rinks and
bowling alleys; whether part of a shopping area or not. Commercial
activity shall not include sale of agricultural products produced on the
premises.
§ 150-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-2
1:677
DEFACE — To cover, mark, write on, paint, color or otherwise mar,
disfigure or draw whatsoever on any private property of any nature
without the express consent of the owner.[Added 9-12-2007 by Ord.
No. 2007-10]
DETERIORATION — The condition of a building or structure or part
thereof characterized by holes, breaks, rot, crumbling, cracking,
peeling, rusting or other evidence of physical decay or neglect, lack of
maintenance or excessive use.
DWELLING UNIT — A room or group of rooms located within a
dwelling and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are
used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
EXPOSED TO PUBLIC VIEW — Any premises, building or structure, or
part thereof, which may be lawfully viewed by the public.
EXTERIOR OF THE PREMISES — Open space on the premises outside
of any building located thereon.
EXTERMINATION — The control and elimination of insects, rodents
and vermin.
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and/or consumption of food. (See also
"refuse" and "rubbish.")
GRAFFITI — Any form of inscription, word, figure, marking or design
that is marked, etched, scratched, drawn on or painted on any building,
structure, fixture or other improvement, whether permanent or
temporary, including, by way of example only and without limitation,
fencing surrounding construction sites, whether public or private,
without the consent of the owner of the property, or the owner's
authorized agent, which is visible from the private right-of-way.[Added
9-12-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-10]
HABITABLE ROOMS — Rooms used or designed for use by one or more
persons for living or sleeping or cooking and eating, but not including
bathrooms, water closet compartments, home laundries, serving and
storage pantries, corridors, foyers, vestibules, cellars, heater rooms,
boiler rooms or utility rooms. Other rooms or spaces that are not used
frequently or for an extended period of time or have less than 50 square
feet of interior floor area shall not be considered as "habitable rooms."
HARBORAGE — Any condition, man-made or natural, which affords a
breeding or hiding place for rodents, insects or other pests.
INFESTATION — The presence of insects, rodents, vermin or other
pests on the premises which constitute a health hazard either to the
occupants of the premises and/or to surrounding properties and/or
residents.
MAINTENANCE — The general upkeep, replacement or mending of
existing grounds, structures and appurtenances as are required in the
interest of public safety, health and welfare.
§ 150-2 KENILWORTH CODE § 150-2
1:678
MIXED OCCUPANCY — Any building containing one or more dwelling
units or rooming units and also having a portion thereof devoted to
nondwelling uses or as a motel.
MULTIPLE DWELLING — Any building or structure and land
appurtenant thereto, or any portion thereof, in which three or more
units of dwelling space are occupied or intended to be occupied by
three or more persons living independently of each other, provided that
motels, hotels and boardinghouses are excluded from this definition.
NUISANCE —
OCCUPANT — Any person having actual possession of the premises or
any part thereof.
OPERATOR — Any person who has charge, care or control of a dwelling
or premises or any part thereof, whether with or without the knowledge
and consent of the owner.
Any public nuisance recognized in common law or in equity
jurisprudence or as provided by the statutes or the State of New
Jersey or the ordinances of the Borough of Kenilworth.
(1)
Any attractive nuisance which may prove detrimental to the health
or safety of children, whether in a building, on the exterior of
premises or upon an unoccupied lot. Attractive nuisances include
but are not limited to abandoned wells, shafts, basements,
excavations, abandoned swimming pools, abandoned iceboxes and/
or refrigerators, motor vehicles, any structurally unsound fences
or structures, lumber, trash, fences, debris or vegetation, such as
poison ivy, oak or sumac, which may prove hazardous for inquisitive
minors.
(2)
Physical conditions dangerous to human life or detrimental to the
health of persons on or near the premises where the conditions
exist.
(3)
Overcrowding of a room with occupants in violation of the State
Fire Code.
(4)
Inadequate or unsanitary sewage or plumbing facilities in violation
of this chapter or the provisions of the State Uniform Construction
Code.
(5)
Unsanitary conditions or anything offensive to the senses or
dangerous to health in violation of this chapter.
(6)
Fire hazards, which shall include but not be limited to the
maintenance and/or storage of combustible materials, the
maintenance and/or storage of flammable chemicals and/or the
maintenance of an uncontrolled open fire.
(7)
(8) Insufficient ventilation or illumination in violation of this chapter.
§ 150-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-2
1:679
OWNER — Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others,
shall have legal or equitable title to any premises, with or without
actual possession thereof, or who shall have charge, care or control
of any dwelling unit as owner or agent of the owner, or as executor,
executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee, receiver or guardian
of the estate or as a mortgagee in possession, regardless of how such
possession was obtained. Any person who is a lessee subletting or
assigning any part of any dwelling or dwelling unit shall be deemed to
be a co-owner with the lessor and shall have joint responsibility over
the portion of the premises sublet or assigned by said lessee.
PARTIES IN INTEREST — All individuals, associations and corporations
who have interest of record in a building and any who are in actual
possession thereof.
PERSON — Includes all manner of corporations and commercial
entities as well as individuals.
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land, including the buildings or
structures thereon.
PUBLIC AUTHORITY — Any officer who is in charge of any department
or branch of the government of the Borough of Kenilworth, County
of Union or State of New Jersey relating to health, fire, building
regulations or to other activities concerning buildings in the
municipality.121
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid waste (except body
waste), including but not limited to garbage, rubbish, ashes, street
cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles and solid market and
industrial wastes (See also "garbage" and "rubbish.")
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid waste consisting of both combustible
and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes,
cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding,
crockery and similar materials. (See also "garbage" and "refuse.")
SHOPPING CENTER — One or more buildings or parts thereof
designed or existing as a unit, occupied or to be occupied by one or
more businesses for the conduct of retail sales, including parking lots.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction for
occupancy, use or ornamentation, whether installed on, above or below
the surface of a parcel of land. Unless the context clearly requires a
different meaning, the word "structure" shall be construed when used
herein as though followed by the words " or part or parts thereof and
all equipment therein."
121. Editor's Note: The definition of "public officer," which previously followed this definition,
was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II). See
§ 150-15, Enforcement officer.
§ 150-2 KENILWORTH CODE § 150-3
1:680
§ 150-3. Applicability.
Every residential and nonresidential building, structure and lot and the
premises or part of the premises on which it is situated in the Borough
of Kenilworth, previously or presently used or intended to be used for
dwelling, commercial, business, recreational, service, transportation,
institutional, religious, charitable, quasi-public, professional, warehousing
or industrial occupancy and uses accessory thereto, shall comply with the
provisions of this chapter, whether or not any such building or structure
or use of the premises shall have been constructed, altered or repaired
before or after the enactment of this chapter and irrespective of any permits
or licenses which may have been issued for the use or occupancy of such
building or for the installation or repair of equipment or facilities prior to
the effective date of this chapter. Vacant lots, lands and premises are also
required to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 150-4. Higher standards to prevail. [Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
In any case where the provisions of this chapter impose a higher or stricter
standard than those set forth in any other ordinance or regulation of the
Borough of Kenilworth or under the laws or regulations of the State of New
Jersey or any of its agencies, then the standards as set forth herein shall
prevail. If the provisions of this chapter impose a lower or lesser standard
than any other regulation or ordinance of the Borough of Kenilworth or
the State of New Jersey or any of its agencies, then the higher standard
contained in any such other ordinance, regulation or law shall prevail. All of
the terms and provisions of the International Property Maintenance Code as
published by the International Code Council (ICC) are incorporated herein,
and, to the extent such terms and provisions impose a higher or stricter
standard than the terms contained herein, the terms of the International
Property Maintenance Code shall be applied.
§ 150-5. Compliance with other ordinances.
Compliance with this chapter shall not constitute a defense against any
violation of any other ordinance of the Borough of Kenilworth applicable to
any structure or premises, nor shall any one act of compliance constitute a
defense against any subsequent or other violation of this chapter.
§ 150-6. Responsibilities of owner, operator and occupant to be
independent of each other.
Owners, operators and occupants shall have all the duties, obligations and
responsibilities prescribed in this chapter, and no such person or entity shall
be relieved of any such duty, obligation or responsibility hereunder nor be
entitled to assert as a defense against any charge made against him or
them for violation of this chapter the fact that another owner, operator or
occupant or any other third person or entity is also responsible therefor and
in violation thereof.
§ 150-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-7
1:681
§ 150-7. Applicability of building code.
Any alterations to buildings, structures or appurtenances thereto or
changes of use therein, which may be caused directly or indirectly by the
enforcement of this chapter, shall be done in accordance with all applicable
sections of the State Uniform Construction Code.
§ 150-8. Applicability of land use regulations.
Nothing contained in this chapter or any requirement of compliance
herewith shall be deemed to alter, impair or affect the application of the
Land Use Ordinance or zoning laws of the municipality.122
§ 150-9. Existing remedies.
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to abolish or impair existing
remedies of the municipality or its officers or agencies relating to the
removal or demolition of any buildings or structures which are deemed to
be dangerous, unsafe or unsanitary.123
122. Editor's Note: See Ch. 120, Land Use.
123. Editor's Note: See Ch. 71, Buildings, Unfit.
§ 150-7 KENILWORTH CODE § 150-9
1:682
ARTICLE II
Owners, Operators and Occupants; Duties and Responsibilities
§ 150-10. Compliance required; remediation by Department of
Public Works; reimbursement of costs.
A. In furtherance of the purposes of this chapter, it shall be the duty and
responsibility of the owner, operator or occupant of premises to comply
with any or all of the requirements and standards of this chapter, to
keep the premises free of conditions which constitute violations hereof
and to promptly remove, prevent or abate such conditions.
B. If after notice of violation has been sent pursuant to § 150-13 herein and
the time period within which to respond has expired the violation has
not been corrected, the Zoning Officer may direct the Superintendent
of the Department of Public Works to remediate or cure the condition,
the cost of which shall be assessed to and become a lien against the real
property affected, and the Tax Collector is hereby authorized and
directed to add such assessment to the property tax account of the
affected property. [Added 8-27-1997 by Ord. No. 97-15]
C. Department of Public Works remediation charges for property cleanup.
[Added 2-9-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-03]
Model **Price per Hour
Street sweeper $150
Loader (3 yard) $200
Loader (1.5 yard) $150
Sewer jet truck $100
Recycler truck $100
Sanitation truck $150 + tipping fee (1 ton
minimum)
Large dump truck $100
Large dump truck with snow plow $150
Dump truck — A.P.B. $150
Mason dump truck with snow
plow
$100
Mason dump truck $75
Jeep $75
Pick-up truck $75
Pick-up truck with snow plow $100
Leaf machine $100
Brush chipper $150
Stump grinder $75
§ 150-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-10
1:683
§ 150-11. Exterior maintenance standards.
The exterior of all premises shall be kept free of the following matter,
materials or conditions:
Model **Price per Hour
Chain saw $25
Compressor with accessories $150
Asphalt hot box $100 + asphalt (1 ton minimum)
Plate compactor $25
Cement mixer $50 + cement (1 bag minimum)
Gas powered blower $25
Weed wacker $15
Hedge trimmer $15
Lawn mower $15
Deck mower $30
Landscaping trailer $25
Line striper machine $100 + paint (1 5-gallon container
minimum)
Snow blower $25
Miscellaneous tools (i.e., shovel,
rake)
$2
Gas-powered generator $25
Three-inch trash pump $25
Safety cones/barricades $2
** There will be a minimum charge of one hour for personnel and
equipment.
* Overtime and holiday pay will be charged accordingly for all public
works employees.
A. Refuse, as hereinabove defined.
B. Rubbish, as hereinabove defined.
C. Abandoned, uncovered or structurally unsound wells, shafts, towers,
exterior cellar openings, basement hatchways, foundations, excavations
or outhouses.
D. Abandoned iceboxes, refrigerators, boilers, hot-water heaters,
television sets and other similar major appliances.
E. Structurally unsafe or unsound buildings, structures or fences.
F. Rodents, vermin, pest infestations or rodent harborages.
§ 150-10 KENILWORTH CODE § 150-11
1:684
§ 150-12. Responsibility for exterior maintenance.
Without limitation by the foregoing, it shall also be the duty and
responsibility of owners, occupants or operators to keep the exterior of
all premises structurally sound, in good general repair and sufficiently
maintained to an extent so as to prevent and avoid conditions that violate
the purposes of this chapter as hereinabove set forth in § 150-1.
§ 150-12.1. Responsibility of owner for abutting property. [Added
10-12-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-15]
G. Animal excrement.
H. Hidden or uncovered ground or surface hazards, such as holes, sudden
depressions and sharp or jagged projections or obstructions.
I. Buried rubble, refuse or rubbish.
J. Nuisances, as hereinabove defined.
K. Dangerously loose and overhanging objects, including but not limited to
dead trees or limbs, accumulations of ice or any object, natural or manmade,
which could threaten the health and safety of persons if caused
to fall or other similar dangerously loose and overhanging objects
which, by reason of their location above ground level, constitute an
actual hazard to persons or vehicles in the vicinity thereof.
L. Inadequate or unsafe foundation walls, piers and columns and other
similar structurally unsound, damaged or defective load-bearing
components which are incapable of bearing imposed loads safely at all
points.
M. Structurally unsound, loose, dangerous, crumbling, missing, broken,
rotted or unsafe exterior portions of buildings or structures, including
but not limited to porches, landings, balconies, stairways, handrails,
steps, walls, overhangs, roofs, fences, supporting members, timbers,
abutments, fire escapes and signs and loose, crumbling or falling
bricks, stones, mortar or plaster.
N. Broken glass or windows and rotted, missing or substantially destroyed
window frames and sashes, door frames, exterior doors or other major
exterior component parts of buildings or structures.
O. Graffiti or defacing of property, as hereinabove defined. [Added
9-12-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-10]
P. Grass and/or weeds shall not be permitted to exceed six inches in
height. [Added 10-11-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-10]
A. The owner and/or occupant shall be responsible for the maintenance of
the area abutting such property between the street property line and
pavement or roadway, including landscape, ground cover, construction
§ 150-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-12.1
1:685
of curbing and/or sidewalk, and reconstruction and/or replacement of
defective or hazardous conditions of walkways.
B. The maintenance standards of § 150-11 of the Borough Code shall also
apply to the abutting property between the street property line and
pavement or roadway.
§ 150-12.1 KENILWORTH CODE § 150-12.1
1:686
ARTICLE III
Administration and Enforcement
§ 150-13. Notice of violation; corrective action required. [Amended
at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 150-14. Emergency conditions; unsafe structures; repair, closing
or demolition.125 [Amended 6-10-1998 by Ord. No. 98-15]
A. Whenever the enforcement officer determines that there is or has been
a violation of any provision of this chapter, he shall give notice of such
violation to the person, persons or entities responsible therefor. Such
notice shall be in writing and shall include a concise statement of the
reasons for its issuance. Such notice shall be deemed to be properly and
sufficiently served if a copy thereof is sent by registered or certified
mail to the last known address of the person or entity upon which the
same is served, as shown by the most recent tax lists of the municipality,
or a copy thereof is handed to said person or persons or a copy thereof
is left at the usual place of abode or office of said persons or entities.
Notice shall be given as aforesaid within or without the municipality.
The notice shall also state that unless the violation is abated, removed,
cured, prevented or desisted from within 10 days of the date of service
of such notice (exclusive of the date of service), a summons shall issue
for such violation. The enforcement officer may, at the time he issues
the notice, extend the period for correction of the violation stated in the
notice for a period in excess of the aforesaid 10 days if, in his judgment,
the abatement, removal, prevention, cessation or cure of the condition
violated cannot reasonably be effected within the ten-day period, and in
such cases the enforcement officer shall state such reasonably required
extended period in the notice, which shall then be applicable instead of
the aforesaid 10 days. In the event that the violation is not abated,
removed, cured, prevented or desisted from or otherwise fully
remedied within said ten-day period or within such extended period as
set forth in the notice, a summons shall then issue against the person,
persons, entity or entities so notified.
B. Violations of the ground cover height referenced in § 150-11P shall
provide for an additional 10 days for the abatement of the violation
prior to the issuance of a fine and/or the Borough commencing
corrective action. [Added 10-11-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-10124]
A. Whenever the enforcement officer finds that an emergency condition
exists such that a building or structure is unfit for human habitation or
occupancy or use, the enforcement officer shall cause to be served upon
the owner of and parties in interest in such building or structure a
complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing a notice
that a hearing will be held before the enforcement officer, or his
124. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that it would take effect 20 days after the first
publication thereof after final passage as provided by law.
125. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 71, Buildings, Unfit.
§ 150-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-14
1:687
designated agent, at a place therein fixed not less than seven days
nor more than 30 days after serving of said complaint. The owner and
parties in interest shall be given the right to file an answer to the
complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise, and give testimony at
the place and time fixed in the complaint. The rules of evidence shall
not be controlling in such hearings.
B. If, after such notice and hearing, the enforcement officer, or his
designated agent, determines that the building or structure under
consideration is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use, he
shall state, in writing, his findings of fact in support of such
determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner
thereof and the parties in interest an order:
(1) Requiring the repair, alteration or improvement of said building or
structure by the owner within a reasonable time, which time shall
be set forth in the order or, at the option of the owner, to vacate or
have said building or structure vacated and closed within the time
set forth in that order; and
(2) If the building or structure is in such condition as to make it
dangerous to the health and safety of persons on or near the
premises, and the owner fails to repair, alter or improve said
building within the time specified in the order, then the owner shall
be required to remove or demolish the building within a reasonable
time as specified in said order of removal.
C. If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or improve or,
at the option of the owner, to vacate and close the building, the
enforcement officer may cause such building to be repaired, altered or
improved, or to be vacated and closed; the enforcement officer shall
cause to be posted on the main entrance of any building so closed a
placard with the following words: "This building is unfit for human
habitation or occupancy or use; the use or occupation of this building is
prohibited and unlawful." [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
D. If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the
building, the enforcement officer may cause such building to be
removed or demolished or may contract for the removal or demolition
thereof after advertisement for, and receipt of, bids therefor.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
E. If the enforcement officer is required to act pursuant to Subsection C or
D herein, the cost of the filing of legal papers, expert witnesses' fees,
search fees and advertising charges incurred in the course of any
proceeding taken pursuant to this chapter determined in the favor of
the Borough of Kenilworth as well as the costs for repairs, alterations or
improvements, or vacating and closing, or removal or demolition, if any,
shall be a municipal lien against the real property upon which such cost
§ 150-14 KENILWORTH CODE § 150-14
1:688
§ 150-15. Enforcement officer.
The Zoning Officer, assisted by the Construction Official, Borough Health
Officer and Borough Fire Official, shall be responsible for enforcement of
this chapter.
§ 150-16. Violations and penalties. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
Any occupant, operator or owner who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, be subject
for each violation to a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $500,
imprisonment for a term not to exceed six months, community service not to
exceed 90 days or a combination of the foregoing. Every day that a violation
occurs or exists shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation of this
chapter.
§ 150-16.1. Habitual offenders; violations and penalties. [Added
8-27-1997 by Ord. No. 97-15]
was incurred. The enforcement officer shall file with the Tax Assessor
or other custodian of the record of tax liens a detailed statement of all
costs incurred and shall immediately forward a copy of the same to the
owner by registered mail.
F. Any owner or party in interest may, within 30 days from the date of the
filing of the lien certificate, proceed in a summary manner in the
Superior Court to contest the reasonableness of the amount or the
accuracy of the costs set forth in the municipal lien certificate.
G. If an actual and immediate danger to life is posed by the threatened
collapse of any fire-damaged or other structurally unsafe building, the
enforcement officer may, after taking such measures as may be
necessary to make such building temporarily safe, seek a judgment in
summary proceedings for the demolition thereof. [Amended at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
H. The provisions of §§ 150-13 and 150-14A notwithstanding, if the
Borough Construction Official or any subcode official determines that a
building or structure is unsafe pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.32 of the
State Uniform Construction Code (UCC), the provisions of the UCC
shall apply, and the enforcing officer shall act in accordance therewith,
and the occupant, owner and operator shall have all remedies and
rights of appeal as provided therein.
A. For the purpose of this section, a "habitual offender" shall be defined as
any person found to have violated the provisions of this chapter two or
more times within any twelve-calendar-month period.
§ 150-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-16.1
1:689
B. Any person found to be a habitual offender of this chapter shall, in
addition to the penalties provided for in § 150-16, upon conviction be
fined the sum of $1,000.
§ 150-16.1 KENILWORTH CODE § 150-16.1
1:690
ARTICLE IV
Repealer; Severability
§ 150-17. Repealer.
In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with
or inconsistent with a provision of any other ordinance, rule or regulation of
the municipality which establishes a lower standard for the promotion and
protection of the safety, health and welfare of the people, the provisions of
this chapter shall prevail, and such other ordinances, rules or regulations
or parts thereof are hereby declared to be repealed to the extent that they
may be so found to be in conflict with this chapter.
§ 150-18. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this
chapter shall be declared to be unenforceable or invalid, such decision or
declaration shall not affect the remaining portions of this chapter, which
shall continue in full force and effect, and to that end the provisions of this
chapter are hereby declared to be severable.
§ 150-19. through § 150-24. (Reserved)
§ 150-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-19
1:691

ARTICLE V
Responsibilities of Creditors and Mortgage Holders for Vacant,
Abandoned and Foreclosed Properties
[Added 7-13-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-06]
§ 150-25. Definitions.
For the specific purposes of this article, the following terms, whenever used
herein or referred to in this article, shall have the respective meanings
assigned to them hereunder unless a different meaning clearly appears
from the context:
CREDITOR — A state chartered bank, savings bank, savings and loan
association or credit union, any person or entity required to be licensed
under the provisions of the New Jersey Residential Mortgage Lending Act,
P.L. 2009, c. 53 (N.J.S.A. 17:11C-51 et seq.), any foreclosing entity subject
to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51 (P.L. 2008, c. 127, § 17, as amended
from time to time) and any entity acting on behalf of the creditor named in
the debt obligation, including, but not limited to, servicers.
EXTERIOR OF PREMISES — Those portions of a structure which are
exposed to public view or are visible from adjoining or adjacent lots,
including all outside surfaces and appurtenances thereto, and the open land
space of any premises outside of any building or structure erected thereon,
including vacant lots.
NUISANCE —
OPERATOR — Any person, persons or entity not the owner, but including
any agent of the owner, who has charge, possession, custody, care or control
of a dwelling or premises or a part thereof.
OWNER — Any person, persons or entity who shall have legal or equitable
title in any form whatsoever to any premises or part thereof, including
any fiduciary, trustee, receiver, guardian or mortgagee in possession. Any
lessee, sublessee or assignee of a lessee of any part of any premises shall
be deemed an "owner" with respect to that portion of the premises sublet,
leased or assigned.
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land, right-of-way or multiples thereof,
including the building or structures thereon.
REFUSE or RUBBISH — All discarded, useless, unusable, unused or
worthless solid waste matter or materials, combustible or noncombustible,
including, but not limited to, garbage, trash, ashes, paper, paper goods
Any public or private condition that would constitute a nuisance
according to the statutes, laws and regulations of the State of New
Jersey, its governmental agencies or the ordinances of the Borough.
A.
Any physical condition existing in or on the exterior of any premises
which is potentially dangerous, detrimental or hazardous to the life,
health or safety of persons on, near or passing within the proximity of
the premises where the condition exists.
B.
§ 150-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-25
1:693
and products, wrappings, cans, bottles, containers, yard clippings, garden
waste, debris, junk, glass, boxes, crockery, wood, plastic, rubber, leather,
furniture, household goods, appliances, bedding, scrap lumber, scrap metal,
construction material, inoperable machinery or parts thereof, garden or
farming implements and supplies, dead or rotting vegetation, tires and
abandoned, inoperative or unusable automobiles and vehicles and solid
commercial or industrial waste. Anything herein to the contrary
notwithstanding, a compost pile free of discarded foodstuffs shall not be
deemed to be "refuse" or "rubbish."
UNREGISTERED MOTOR VEHICLE — A motor vehicle without a valid and
current state inspection sticker.
VACANT AND ABANDONED RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Where a
property is not occupied and three or more of the following conditions exist:
A. Overgrown or neglected vegetation;
The accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers or mail on the
property;
B.
C. Disconnected gas, electric, or water utility services to the property;
The accumulation of hazardous, noxious, or unhealthy substances or
materials on the property;
D.
E. The accumulation of junk, litter, trash or debris on the property;
F. The absence of window treatments such as blinds, curtains or shutters;
G. The absence of furnishing and personal items;
Statements of neighbors, association management, delivery persons,
or government employees indicating that the residence is vacant and
abandoned;
H.
Windows or entrances to the property that are boarded up or closed off
or multiple window panes that are damaged, broken and unrepaired;
I.
Doors to the property that are smashed through, broken off, unhinged,
or continuously unlocked;
J.
A risk to the health, safety or welfare of the public, or any adjoining
or adjacent property owners, exists due to acts of vandalism, loitering,
criminal conduct, or the physical destruction or deterioration of the
property;
K.
An uncorrected violation of a municipal building, housing, or similar
code during the preceding year, or an order by municipal authorities
declaring the property to be unfit for occupancy and to remain vacant
and unoccupied;
L.
§ 150-25 KENILWORTH CODE § 150-25
1:694
§ 150-26. Registration procedure; responsibility for vacant and
abandoned properties.
The mortgagee or other authorized party has secured or winterized the
property due to the property being deemed vacant and unprotected or
in danger of freezing;
M.
A written statement issued by any mortgagor expressing the clear
intent of all mortgagors to abandon the property;
N.
O. Any other reasonable indicia of abandonment.
A. Registration of vacant and abandoned properties.
(1) Every creditor filing an action to foreclose on a mortgage of any
residential property within the Borough of Kenilworth shall, within
10 days thereof, notify the Borough Clerk, in writing, by mail, of
said filing (see N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51). The notice shall also include the
street address, lot and block number of the property, and the full
name and contact information of an individual located within the
state who is authorized to accept service on behalf of the creditor.
The notice shall also contain the name and contact information of
the representative of the creditor who is responsible for receiving
complaints of property maintenance and code violations. In the
event the creditor that has served a summons and complaint in an
action to foreclose on a residential property is located out of state,
the notice shall also contain the full name and contact information
of an in-state representative or agent who shall be responsible for
the care, maintenance, security and upkeep of the exterior of the
property if it becomes vacant and abandoned.
(2) A creditor filing a summons and complaint in an action to foreclose
on a vacant and abandoned property, or a creditor who has
previously filed a summons and complaint to foreclose on a
residential property which subsequently becomes vacant and
abandoned, shall within 30 calendar days after the building
becomes vacant and abandoned or within 30 calendar days after
assuming ownership of the vacant and abandoned property,
whichever is earlier, or within 10 calendar days of receipt of notice
from the Borough, and annually thereafter, file a registration
statement for such vacant and abandoned property with the
Municipal Clerk on forms provided by the Borough for such
purposes. Any failure to receive notice from the Borough shall not
constitute grounds for failing to register the vacant and abandoned
property.
(3) Each vacant and abandoned property having a separate block and
lot number as designated in the official tax maps of the Borough
shall be registered separately.
§ 150-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-26
1:695
(4) The registration statement shall include the name, street address,
telephone number, and e-mail address (if applicable) of a person 21
years or older designated by the creditor as the authorized agent
within the State of New Jersey for receiving notices of code
violations and for receiving process in any court proceeding or
administrative enforcement proceeding on behalf of such creditor
in connection with the enforcement of any applicable code.
(5) The registration statement for each shall include the name, street
address, telephone number, and e-mail address (if applicable) of
the firm and the actual name(s) of the firm's individual principal(s)
responsible for maintaining the abandoned and vacant property.
The individual or representative of the firm responsible for
maintaining the abandoned and vacant property shall be available
by telephone or in person on a twenty-four-hour per day, seven-day
per week basis. The two entities may be the same or different
persons. Both entities shown on the statement must maintain
offices in the State of New Jersey or reside within the State of New
Jersey.
(6) The registration for each property shall remain valid for three
years from the date of registration except for the initial registration
which shall be valid through December 31 of the year in which it
was filed. The creditor shall be required to renew the registration
annually as long as the building remains vacant and abandoned and
shall pay a registration or renewal fee in the amount prescribed in
Subsection A(10) of this section for each vacant and abandoned
property registered.
(7) The renewal shall be completed within the first two weeks of
December, just prior to expiration. The initial registration fee shall
be prorated for registration statements received less than 10
months prior to that date.
(8) The creditor shall notify the Municipal Clerk within 30 calendar
days of any change in the registration information by filing an
amended registration statement on a form provided by the
Municipal Clerk for such purpose.
(9) The registration statement shall be deemed prima facie proof of the
statements therein contained in any administrative enforcement
proceeding or court proceeding instituted by the Borough against
the creditor.
(10) Fee schedule. The initial registration fee for each vacant and
abandoned property under the provisions of this section; the fee for
the first year’s renewal; the fees for the second year’s renewal; and
the fee for all additional renewals are set forth in Chapter 91, Fees
and Licenses. [Amended 4-25-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-04;
9-12-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-14]
§ 150-26 KENILWORTH CODE § 150-26
1:696
B. Creditor responsibility for vacant and abandoned properties.
(1) A creditor filing a summons and complaint in an action to foreclose
on a residential property within the Borough shall be responsible
for the care, maintenance, security and upkeep of the exterior of
the property, after the property becomes vacant and abandoned.
(2) The creditor shall be responsible for appointing an in-state
representative or agent to act for the foreclosing creditor. The instate
representative shall be an individual residing in this state and
shall provide his or her full name and address as part of the
registration. [Amended 4-25-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-04]
C. Enforcement.
(1) The enforcement officers designated shall be authorized to issue a
notice to a creditor that has filed a summons and complaint in an
action to foreclose on a residential property within the Borough, if
the enforcement officer determines that the creditor has violated
this section by failing to provide for the care, maintenance,
security, and upkeep of the exterior of a vacant and abandoned
property.
(2) Where a creditor is an out-of-state creditor, the notice shall be
issued to the representative or agent that has been identified by the
creditor pursuant to this article.
(3) The notice referenced in Subsection C(2) of this section shall
require the creditor to correct the violation(s) within 30 days of
receipt of the notice, or within 10 days of receipt of the notice if the
violation presents an imminent threat to public health and safety.
(4) The issuance of a notice pursuant to Subsection C(2) of this section
shall constitute proof that a residential property is vacant and
abandoned for the purposes of this section.
(5) If a creditor fails to properly name a registered agent who resides
in the State of New Jersey within 30 days from the date creditor's
attorney is served with notice of the requirement to register, the
Borough Attorney is authorized to file a motion in the Chancery
Division seeking an order restraining the creditor from proceeding
with the sale of the property until such time as he or she has
properly registered the foreclosed property and the creditor shall
reimburse the Borough for all fees and costs incurred for any
proceedings in the Superior Court. [Added 4-25-2018 by Ord.
No. 2018-04]
D. Violations and penalties.
(1) A creditor subject to this section that is found by the Municipal
Court of the Borough, or by any other court of competent
jurisdiction, to be in violation of the requirement to correct a care,
§ 150-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-26
1:697
§ 150-27. Administrative provisions.
maintenance, security, or upkeep violation cited in a notice issued
pursuant to this section shall be subject to a fine of $1,500 for each
day of the violation. Any fines imposed pursuant to this subsection
shall commence 31 days following the service of the notice, except
if the violation presents an imminent risk to public health and
safety, in which case any fines shall commence 11 days following
service of the notice.
(2) An out-of-state creditor subject to this section that is found by the
Municipal Court of the Borough, or by any other court of competent
jurisdiction, to be in violation of the requirement to appoint an instate
representative or agent pursuant to this section shall be
subject to a fine of $2,500 for each day of the violation. Any fines
imposed on a creditor for the failure to appoint an in-state
representative or agent shall commence on the day after the tenday
period after filing a foreclosure complaint that provides notice
to the Municipal Clerk that a summons and complaint in an action
to foreclose on a mortgage has been served.
(3) A creditor subject to this section that is found by the Municipal
Court of the Borough, or by any other court of competent
jurisdiction, to be in violation of the requirement to register a
vacant and abandoned property pursuant to this section shall be
subject to a fine not exceeding $2,000. Any fines imposed on a
creditor under this subsection shall commence 11 days following
receipt of notice from the Borough pursuant to this section.
A. Enforcement officer. This article may be enforced by the Construction
Official, Zoning Officer, Health Officer, Police Department and the
Building Department of the Borough. [Amended 9-12-2018 by Ord.
No. 2018-14]
B. Enforcement procedure. Whenever the enforcement officer determines
that there is or has been a violation of any provision of this article, the
officer shall give notice of such violation to the person, persons or
entities responsible therefor under this article. Such notice shall be in
writing and shall include a concise statement of the reasons for its
issuance. Such notice shall be deemed to be properly and sufficiently
served if a copy thereof is sent by registered or certified mail to the last
known address of the person or entity upon which the same is served,
as shown by the most recent tax lists of the Borough, or if a copy thereof
is handed to the person or persons or a copy thereof is left at the usual
place of abode or office of the persons or entities. Notice shall be given
as aforesaid within or without the Borough. The notice shall also state
that unless the violation is abated, removed, cured, prevented or
desisted from within 10 days of the date of service of such notice
(exclusive of the date of service), a summons shall issue for such
violation. The enforcement officer may, at the time the officer issues the
notice, extend the period for correction of the violation stated in the
§ 150-26 KENILWORTH CODE § 150-27
1:698
§ 150-28. Violations and penalties.
With the exception of the violations and penalties contained within this
chapter, any person or entity who shall violate any of the provisions of this
article or any order promulgated hereunder shall, after a summons is issued
under the terms hereof, upon conviction, be punished as follows:
§ 150-29. through § 150-35. (Reserved)
§ 150-36. Brush, grass and debris.
notice for a period in excess of the aforesaid 10 days if, in the officer's
judgment, the abatement, removal, prevention, cessation of or cure of
the condition violated cannot reasonably be effected within the tenday
period, and in such cases the enforcement officer shall state such
reasonably required extended period in the notice, which shall then be
applicable instead of the aforesaid 10 days. In the event the violation
is not abated, removed, cured, prevented or desisted from or otherwise
fully remedied within the ten-day period or within such extended period
as set forth in the notice pursuant to the foregoing, a summons shall
then issue against the person, persons, entity or entities so notified.
C. Emergency conditions. Whenever the enforcement officer finds that an
emergency condition in violation of this article exists, which condition
requires immediate attention in order to protect the public health or
safety, the officer may issue an order by service of notice reciting the
existence of such an emergency condition and requiring that such
action be taken by the violator as soon as reasonably necessary to meet
the emergency. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article,
such order shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom such an
order is directed shall comply therewith immediately, but upon
objection, in writing, to the enforcement officer, any such person shall
be afforded a hearing before the governing body of the Borough as soon
as is reasonably possible. After such a hearing and decision by the
governing body as to the existence or nonexistence of the emergency
condition, the governing body may continue such order in effect, or
modify or withdraw it, subject to issuance of a summons for violation
thereof if such order is continued.
A. For a first offense, by a fine not to exceed $50.
B. For a second offense, by a fine not to exceed $200.
C. For a third offense or any subsequent offenses, by the penalty stated in
this chapter.
A. Prohibited accumulation. It shall be unlawful to gather, accumulate,
keep or permit the gathering, accumulation or keeping of brush, weeds,
dead and dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious growths, filth, garbage,
trash, debris, litter, refuse, rubbish or any of the articles on any land or
§ 150-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-36
1:699
in any place in the Borough in such a manner as to constitute a menace
to public health, safety or general welfare or to create a fire hazard.
B. Removal required. The person having charge or control over the
premises where any material has accumulated in violation of any
provision of the property maintenance code shall remove or cause the
removal of the articles as provided in this chapter.
C. Enforcement; notice.
(1) Enforcement. If any condition described in Subsection A above is
deemed to exist, it shall be the duty of the Fire Inspectors, the
Health Officer, the Sanitarian and the Police Department of the
Borough, or any of them, to then give written notice to the owner of
the premises or the tenant therein or the person having charge or
control thereof, requiring the removal of the articles within 10 days
after the service of the notice.
(2) Notice. Any notice mentioned herein may be served in person or by
mailing to the last known address of the respective owner or tenant
or person in charge. When the owner or person in charge does not
reside in the Borough and when service is by mailing, then a copy
of the notice shall be posted on the same day as the mailing at the
premises where the condition exists. Failure to rectify the condition
of which notice is given within the period specified in the notice
shall constitute a violation hereunder.
D. Enforcement officers. The Health Officer, the Zoning Officer, the
Sanitarian, appointed Fire Inspectors and the Police Department are
hereby designated enforcement officers of this section with full power
to make complaints and issue summonses for violations. The
designation herein contained shall not limit the capacity or authority of
any person or officer authorized to enforce this section or any similar
ordinance under any other ordinance or law.
E. Compliance with notice; lien. If the person in charge shall fail to remove
the brush, weeds, dead and dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious
growths, filth, garbage, trash, debris or other articles within the time
required by the notice, then the enforcement officer may remove or
cause or arrange for the removal of the articles. The officer causing the
removal shall keep an accurate account of the cost thereof and shall
certify the cost and expense to the Mayor and Council, which shall
examine the certification. If the Mayor and Council shall find the same
correct, the cost shall be charged against the lands upon which the
articles are located and from which they were removed. A statement of
the cost shall forthwith be furnished by the Borough Clerk to the
Collector of Taxes, and the cost shall forthwith become a lien upon the
lands where the violation existed and shall be added to, become and
form part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon the lands, to
bear interest at the same rate as taxes, and the lien shall be collected
and enforced in the same manner as taxes, pursuant to the statutes
§ 150-36 KENILWORTH CODE § 150-36
1:700
§ 150-37. through § 150-47. (Reserved)
§ 150-48. Conflict with other provisions.
In any case where a provision of this article is found to be in conflict
with or inconsistent with a provision of any other ordinance or code of
this municipality which establishes a lower standard for the promotion and
protection of the safety, health and welfare of the people, the provisions
of this article shall prevail, and such other ordinances or codes or parts
thereof are hereby declared to be repealed to the extent that they may be
so found to be in conflict with this article.
governing the subject matter. [Amended 9-12-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-14]
(1) The enforcement officers designated in this section shall be
authorized to issue a notice to a creditor that has filed a summons
and complaint in an action to foreclose on a residential property
within the Borough, if the enforcement officer determines that the
creditor has violated this section by failing to provide for the care,
maintenance, security, and upkeep of the exterior of a vacant and
abandoned property. Where a creditor is an out-of-state creditor,
the notice shall be issued to the representative or agent that has
been identified by the creditor pursuant to this article.
(2) The issuance of a notice pursuant to this section shall constitute
proof that a property is vacant and abandoned for the purposes of
this section.
§ 150-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-48
1:701
Chapter 154
RETAIL SALES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees and license — See Ch. 91
Garage sales — See Ch. 104.
Peddling and soliciting — See. Ch. 144
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 170.
§ 150-48 KENILWORTH CODE § 150-48
1:702
ARTICLE I
Special Sales
[Adopted 8-10-1976 by Ord. No. 76-18]
§ 154-1. Definitions and word usage.
§ 154-2. License required.
A license issued by the Clerk shall be obtained by any person before selling
or offering to sell any goods at a sale to be advertised or held out by any
means to be one of the following kinds:
A. Word usage. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the
present tense include the future; words in the plural include the
singular. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely
directory.
B. Definitions. For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases,
words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Kenilworth.
CLERK — The Clerk of the Borough of Kenilworth.
FIRE AND OTHER ALTERED GOODS SALE — A sale held out in such
a manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that the sale will
offer goods damaged or altered by fire, smoke, water or other means.
GOING-OUT-OF-BUSINESS — A sale held out in such a manner as to
reasonably cause the public to believe that upon the disposal of the
stock of goods on hand the business will cease and be discontinued,
including but not limited to the following sales: adjuster's, adjustment,
alteration, assignee's, auction sale, bankrupt, benefit of administrators,
benefit of creditors, benefit of trustees, building coming down, closing,
creditors' committee, creditors, end, executor's final days, forced out,
forced out of business, insolvents', last days, lease expires, liquidation,
loss of lease, mortgage sale, receiver's, trustee's, quitting business,
closing out sale of any kind.
GOODS — Includes any goods, wares, merchandise or other property
capable of being the object of a sale regulated hereunder.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
REMOVAL OF BUSINESS SALE — A sale held out in such a manner as
to reasonably cause the public to believe that the person conducting
the sale will cease and discontinue business at the place of sale upon
disposal of the stock of goods on hand and will then move to and resume
business at a new location in the Borough or will then continue business
from other existing locations in the Borough.
A. Going-out-of-business sale.
§ 154-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 154-2
1:703
§ 154-3. Restrictions.
B. Removal of business sale.
C. Fire and other altered goods sale. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
A. Established business requisite.
(1) Any person who has not been the owner of a business advertised or
described in the application for a license hereunder for a period of
at least six months prior to the date of the proposed sale shall not
be granted a license.
(2) Upon the death of a person doing business in the Borough, his or
her heirs, devisees or legatees shall have the right to apply at any
time for a license hereunder.
B. Interval between sales. Any person who has held a sale, as regulated
hereunder, at the location stated in the application within one year last
past from the date of such application shall not be granted a license.
C. Restricted location. Where a person applying for a license hereunder
operates more than one place of business, the license issued shall apply
only to the one store or branch specified in the application, and no other
store or branch shall advertise or represent that it is cooperating with it
or in any way participating in the licensed sale, nor shall the store or
branch conducting the licensed sale advertise or represent that any
other store or branch is cooperating with it or participating in any way
in the licensed sale.
D. Persons exempted. The provisions of this article shall not apply to or
affect the following persons:
(1) Persons acting pursuant to an order or process of a court of
competent jurisdiction.
(2) Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as
public officials.
(3) Duly licensed auctioneers selling at auction wherein articles are
sold pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent
jurisdiction or are sold as part of the estate of a deceased or
incompetent person.
(4) Persons conducting a sale of the type regulated herein on the
effective date of this article, unless such sale is continued for a
period of more than five days from and after such effective date, in
which event such person, at the lapse of said five-day period, shall
comply with the provisions of this article.
(5) Any publisher of a newspaper, magazine or other publication who
publishes in good faith any advertisement, without knowledge of its
§ 154-2 KENILWORTH CODE § 154-3
1:704
§ 154-4. Application requirements; fee.
false, deceptive or misleading character or without knowledge that
the provisions of this article have not been complied with.
A. Written information required. A person desiring to conduct a sale
regulated by this article shall make a written application to the Clerk,
setting forth and containing the following information:
(1) The true name and address of the owner of the goods to be the
subject of the sale.
(2) The true name and address of the person from whom he purchased
the goods to be sold and the price therefor, and if not purchased,
the manner of such acquisition.
(3) A description of the place where such sale is to be held.
(4) The nature of the occupancy, whether by lease or sublease, and the
effective date of termination of such occupancy.
(5) The dates of the period of time in which the sale is to be conducted.
(6) A full and complete statement of the facts in regard to the sale,
including the reason for the urgent and expeditious disposal of
goods thereby and the manner in which the sale will be conducted.
(7) The means to be employed in advertising such sale, together with
the proposed content of any advertisement.
(8) A complete and detailed inventory of the goods to be sold at such
sale as disclosed by the applicant's records. Said inventory shall be
attached to and become part of the required application.
(a) Bona fide orders. All goods included in such inventory shall
have been purchased by the applicant for resale on bona fide
orders without cancellation privileges and shall not comprise
goods purchased on consignment.
(b) Goods purchased for sale hereunder. Such inventory shall not
include goods ordered in contemplation of conducting a sale
regulated hereunder. Any unusual purchase or additions to the
stock of goods of the business hereby affected within 30 days
before the filing of an application hereunder shall be deemed
to be of such character.
B. License fee. Any applicant for a license hereunder shall submit to the
Clerk with his application a license fee as provided in Chapter 91, Fees
and Licenses. Any applicant for a renewal license hereunder shall
submit to the Clerk with his renewal application a renewal license fee
as provided in Chapter 91, Fees and Licenses. [Amended 9-11-1979
by Ord. No. 79-19]
§ 154-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 154-5
1:705
§ 154-5. Conditions for issuance of license.
A license shall be issued hereunder on the following terms:
§ 154-6. Duties of licensee.
A licensee shall:
A. Licensing period. The license shall authorize the sale described in the
application for a period of not more than 21 consecutive days, Sundays
and legal holidays excluded, following the issuance thereof.
B. Renewal procedure. The Clerk shall renew a license for one period of
time only, such period to be in addition to the 21 days permitted in the
original license and not to exceed 14 consecutive days, Sundays and
holidays excluded, when he finds:
(1) That facts exist justifying the license renewal.
(2) That the licensee has filed an application for renewal.
(3) That the licensee has submitted with the application for renewal a
revised inventory showing the items listed on the original inventory
remaining unsold and not listing any goods not included in the
original application and inventory. For the purposes of this
subsection, any application for a license under the provisions of
this article, covering any goods previously inventoried as required
hereunder, shall be deemed to be an application for renewal,
whether presented by the original applicant or by any other person.
C. Nature of sale. The license shall authorize only the one type of sale
described in the application at the location named therein.
D. Salable goods. The license shall authorize only the sale of goods
described in the inventory attached to the application.
E. Surrender of general license. Upon being issued a license hereunder for
a going-out-of-business sale, the licensee shall surrender to the Clerk all
other business licenses he may hold at that time applicable to the
location and goods covered by the application for a license under this
article.
F. Nontransferability. Any license herein provided for shall not be
assignable or transferable.
A. Adhere to inventory. Make no additions whatsoever during the period of
the licensed sale to the stock of goods set forth in the inventory
attached to the application for license.
B. Advertise properly. Refrain from employing any untrue, deceptive or
misleading advertising.
C. Adhere to advertising. Conduct the licensed sale in strict conformity
with any advertising or holding out incident thereto.
§ 154-5 KENILWORTH CODE § 154-6
1:706
§ 154-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to the general penalty set forth in Chapter
1, Article I, General Penalty, of the Borough of Kenilworth Code. Each day
of sale in violation of any or all of the provisions of this article shall be a
separate offense.
D. Keep duplicate inventory. Keep available at the place of sale a duplicate
copy of the inventory submitted with the application and shall present
such duplicate to inspecting officials upon request.
E. Segregate noninventoried goods. Keep any other goods separate and
apart from the goods listed in the filed inventory as being objects of sale
and shall make such distinction clear to the public by placing tags on all
inventoried goods in and about the place of sale apprising the public of
the status of all such goods.
F. Display the license issued hereunder prominently throughout the entire
period of the sale on the premises involved.
§ 154-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 154-7
1:707

ARTICLE II
Storage and Display of Merchandise on Sidewalks and Open Areas
[Adopted 2-26-1997 by Ord. No. 97-2]
§ 154-8. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LOT — The same definition as stated in § 120-1.4.[Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
PARKING AREA OR LOT — The same definition as stated in § 170-1.
PERSON — Includes any natural person, corporation, partnership, limited
liability company, association or firm.
SIDEWALK — The same definition as stated in § 170-1.
STREET — The same definition as stated in § 170-1.
VACANT LOT — A lot as defined herein which does not have a principal
structure located thereon.
§ 154-9. Storage and display prohibited; exception and restrictions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to store or display merchandise or any
other tangible personal property upon any sidewalk or within the rightof-
way of any opened street or on any vacant lot within the Borough of
Kenilworth, with the following exceptions:
A. The governing body may, by resolution, suspend the operation of this
article for community-wide special occasions or sales promotion days.
Said resolution may establish rules and regulations governing displays
and sales of merchandise during the community-wide special occasions
or sales promotion days.
B. The governing body may, by resolution, suspend the operation of this
article for temporary patriotic, civic or charitable purposes.
C. The governing body may, by resolution, suspend the operation of this
article for the display and sale of seasonal merchandise or displays
associated with traditional state and national holidays.
D. In every instance where the terms of this article are suspended by the
governing body or unless otherwise exempt under Chapter 144,
§ 144-14, of the Borough Code, and unless otherwise specifically
provided for in the resolution, no storage, display or sale shall be
conducted in a zone district in which it would otherwise be prohibited.
§ 154-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 154-10
1:709
§ 154-10. Permit required.
Nothing contained herein shall be construed or interpreted to waive the
application and permit requirements of Chapter 144, Peddling and
Soliciting.
§ 154-11. Violations and penalties; enforcement.
A. Any person, firm or corporation who or which violates any provision of
this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to the general penalty set
forth in Chapter 1, Article I, General Penalty, of the Borough of
Kenilworth Code. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
B. The Municipal Court shall have jurisdiction over proceedings to enforce
the provisions of this article.
C. The Borough Police Department and Zoning Officer shall have the
authority to enforce the provisions of this article.
§ 154-10 KENILWORTH CODE § 154-11
1:710
Chapter 158
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewerage Authority — See Ch. 45.
Industrial waste — See Ch. 116.
Land use — See Ch. 120
§ 154-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 154-11
1:711

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 4-27-1965 by Ord. No. 65-12; amended in its entirety
7-12-1994 by Ord. No. 94-6126]
§ 158-1. Definitions.
Unless the context otherwise requires, the meaning of terms used in this
article shall be as follows:
AGREEMENT — The contract between the Boroughs of Garwood,
Kenilworth and Roselle Park, the City of Rahway, the Town of Westfield and
the Townships of Clark, Cranford, Springfield and Woodbridge, municipal
corporations of the State of New Jersey, dated August 8, 1951, establishing
the Authority.
AUTHORITY — The Rahway Valley Sewerage Authority and, when the
context requires, its authorized deputies, agents or representatives.
BOD (denoting "biochemical oxygen demand") — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedures during five days at 20° C., expressed in milligrams
per liter.
CHEMICAL WASTE — A material normally generated by or used in
chemical, petrochemical, plastic, pharmaceutical, biochemical or
microbiological manufacturing processes or petroleum refining processes,
which has been selected for waste disposal and which is known to
hydrolyze, ionize or decompose, which is soluble, burns or oxidizes, or
which is buoyant on water, or which has a viscosity less than that of water
or which produces a foul odor and which may be either hazardous or
nonhazardous.
DISCHARGE — Any intentional or unintentional action or omission resulting
in the releasing, spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, admitting, emptying or
dumping of any solid waste as defined herein.
FEDERAL — The United States of America.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Any waste or combination of wastes which poses
a present or potential threat to human health, living organisms or the
environment, including but not limited to waste material that is toxic,
corrosive, irritating, sensitizing, radioactive, biologically infectious,
explosive or flammable.
INDUSTRIAL USER — Any nonresidential user that discharges more than
the equivalent of 10,000 gallons per day of domestic sanitary wastes or
which is identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual under
Division A, B, D, E or I or comparable sections hereafter promulgated
and discharges or has the potential to discharge toxic pollutants into the
126. Editor's Note: This ordinance provided for the repeal of former §§ 158-1 through 158-13.
It left intact § 158-14.
§ 158-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-1
1:713
sewerage works or the municipal sewerage works or which operates a
process to which a federal categorical pretreatment standard is applicable.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Liquid or other waste resulting from any processes
of industry, manufacture, trade or business or from the development,
recovery, detoxification or processing of any natural resource and shall
include any chemical waste or hazardous waste.
INSPECTOR — The Authority and any duly authorized employees or
representatives of the Authority, the Construction Official for the
municipality and/or his authorized deputies, agents or representatives and
the Health Officer of the municipality and/or his authorized deputies, agents
or representatives.[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
MUNICIPAL SEWERAGE WORKS — The sewers, conduits, pipelines, mains,
pumping and ventilating stations and other plants, structures, conveyances
and other real and personal property, and rights therein, and appurtenances
necessary or useful and convenient for the collection or disposal in a
sanitary manner of any sewage or by-product thereof acquired, constructed,
maintained or operated or to be acquired, constructed, maintained or
operated by the municipality.
MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Kenilworth, located in the County of
Union and the State of New Jersey.
NATURAL OUTLET — A body of water or watercourse which exists
continuously or intermittently into which surface drainage or seepage may
run.
NJDEP — New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.[Amended
at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
PEAK FLOW RATE — The rate of flow in millions of gallons per day set
forth in Section 8.1 of the agreement for each municipality based upon the
instantaneous rate of flow measurements not to be exceeded for any period
of time, however brief, as set forth in Section 8.3 of the agreement.
PERSON(S) — Public or private corporation(s), company(ies),
association(s), society(ies), firm(s), partnership(s), joint-stock company(ies),
individual(s), the United States, the State of New Jersey and/or any of their
political subdivisions or agents.
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter of solution.
PHENOL — A soluble crystalline acidic compound that has a characteristic
odor, that is present in coal tar and wood tar and is synthesized by various
methods, that is a powerful caustic poison and in dilute solution is a useful
disinfectant and that is used otherwise chiefly in making resins, plastic,
dyes, pharmaceuticals and other products and as a solvent for refining
lubricating oils.
PRETREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
§ 158-1 KENILWORTH CODE § 158-1
1:714
properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise
introducing such pollutants into the sewerage works and/or municipal
sewerage works, which reduction, elimination or alteration may be obtained
by physical, chemical or biological processes, process changes or by any
means except as prohibited by state or federal law, and appropriate
pretreatment technology shall include control equipment such as
equalization tanks or facilities for protection against surges, slug loadings
and/or slug discharges that might interfere with or otherwise be
incompatible with the sewerage works and/or the municipal sewerage
works.
RECEIVING WATERS — The Arthur Kill.
SANITARY SEWAGE — Water-carried household and toilet wastes from an
improved property.
SEWAGE — A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences,
businesses, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such
groundwaters, surface waters and stormwaters as may be present in the
sewerage works and/or the municipal sewerage works.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit constituting a part of the sewerage works or
the municipal sewerage works, used or usable to collect and convey sewage
and to which groundwaters, surface waters, stormwaters and other nonsewage
waters or liquids are not admitted intentionally, except with respect
to the municipal sewerage works of the City of Rahway, a portion of which
storm sewer is combined with its sewer to convey sanitary sewage and
stormwater.
SEWERAGE WORKS — The plant, structures, on-site wastewater systems
and other real and personal property acquired, constructed, maintained or
operated or to be acquired, constructed, maintained or operated by the
Authority for the purposes of the Authority, including sewers, conduits,
pipelines, mains, pumping and ventilating stations, sewage treatment or
disposal systems, resource recovery systems, chemical or lime fixation
facilities and related curing and storage, sludge recycling facilities, plants
and works, connections and outflows, compensating reservoirs and other
plants, structures, conveyances and other real and personal property, and
rights therein, and appurtenances necessary or useful and convenient for
the collection, treatment, purification, recycling or disposal in a sanitary
manner of any sewage or by-product thereof.
SLUG DISCHARGE — The discharge of industrial waste or any constituents
thereof into the sewerage works and/or municipal sewerage works in such
quantity that the average hourly discharge over any period of two hours'
duration is more than twice the daily average hourly discharge of industrial
waste or constituents thereof or an unusual volume of flow from one or
more users into the sewerage works and/or the municipal sewerage works
which causes or is a contributing factor to causing the peak flow rate of the
municipality at any instant, no matter how brief, to exceed the peak flow
rate of the municipality under the agreement.
§ 158-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-1
1:715
SOLID WASTE — Garbage, refuse or other discarded material resulting
from industrial, commercial and agricultural operations and from domestic
and community activities and including all other waste materials, including
sludge, chemical waste, hazardous wastes and liquids, except for solid
animal and vegetable wastes collected by swine producers licensed by the
State Department of Agriculture to collect, prepare and feed such wastes to
swine on farms owned by such producers.
STATE — New Jersey.
STORM SEWER — A pipe, conduit or system used or usable to collect and
convey stormwater, surface water and groundwater drainage but excluding
sewage, except with respect to the municipal sewerage works of the City
of Rahway, a portion of which storm sewer is combined with its sewer to
convey sanitary sewage and stormwater.
STORMWATER — Water runoff, surface runoff, street wash waters related
to street cleaning or maintenance, infiltration (other than infiltration
contaminated by seepage from sanitary sewers or by other discharges) and
drainage related to storm events or snow melt.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Substances which are removable from sewage by
laboratory filtration.
UNPOLLUTED WATER — Water that would not cause violation of the
Federal Clean Water Act, P.L. 95-217, by direct discharge into the receiving
waters and would not be of a better quality if treated at the sewerage works
prior to discharge to the receiving waters.
§ 158-2. Prohibited connections.
It shall be unlawful to connect any cellar, drain, subsoil drain or surface
drain of any kind or description, sump pump, steam exhaust, blowoff, drip
pipe, air-conditioning equipment, industrial cooling water system,
rainwater conductor, swimming pool, stormwater inlets, catch basins or oil
pipe with the sewerage works or the municipal sewerage works or permit
any subsoil waters or surface waters to flow into the sewerage works or the
municipal sewerage works.
§ 158-3. Discharge to storm sewers or natural outlet; approval.
Stormwater and all other drainage of unpolluted water shall be discharged
to such storm sewers or natural outlets approved by the Engineer of the
municipality. Industrial cooling water or processed unpolluted water may
be discharged, on approval of said Municipal Engineer, to a storm sewer or
natural outlet.
§ 158-4. Prohibited substances.
No person shall discharge or cause or allow to be discharged into the
sewerage works and/or the municipal sewerage works the following
substances, whether directly or indirectly, if it appears likely, in the sole
discretion of the Authority or the municipality, that such discharge may
§ 158-1 KENILWORTH CODE § 158-4
1:716
damage and/or harm the sewerage works or the municipal sewerage works,
have an adverse effect on the receiving waters or otherwise endanger
human health, living organisms or the environment:
A. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150° F. (65° C.).
B. Any waters or wastes containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of 100 milligrams per liter or containing
substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures
between 32° and 150° F. (0° and 65° C.).
C. Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes or
concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not, or other
wastes in such quantity that will cause corrosion or deterioration of the
sewerage works and/or the municipal sewerage works.
D. Any waters or wastes containing arsenic, barium, cadmium, chloride,
cyanide, fluoride, lead, manganese, nickel, nitrate, selenium, sulfate,
iron, chromium, copper, zinc and similar objectionable or toxic
substances in excess of limits established by the Authority or having a
pH outside the maximum and minimum limits established by the
Authority or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement. In no
event shall such limits exceed that necessary to classify the Authority's
sludge as Class A as defined in the Statewide Sludge Management Plan.
E. Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odorproducing
substances in such concentrations exceeding limits which
may be established by the Authority as necessary, after treatment of the
sewage, to meet the requirements of state, federal or other public
agencies having jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.
F. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as
may exceed limits established by the Authority or which are not in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.
G. Materials which exert or cause:
(1) Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids or of dissolved
solids.
(2) Excessive discoloration, such as but not limited to dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions.
(3) Slug discharge.
H. Waters or wastes containing substances which in the sole discretion of
the Authority are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the
Authority or which after treatment fail to meet the effluent
requirements of any governmental agency having jurisdiction over
discharge to the receiving waters.
I. Wastes in such type and quantity that create a risk of fire or explosion
within the sewerage works and/or the municipal sewerage works.
§ 158-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-4
1:717
§ 158-5. Control over discharges; pretreatment.
§ 158-6. Maintenance by owner.
Where pretreatment and/or control over quantities and/or rates is required
for any waters or discharges, the owners and dischargers shall be
exclusively liable for the maintenance and operation of the plants, facilities
and/or equipment installed in compliance with this requirement.
§ 158-7. Installation of monitoring equipment by industrial users.
When required by the Authority and/or by the municipality, each industrial
user and/or the owner of any property used or occupied by any industrial
user shall be jointly and severally liable for the installation, at its (their) own
expense, of measuring and monitoring equipment determined necessary
by the Authority to facilitate the accurate observation, measurement and
sampling of industrial waste. Such equipment shall be protected from
unauthorized entry and tampering, shall be accessible to Authority and
municipality personnel at all times and shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with plans approved by both the Authority and the municipality.
The location of such equipment shall be approved by both the Authority
and the municipality personnel at all times and shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with plans approved by both the Authority and
the municipality. Measuring and monitoring equipment may include but is
J. Any waste, including oxygen demanding wastes (BOD), released in a
discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration that interferes
with the sewerage works and/or the municipal sewerage works.
K. Any water added for the purpose of diluting wastes that would
otherwise exceed applicable maximum concentration limits.
A. In response to any discharge or proposed discharge into the sewerage
works and/or the municipal sewerage works and which in the sole
judgment of the Authority may have a deleterious effect upon the
sewerage works, the municipal sewerage works or authorized peak flow
rates, be harmful to person and/or property and/or constitute a public
nuisance, the Authority and/or the municipality may:
(1) Reject the discharge;
(2) Require pretreatment of the discharge to a condition which, in the
sole discretion of the Authority, is acceptable; or
(3) Require control over the quantities and/or rates of discharge.
B. If the Authority and/or the municipality requires the pretreatment of a
discharge and/or control over the quantities and/or rates of discharge,
the design and installation of any applicable plants, facilities and/or
equipment shall be initially subject to the review and approval of the
municipality and subsequently the Authority and subject to the
requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, laws and regulations.
§ 158-4 KENILWORTH CODE § 158-7
1:718
not limited to pH monitoring equipment, lower explosion limit detection
instrumentation, automatic sampling devices and any other monitoring
devices. All such equipment shall be installed and maintained in accordance
with the Rules and Regulations Concerning Discharges to the Rahway
Valley Sewerage Authority, originally adopted by the Authority on June 16,
1983, and as amended from time to time.
§ 158-8. Standards for tests and analyses. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
Laboratory analysis of industrial waste samples shall be performed by
laboratories certified by the NJDEP in wastewater analyses for the
parameters to be analyzed. Test procedures identified in 40 CFR 136,
Test Procedures for the Analysis of Pollutants, or comparable regulations
hereafter promulgated shall be utilized for all analyses.
§ 158-9. Powers of inspectors.
Inspectors, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted
to enter all properties discharging to the sewerage works and/or the
municipal sewerage works for the purposes of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling and/or testing in accordance with the supervision
contained herein. Inspectors shall have authority to inquire into all matters
bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewerage works and/or
the municipal sewerage works.
§ 158-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person failing to comply with or violating the provisions of this article
shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000
or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both. Each day
during which any such violation continues shall be deemed a separate and
distinct offense.
§ 158-11. Severability.
If any provision herein shall be determined by any court of competent
jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate
the remainder but shall be confined in its operation to the provision directly
involved.
§ 158-12. Repealer.
All ordinances and parts of ordinances, including but not limited to Chapter
158 of the laws of the Borough of Kenilworth, insofar as they are
inconsistent with any of the terms or provisions of this article, are hereby
superseded and repealed to the extent of such inconsistency only.
§ 158-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-13
1:719
§ 158-13. When effective.
This article shall take effect upon publication and second reading and in
accordance with law.
§ 158-14. Material saved from repeal.127
Nothing in this article shall be deemed to repeal or amend the provisions of
the Revised Zoning Ordinance of the Borough of Kenilworth.128
127. Editor's Note: Section 158-14 was previously amended 9-11-1979 by Ord. No. 79-19.
128. Editor's Note: See Ch. 120, Land Use, Part 3, Zoning.
§ 158-13 KENILWORTH CODE § 158-14
1:720
ARTICLE II
Services from Township of Union
[Adopted 8-23-1995 by Ord. No. 95-16]
§ 158-15. Application submitted to Township of Union.
An application will be made and submitted by the property owner to the
Chief Financial Officer of the Township of Union for the purpose of
connecting into the sanitary sewer system of the Township of Union and
receiving services therefrom. Such application shall be subject to approval
of the Township Engineer of Union Township, and all use and services will
be subject to his supervision and approval.
§ 158-16. Accompanying plans and profiles.
The application shall be submitted with the appropriate plans and profiles
as may be required by the Municipal Engineer of Union Township and will
be subject to his approval.
§ 158-17. Schedule of fees; bills; delinquencies.
The Township of Union will establish a schedule of fees and other charges
related to the costs of connection, supervision and usage which will be
in addition to the sums as may now be levied through the joint meeting
of Essex and Union Counties under the existing or amended user charge
ordinances recently adopted by the Township of Union. Appropriate bills
will be submitted directly to the property owner by the proper official of the
Township of Union and will be due and payable upon presentation thereof.
In the event that such bill shall remain open and unpaid to the Township of
Union, it shall be considered delinquent. All delinquencies shall be charged
at the rate of 1 1/2% per month until fully paid and satisfied.
§ 158-18. Proof of payment required.
The Borough of Kenilworth will not issue any building permits with regard
to properties requesting a connection into and use of the sanitary sewer
system of the Township of Union unless such applicant submits proof of
payment of any and all sewer or other charges due and owing to the
Township of Union at the time application is made for such permit to the
Construction Official of the Borough of Kenilworth. This condition shall
apply to all properties now connected to or otherwise utilizing the sanitary
sewer system of the Township of Union, as well as all future users of such
facilities.
§ 158-19. Copies of building and/or plumbing permits.
The property owner shall forward to the Chief Financial Officer of Union
Township copies of any and all building and/or plumbing permits issued for
buildings or other structures proposed to be serviced by the sanitary sewer
§ 158-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-19
1:721
facilities herein referred to in order to enable the Township of Union to
maintain proper records regarding those properties being served.
§ 158-20. Notification of Borough Tax Collector of unpaid charges.
The Township of Union may periodically notify the Tax Collector of the
Borough of Kenilworth or other municipal officer charged with the
enforcement of municipal liens of those property owners utilizing the
sanitary sewer system who have not promptly paid their charges and are
in a delinquent status, together with a statement of the amount owed,
plus interest and related charges. Upon receipt of such list of delinquent
property owners, the Tax Collector or the municipal officer of the Borough
of Kenilworth charged with enforcement of municipal liens shall cause
such charges to be certified as an open lien on the books and records
of the municipality as provided for in the manner set forth in N.J.S.A.
40:14B-42. In addition to the foregoing, the Tax Collector or other municipal
officer charged with the enforcement of municipal liens of the Borough
of Kenilworth shall, when preparing for an annual tax sale pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 54:5-19, make a written request of the Chief Financial Officer of the
Township of Union for a certified list of delinquent charges and properties
as permitted and required under N.J.S.A. 54:5-40. Such certified list of
delinquent properties shall be included within such tax sale.
§ 158-21. Delinquent charges included on lien records.
All delinquent charges submitted to the Borough of Kenilworth shall be
reflected upon the lien records of said Borough and shall be set forth on any
official search by the designated bonded official pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-11
and 54:5-12.
§ 158-22. Tax sale certificate. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
Any delinquency certified to the Tax Collector of the Borough of Kenilworth
or other municipal officer charged with enforcement of municipal liens shall
be included within the tax sale certificate issued to the purchaser at the
time of the public sale permitted by N.J.S.A. 54:5-46. Upon redemption of
the tax sale certificate pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-58 et seq., the Tax Collector
of the Borough of Kenilworth shall forthwith remit to the Tax Collector of
the Township of Union the amount of the delinquency as certified together
with a pro rata share of all accumulated interest and other charges, less an
administrative fee equal to 10% of the total amount collected on behalf of
the Township of Union. A copy of the redeemed tax sale certificate issued
by the Borough of Kenilworth shall also be sent to the Tax Collector of the
Township of Union. The Borough of Kenilworth may, in its sole discretion,
bring an in rem foreclosure action pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-104.29 et seq.
on any tax sale certificates which have not been redeemed. In the event that
no redemption occurs and the Borough of Kenilworth becomes the owner
of the property subject to the lien, then and in that event the Borough
of Kenilworth agrees to pay to the Township of Union the amount of its
§ 158-19 KENILWORTH CODE § 158-22
1:722
lien, less any administrative costs as provided for herein, but only after
the subject property has been sold by the Borough of Kenilworth at public
sale as permitted by law, and further provided that all of the costs and
expenses, including legal and advertising expenses, are first paid for out of
the proceeds of such sale. In no event and under no circumstances shall
the Borough of Kenilworth be considered a user of the Township of Union
sewer system nor shall it become liable for the payment of past, current
or future connection or usage charges by virtue of acquiring ownership of
any property connected to and/or using the Union Township sewer system
through an in rem foreclosure action pursuant to law.
§ 158-23. Termination of service.
In addition to all other remedies set forth herein, the Township of Union
shall have all the powers and rights to terminate the sewer and water
service as permitted by N.J.S.A. 40:14B-44.
§ 158-24. Term of provisions.
The provisions set forth herein shall remain in effect until such time as
either municipality shall terminate the same by the adoption of an
authorizing resolution or ordinance providing for such termination and
forwarding a copy of the same to the other municipality.
§ 158-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-24
1:723

ARTICLE III
Sanitary Sewer Remediation
[Adopted 11-26-1997 by Ord. No. 97-22]
§ 158-25. Findings; purpose.
The governing body finds that by virtue of the age of the sanitary sewerage
infrastructure within the Borough there has been and continues to be a
problem with surface and subsurface water invading the system. This inflow
and infiltration water increases the average daily flow generated by the
Borough which, in many cases, causes the Borough to exceed its flow
rights resulting in sanctions imposed on the Borough by the Rahway Valley
Sewerage Authority. The purpose of this article is to establish a remediation
program to address the problem of inflow and infiltration in an attempt
to reduce the costs of sanitary sewage disposal to the residents of the
Borough.
§ 158-26. Inflow/Infiltration Remediation Program established;
improvement project schedule.
There is hereby established an Inflow/Infiltration Remediation Program in
the Borough of Kenilworth. The program shall be ongoing and continuous in
nature and shall be administered by the Borough Engineer. The governing
body, with the advice and assistance of the Borough Engineer, shall develop
a five-year capital improvement project schedule which shall identify and
prioritize those areas of the sanitary sewer system most urgently in need
of repair. On or before September of each year, the Borough Engineer shall
update the list with any new areas in need of repair.
§ 158-27. New construction fees; calculation; payment.
§ 158-28. Fees for existing facilities; calculation; payment.
A. Each property owner, agent or applicant seeking to obtain an
appropriate local endorsement or CP-1 approval from the Rahway
Valley Sewerage Authority (RVSA) for new construction of a
nonresidential facility shall, in addition to any fee payable to the RVSA,
be subject to payment of a remediation charge of $5 for each gallon of
flow per day anticipated to be generated by the proposed new
connection. The calculations of such flow shall be made by the Borough
Engineer using projected water usage and design flow estimates as
established, from time to time, by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection (NJDEP).
B. Payment of the remediation fee as required by this section shall be
made at the time the fee for the local endorsement or CP-1 approval is
paid.
A. Each property owner, agent or applicant seeking to obtain a plumbing
permit to perform work on an existing facility which will have the net
§ 158-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-28
1:725
§ 158-29. Escrow account.
The Borough Chief Financial Officer is hereby authorized and directed to
establish an interest-bearing escrow account to be designated "Borough of
Kenilworth Inflow/Infiltration Remediation Account." All fees received by
the Borough pursuant to § 158-27 of this article shall be deposited in said
account and shall be dedicated to and, together with all accrued interest
earned thereon, be used solely and exclusively to perform corrective inflow/
infiltration work on the projects identified in § 158-26 of this article.
§ 158-30. Severability.
If any provision of this article shall be determined to be invalid by any
court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect, impair
or invalidate the remainder but shall be confined in its operation to the
provisions directly involved.
effect of increasing the daily flow of such facility into the sanitary sewer
system shall pay a fee for such increase. The per gallon fee and method
of calculation shall be the same as that used in § 158-27 of this article.
B. The payment of the fee provided for in this section shall be in addition
to any other fees required to be paid for permits or other approvals, and
shall be collected prior to and as a condition of the issuance of a permit.
§ 158-28 KENILWORTH CODE § 158-30
1:726
ARTICLE IV
Illicit Connections
[Adopted 5-24-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-07]
§ 158-31. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prohibit illicit connections to the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Borough of Kenilworth so
as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties
for the failure to comply.
§ 158-32. Definitions and word usage.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use
in the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When
not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tease include
the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number,
and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The
word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. The definitions
below are the same as or based on corresponding definitions in the New
Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C.
7:14A-1.2.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Waste and wastewater from humans or household
operations.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any physical or nonphysical connection that
discharges domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water, process wastewater
or other industrial waste (other than stormwater) to the municipal separate
storm sewer system operated by the Borough of Kenilworth unless that
discharge is authorized under a NJPDES permit other than the Tier A
municipal stormwater general permit (NJPDES Permit Number NJO141
852). Nonphysical connections may include, but are not limited to, leaks,
flows, or overflows into the municipal separate storm sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Nondomestic waste, including but not limited to
those pollutants regulated under § 307(a), (b), or (c) of the Federal Clean
Water Act [33 U.S.C. § 1317(a), (b), or (c)].
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough of Kenilworth or other
public body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater.
NJPDES PERMIT — A permit issued by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used to reduce temperature
for the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come into direct contact
§ 158-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-32
1:727
with any raw material, intermediate product (other than heat) or finished
product. Noncontact cooling water may, however, contain algaecides, or
biocides to control fouling of equipment such as heat exchangers, and/or
corrosion inhibitors.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Any water which, during manufacturing or
processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production
or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct,
or waste product. Process wastewater includes, but is not limited
to, leachate and cooling water other than noncontact cooling water.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 158-33. Prohibited conduct. [Amended 10-28-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-06]
§ 158-34. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department, code enforcement
officers of the Borough of Kenilworth and Department of Public Works.
§ 158-35. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-28-2015 by Ord.
No. 2015-06]
A. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged through an illicit
connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by
or for the Borough of Kenilworth any domestic sewage, noncontact
cooling water, process wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than
stormwater).
B. No person shall place any object within three feet of any access point or
manhole for a sanitary sewer or a storm sewer, or an industrial sewer
within a municipal right-of-way or easement that may obstruct access to
the sewer system.
C. No person shall obstruct a storm sewer inlet grate thereby restricting
the natural flow of surface water into a storm sewer or retention pond
or dry well.
A. Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this
article shall be subject to a fine of no less than $100 and not more than
$2,000. Each day that a violation continues after notification shall
constitute an additional separate offense. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 158-32 KENILWORTH CODE § 158-35
1:728
B. Any object in violation of § 158-33B or C shall be subject to removal by
the municipality at the owner's expense if it is not removed by the
owner and/or person(s) responsible for placing the obstruction within
the municipal right-of-way.
C. If any object that is removed by the municipality is not reclaimed and
the owner or his/her designee has not paid for the removal and storage
within 10 business days, the object shall be deemed abandoned and
sold by the Borough Clerk to pay for the cost of the removal and storage
of the object in addition to the cost of the sale.
§ 158-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-35
1:729

ARTICLE V
Storm Sewer System Improper Disposal of Waste
[Adopted 5-24-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-06]
§ 158-36. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the spilling, dumping, or disposal
of materials other than stormwater to the municipal separate storm sewer
system (MS4) operated by the Borough of Kenilworth so as to protect public
health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to
comply.
§ 158-37. Definitions and word usage.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough of Kenilworth or other
public body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 158-38. Prohibited conduct.
The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials other than stormwater to
the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Borough of
Kenilworth is prohibited. The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials
other than stormwater in such a manner as to cause the discharge of
pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system is also prohibited.
§ 158-39. Exceptions to prohibition.
Exceptions to prohibition include:
A. Water line flushing and discharges from potable water sources.
§ 158-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-39
1:731
§ 158-40. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department, the Department of
Public Works of Kenilworth and code enforcement officers of the Borough of
Kenilworth.
§ 158-41. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who continues to be in violation of the provisions of this
article, after being duly notified, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed
$1,500. Each day that a violation continues after notification shall constitute
a separate offense.
B. Uncontaminated groundwater (e.g., infiltration, crawl space or
basement sump pumps, foundation or footing drains, rising
groundwaters).
C. Air-conditioning condensate (excluding contact and noncontact cooling
water).
D. Irrigation water (including landscape and lawn watering runoff).
E. Flows from springs, riparian habitats and wetlands, water reservoir
discharges and diverted stream flows.
F. Residential car washing water and residential swimming pool
discharges.
G. Sidewalk, driveway and street wash water.
H. Flows from firefighting activities.
I. Flows from rinsing of the following equipment with clean water:
(1) Beach maintenance equipment immediately following its use for its
intended purposes; and
(2) Equipment used in the application of salt and deicing materials
immediately following salt and deicing material applications. Prior
to rinsing with clean water, all residual salt and deicing materials
must be removed from equipment and vehicles to the maximum
extent practicable using dry cleaning methods (e.g., shoveling and
sweeping). Recovered materials are to be returned to storage for
reuse or properly discarded.
(3) Rinsing of equipment, as noted in the above situation, is limited to
exterior, undercarriage, and exposed parts and does not apply to
engines or other enclosed machinery.
§ 158-39 KENILWORTH CODE § 158-41
1:732
ARTICLE VI
Sump Pump Inspections and Certificates
[Adopted 10-13-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-13]
§ 158-42. Sump pump inspection and certificate required.
No owner shall sell or transfer nor shall anyone or any entity purchase
or obtain title to a residential or nonresidential building in the Borough
without obtaining from the Building Department of the Borough of
Kenilworth a sump pump inspections certificate. The certificate is required
even if the building is not equipped with a sump pump. The certificate shall
be evidence that no sump pump or any other device discharges drainage
resulting from rainwater, springs, wells or other groundwater into the
sanitary sewer system in violation of subsections of this chapter, nor shall
any sump pump be permitted to discharge so as to create a hazardous
condition to the public. No purchaser of real property shall purchase real
property within the Borough unless the transferor has obtained the required
certificate of sump pump compliance within 30 days prior to closing.
§ 158-43. Application for certificate; procedures; fee.
The Building Department shall issue certificates of sump pump compliance
in accordance with the following procedures:
§ 158-44. Violations and penalties.
A. Application; fee. Applications for certificates of sump pump compliance
shall be filed with the Building Department by the transferor of the
property or the property owner or their authorized designee, as the
case may be, at least 10 business days but not more than 30 days prior
to the change in ownership and/or first occupancy. Applications shall be
submitted on the form supplied by the Building Department and shall
be accompanied by a fee in the amount of $75 per inspection and for
each reinspection if an additional inspection is required.
B. Inspection.
(1) Upon receipt of a completed application, the Building Department
shall request an inspection of the property by the designated
Borough official to determine compliance with the standards set
forth in this article.
(2) If a violation exists, the property owner and the applicant will be
put on a notice of the violation by first-class mail within two
business days after the inspection. The notice shall clearly describe
the violation and the remedial action needed for compliance within
10 business days after the mailing of the notice.
A. Any person who fails to obtain a certificate of sump pump compliance as
required by this article shall upon conviction be liable to the penalty of
§ 158-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-44
1:733
§ 158-45. Right of entry.
not less than $100 nor more than $2,000. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
B. The owner of any building, lot or land where anything in violation of this
article exists and any contractor, agent or person who commits or
knowingly assists in the commission of any such violation shall each be
guilty of a separate offense, and, upon conviction, shall each be liable to
the penalty specified in this section.
C. Any person violating any provision of this article shall become liable to
the Borough for any expense, loss or damage caused to the Borough
because of such violation in addition to all cost of collection and
enforcement proceedings.
A. Upon reasonable belief that a violation of this article exists, any other
duly authorized employee of the Borough bearing proper credentials
and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the
purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing
at any reasonable hours and notice to the property owner. Such right of
entry shall include the right to inspect activity.
B. The Borough Council may designate an individual by resolution to serve
as the primary party and any additional parties responsible for the
inspection of sump pumps and any connections to the sanitary sewers.
C. If a party refuses to grant access during common business hours during
a weekday after having been given reasonable notice in writing of no
less than two business days, the Borough Attorney may seek an
administrative search warrant from a judge of the Superior Court in
order to gain access.
§ 158-44 KENILWORTH CODE § 158-45
1:734
ARTICLE VII
Maintenance of Refuse Containers and Dumpsters
[Adopted 4-13-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-02]
§ 158-46. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to require dumpsters and other refuse
containers that are outdoors or exposed to stormwater to be covered at all
times and to prohibit the spilling, dumping, leaking, or other discharge of
liquids, semiliquids or solids from the containers to the municipal separate
storm sewer system(s) operated by the Borough of Kenilworth and/or the
waters of the state so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to
prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 158-47. Definitions; word usage.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
DUMPSTER or REFUSE CONTAINER — Any waste container that a person
controls, whether owned, leased, or operated, including dumpsters, trash
cans, garbage pails, and plastic trash bags.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough of Kenilworth or other
public body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation, including rain and
snow, that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams,
wetlands, and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether natural or
artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
§ 158-48. Covering of containers and dumpsters; prevention of
leaks and discharges.
§ 158-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-48
1:735
§ 158-49. Exceptions.
The following shall be exceptions to the prohibited conduct in § 158-48
above:
§ 158-50. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department, Zoning Officer and/
or Health Officer of the Borough of Kenilworth.
§ 158-51. Violations and penalties. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
Any person who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not to exceed $2,000
or imprisonment up to 90 days, or a period of community service up to 90
days, or any combination thereof. Each day that a violation continues shall
be deemed a separate violation.
A. Any person who controls, whether owned, leased, or operated, a refuse
container or dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster is
covered at all times and shall prevent refuse from spilling out or
overflowing.
B. Any person who owns, leases or otherwise uses a refuse container or
dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster does not leak or
otherwise discharge liquids, semiliquids or solids to the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Borough of Kenilworth.
A. Permitted temporary demolition containers.
B. Litter receptacles (other than dumpsters or other bulk containers).
C. Individual homeowner trash and recycling containers.
D. Refuse containers at facilities authorized to discharge stormwater
under a valid NJPDES permit.
E. Large bulky items (e.g., furniture, bound carpet and padding, white
goods) placed curbside for pickup.
§ 158-48 KENILWORTH CODE § 158-51
1:736
ARTICLE VIII
Private Storm Drain Inlet Retrofitting
[Adopted 4-13-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-03]
§ 158-52. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to require the retrofitting of existing storm
drain inlets which are in direct contact with repaving, repairing,
reconstruction, or resurfacing or alterations of facilities on private property,
to prevent the discharge of solids and floatables (such as plastic bottles,
cans, food wrappers and other litter) to the municipal separate storm sewer
system(s) operated by the Borough of Kenilworth so as to protect public
health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to
comply.
§ 158-53. Definitions; word usage.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough of Kenilworth or other
public body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORM DRAIN INLET — An opening in a storm drain used to collect
stormwater runoff and includes, but is not limited to, a grate inlet, curbopening
inlet, slotted inlet, and combination inlet.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams,
wetlands, and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether natural or
artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
§ 158-54. Prohibited conduct.
No person in control of private property, except a residential lot with one
single-family house, shall authorize the repaving, repairing (excluding the
repair of individual potholes), resurfacing (including top coating or chip
sealing with asphalt emulsion or a thin base of hot bitumen), reconstructing
§ 158-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-54
1:737
or altering of any surface that is in direct contact with an existing storm
drain inlet on that property unless the storm drain inlet either:
§ 158-55. Design standard; exceptions.
Storm drain inlets identified in § 158-55 above shall comply with the
following standard to control passage of solid and floatable materials
through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this section, "solid and floatable
materials" means sediment, debris, trash, and other floating, suspended, or
settleable solids.
A. Already meets the design standard below to control passage of solid
and floatable materials; or
B. Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the design standard in § 158-56 below
prior to the completion of the project.
A. Grates.
(1) Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever
they use a grate in pavement or another ground surface to collect
stormwater from that surface into a storm drain or surface water
body under that grate:
(a) The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT)
bicycle-safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the
NJDOT Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways Planning
and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
(b) A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate
has an area of no more than seven square inches, or is no
greater than 0.5 inch across the smallest dimension.
(2) Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates in grate
inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening portion) of combination
inlets, grates on storm sewer manholes, ditch grates, trench grates,
and grates of spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground
surfaces include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open
channels, and stormwater basin floors.
B. Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear space in
that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if the curb opening
has two or more clear spaces) shall have an area of no more than seven
square inches, or be no greater than two inches across the smallest
dimension.
C. This standard does not apply:
(1) Where the Borough Engineer agrees that this standard would
cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could not practicably
be overcome by using additional or larger storm drain inlets that
meet these standards;
§ 158-54 KENILWORTH CODE § 158-55
1:738
§ 158-56. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department and/or Zoning
Officer of the Borough of Kenilworth.
§ 158-57. Violation and penalties. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
Any person who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not to exceed $2,000
or imprisonment up to 90 days, or a period of community service up to 90
days, or any combination thereof. Each day that a violation continues shall
be deemed a separate violation.
(2) Where flows are conveyed through any device (e.g., end-of-pipe
netting facility, manufactured treatment device, or a catch basin
hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all
solid and floatable materials that could not pass through one of the
following:
(a) A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches wide
(this option does not apply for outfall netting facilities); or
(b) A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inch.
(3) Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars; or
(4) Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
determines, pursuant to the New Jersey Register of Historic Places
rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet this standard is an
undertaking that constitutes an encroachment or will damage or
destroy the New Jersey Register listed historic property.
§ 158-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-57
1:739
Chapter 160
SHOPPING CARTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 91.
§ 160-1. Display of name and address of owner required.
The owner or owners of shopping carts, carriages or wagons intended for
the use of patrons in carrying articles of merchandise from the stores of
such owners in the Borough of Kenilworth shall clearly designate on each
cart, carriage or wagon so used the name and the address of such owner or
owners.
§ 160-2. Abandonment prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for such owner or owners to permit to be left unattended
or abandoned on any public streets or public place within the Borough of
Kenilworth any such shopping cart, carriage or wagon.
§ 160-3. Confiscation; redemption; fees. [Amended 9-11-1979 by
Ord. No. 79-19]
It shall be the duty of the Kenilworth Police Department to confiscate all
such shopping carts, carriages or wagons left unattended or abandoned,
and the same shall be redeemed by the owners only upon payment to the
Borough of Kenilworth of a sum as provided in Chapter 91, Fees, for each
such cart, carriage, wagon or vehicle. In the event that such vehicles are
not reclaimed within 30 days, a storage charge as provided in Chapter 91,
Fees, shall be levied against such owner or owners.
Chapter 163
(RESERVED)
Chapter 165
SMOKE DETECTORS AND LOCK BOXES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 78.
Fees and licenses — See Ch. 91.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 94.
§ 158-57 KENILWORTH CODE § 160-3
1:740
ARTICLE I
Smoke Detectors
[Adopted 9-12-1978 by Ord. No. 78-25; amended in its entirety
4-13-1993 by Ord. No. 93-6]
§ 165-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPROVED SMOKE DETECTORS — Instruments approved by a nationally
licensed testing laboratory for the detection of ionized gases or products of
combustion produced by smoldering or burning materials.
§ 165-2. Installation prior to sale or rental of premises. [Amended
9-27-1995 by Ord. No. 95-23; at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
With the exception of new construction, no residence or apartment shall be
sold, rented or otherwise transferred unless approved smoke detectors are
installed in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:70-4.19 and a certificate of smoke
detector compliance has been issued in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.3.
A certificate of compliance issued pursuant to this article shall be valid for
a period of 90 days from the date of issuance.
§ 165-3. Inspections. [Amended 9-27-1995 by Ord. No. 95-23]
No one- to three-family residence or apartment shall be sold, rented or
transferred unless the same shall have been duly inspected and approved
by the licensed fire official or one of the licensed inspectors employed by the
local Bureau of Fire Prevention established under Chapter 94 of this Code
to ensure that the same complies with § 165-2 of this article.
§ 165-4. Application for inspection; fee. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
Application for inspection shall be made, in writing, at the office of the
Building Department of the Borough of Kenilworth and be accompanied
with a fee as set forth in Chapter 91, Fees and Licenses, for each rental
unit to be inspected or each one-, two- or three-family structure being sold.
The fee shall include one reinspection should noncompliance be determined
upon first inspection. A fee as set forth in Chapter 91, Fees and Licenses,
will be charged for each additional inspection to ensure compliance with
this article.
§ 165-5. Tax Collector statement.
The Tax Collector of the Borough of Kenilworth shall provide to each person
requesting a tax search from his/her office a statement calling attention to
the provisions of this article and shall inform the persons requesting a tax
search of the obligation of the owner and seller of real estate to obtain an
§ 165-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-5
1:741
inspection by the Building Department and to install smoke detectors as
provided herein prior to transfer of title.
§ 165-6. Distribution of fees. [Amended 9-27-1995 by Ord. No.
95-23]
The fee collected shall be distributed in the following manner: The Borough
of Kenilworth shall receive half for administrative expenses, and half of the
fee shall be paid to the licensed official making the necessary inspection.
§ 165-7. (Reserved)129
§ 165-8. (Reserved)130
§ 165-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article or fails to comply with
any provision herein shall be subject to prosecution in the Municipal Court
and, if convicted, shall be subject to a fine of up to $500 for a first offense
and up to $1,000 for a second and each subsequent offense. Each day such
violation continues shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation of this
article.
§ 165-10. Enforcement. [Amended 9-27-1995 by Ord. No. 95-23]
The Bureau of Fire Prevention, the Construction Official and the Fire
Subcode Official shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this
article.
129. Editor's Note: Former § 165-7, Smoke Detector Inspector, was repealed 9-27-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-23.
130. Editor's Note: Former § 165-8, Term of Inspector, was repealed 9-27-1995 by Ord. No.
95-23.
§ 165-5 KENILWORTH CODE § 165-10
1:742
ARTICLE II
Key Lock Box Emergency Access System
[Adopted 10-12-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-09]
§ 165-11. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTOMATIC DIALER — A device that automatically dials and relays a
prerecorded message to a central station or the Fire Department.
AUTOMATIC FIRE SUPPRESSION SYSTEM — A system or assembly of
piping, valves, controls, and sprinklers which are designed and installed
to comply with the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) standards,
which utilize water, foam, carbon dioxide, or other gas to automatically
react to suppress fire.
CENTRAL STATION — An office of a private company to which remote
alarm and supervisory signaling devices are transmitted and where
personnel are in attendance at all times to supervise the circuits and
investigate signals.
FIRE OFFICIAL — The Fire Chief or his/her designee.
KEY LOCK BOX — A secure rapid entry system that is designed to be used
by Fire Department personnel in the event of an emergency to gain entry
into a structure by using the enclosed owner-provided key(s). This box is
usually mounted on the exterior of the building in a location that is specified
by the Fire Official. All boxes shall be UL (Underwriters Laboratories)
certified, Knox Box brand, and approved by the Fire Official.
STANDPIPE SYSTEM — A wet or dry system of piping, valves, outlets and
related equipment designed to provide water or a fire retardant at specified
pressures and installed exclusively for the fighting of fires.
§ 165-12. Structures to be equipped with key lock box.
Unless otherwise determined, in writing, by the Fire Official, the following
structures shall be equipped with a key lock box of a type and size and at a
location approved by the Fire Official:
A. All new commercial buildings shall be equipped with a key lock box
prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy.
B. All existing commercial buildings constructing additions, major
renovations, or changes of use that require Borough Zoning or Planning
Board approval shall be equipped with a key lock box prior to the
issuance of any necessary permits.
C. All existing commercial buildings with new occupancies by tenants
shall be equipped with a key lock box prior to the issuance of a
certificate of continued occupancy.
§ 165-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-12
1:743
§ 165-13. Key lock box contents.
D. Each building protected by an automatic fire suppression and/or
standpipe system and not manned 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
E. Each building protected by an automatic fire alarm system (automatic
dialer, central station, external audible/visual alarm) and not manned
24 hours a day, seven days a week.
F. Multifamily residential structures that have restricted access through
locked doors but have a common corridor for access to the living units,
including, but not limited, to condominium buildings.
G. Schools, whether public or private.
H. Governmental structures and nursing care facilities, unless the building
is staffed or open 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
I. Any other commercial building that the Fire Official reasonably believes
would benefit from having a secure lock box. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
A. The property owner is required at all times to keep a key(s) in the key
lock box that will allow access to the structure. The key lock box shall
contain, but not be limited to, the following items as designated by the
Fire Official:
(1) Labeled keys to locked points of ingress and egress, whether in
interior or exterior of such buildings;
(2) Labeled keys to the locked mechanical rooms;
(3) Labeled keys to locked elevator rooms and controls;
(4) Labeled keys to any fence or secured areas;
(5) Labeled keys to areas of the building where fire alarm panels and
fire protection systems are located;
(6) Labeled keys to any other areas that may reasonably be required by
the Fire Official;
(7) A card containing the emergency contact names and phone
numbers for the building;
(8) Floor plans of the rooms within the building showing locations of
shutoffs;
(9) Hazardous materials information; and
(10) An inventory of the keys.
B. The property owner shall notify, in writing, the Borough Fire
Department when any or all of the locks or keys have been changed and
§ 165-12 KENILWORTH CODE § 165-13
1:744
§ 165-14. Registration and installation of key lock boxes. [Amended
at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
The property owner shall apply for a registration for a key lock box on forms
provided by and obtained from the Fire Official. A registration with a check
made payable to the Borough in the amount set forth in Chapter 91, Fees
and Licenses, is required prior to the installation of a key lock box in order
to verify the proper size, mounting location and installation of said key lock
box. The key lock box shall be installed at a location approved by the Fire
Official. No key lock box shall be installed, voluntarily or otherwise, without
first obtaining the approval of the Fire Official. The property owner shall be
responsible for the cost to purchase, install, and maintain the key lock box.
§ 165-15. Compliance; reinspections.
§ 165-16. Violations and penalties.
shall keep the immediate area of the key lock box free and clear of any
and all obstructions.
A. All existing buildings required to have a key lock box shall comply with
this article within one year from the date notified by the Fire Official. All
newly constructed buildings not yet occupied or buildings currently
under construction and all buildings or businesses applying for a
certificate of occupancy shall comply immediately upon passage of this
article. In any event, the owner of any structure in the Borough with
hazardous material in sufficient quantities to be a significant threat as
determined by the Fire Official shall comply with this article within 60
days from receipt of written notice from the Fire Official. The cost of
purchasing and installing, along with any cost associated with
implementation of the program at a specific property, will be borne by
the property owner and/or business owner.
B. In even-numbered years, each key lock box shall be inspected for
continued compliance with regard to all the required contents. The
property owner and/or business owner shall pay for the reinspection
per key in the lock box. The reinspection fee is included in Chapter 91,
Fees and Licenses. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
A. Any property owner and/or business owner failing to comply with this
article shall be subject to a fine of not more than $200 nor less than
$100 for each day of violation or noncompliance.
B. Any tenant that has changed a lock to an area which has a key in the
lock box and has failed to provide a key to the Fire Official shall be
subject to a fine of not more than $200 nor less than $100 for each day
of violation or noncompliance.
C. If a landlord or tenant is a business entity such as a corporation or LLC
or LLP which is in violation of this article, then the president of the
§ 165-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-16
1:745
§ 165-17. Severability.
Each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of this article is
declared to be an independent section, subsection, sentence, clause and
phrase, and the finding or holding of any such portion of this article to be
unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause, or reason, shall not affect
any other portion of this article.
§ 165-18. Repealer.
All Borough ordinances and parts of ordinances that are inconsistent with
this article are hereby repealed.
corporation or the managing member shall be personally responsible
for the penalty imposed and if not paid within 10 business days shall
be subject to imprisonment for up to 30 days. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 165-16 KENILWORTH CODE § 165-18
1:746
Chapter 166
SMOKING
§ 165-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-18
1:747

ARTICLE I
Municipal Buildings and Borough Agencies
§ 166-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOROUGH AGENCY — A commercial or other bureau furnishing some form
of service for or to the public or otherwise under the general auspices of the
Borough of Kenilworth.
MUNICIPAL BUILDING — A building or portion of a building owned or
leased by the Borough of Kenilworth.
§ 166-2. Prohibited acts; exception.
§ 166-3. Posting of signs required.
All municipal buildings or agencies affected by this article shall be identified
by signs posted by the department/division thereof with letters at least
one inch in height stating "SMOKING PROHIBITED" or designated by the
appropriate smoking prohibited international symbol. The letters or
symbols shall contrast in color with the sign. Every sign required by this
section shall be located so as to be clearly visible to the public and
employees.
§ 166-4. Disciplinary action.
Where the Department of Health has reason to suspect that any official and/
or employee may be in violation of this article, the Department shall first
give written notice to the suspected violator and an opportunity to be heard.
If the Department subsequently determines that this article has in fact been
violated, the official and/or employee may be subject to disciplinary action
pursuant to the appropriate laws, regulations and civil service guidelines.
§ 166-5. Violations and penalties; disposition of fines.
A. Smoking is prohibited in all municipal buildings and Borough agencies.
B. Outdoor facilities owned or leased by the Borough of Kenilworth and
used for holding sports events, such as football, baseball or basketball,
or those providing ambulatory recreation are excluded from this article.
A. Any municipal health official engaged in executing or enforcing this
article may order any person smoking in violation of § 166-2 to comply
with the provisions of this article. Thereafter, any such person who
smokes in a government building or agency shall be subject to a fine not
to exceed $25.
§ 166-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 166-5
1:749
§ 166-6. Right to withhold public services.
§ 166-7. Enforcement.
B. Any penalty recovered under the provisions of this article shall be in the
name of the Board of Health and paid into the treasury of the Borough
of Kenilworth.
A. Department/division heads shall have the right to withhold the services
of his/her department/division to any member of the public who smokes
in a municipal building or agency, provided that the department/
division head and/or Borough employee informs that person that
smoking is prohibited. Services shall not be denied if the member of the
public complies with the rules governing smoking after receiving
notice.
B. Any person waiting for service in a municipal building/agency who
leaves the building to smoke shall, upon reentering the building/agency,
have the right to regain his/her position in the order of persons
receiving those services.
A. The Municipal Court shall have jurisdiction over proceedings to enforce
and collect any penalty imposed because of a violation of this article.
The proceedings shall be summary and in accordance with N.J.S.A.
2A:58-10 et seq. Process shall be in the form of a summons and shall
issue from the Board of Health as plaintiff. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
B. The Health Officer and his or her duly appointed agents shall be
responsible for executing or enforcing this article against any member
of the public found to be in violation hereof.
§ 166-5 KENILWORTH CODE § 166-7
1:750
ARTICLE II
Tobacco Sales to Minors
[Added 8-28-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-12]
§ 166-8. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
HEALTH OFFICER — The Health Officer of the Borough of Kenilworth and/
or his or her authorized representatives.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, cooperative, association,
corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or any
other legal entity.
TOBACCO — Any product made from the tobacco plant for the purpose
of smoking, chewing, inhaling and other personal use, including cigars,
chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco, snuff and cigarettes in any form.
VENDING MACHINE — Any automated, self-service device which, upon
insertion of money, tokens or any other form of payment, dispenses
cigarettes or other tobacco products.
§ 166-9. Sales to minors prohibited; sign required. [Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
In addition to the existing New Jersey state prohibitions regarding the sale
of tobacco products to minors under 21 years of age, the following shall
apply throughout the Borough of Kenilworth:
§ 166-10. Identification required. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
It shall be unlawful for a tobacco retailer to sell or permit to be sold tobacco
to any individual without requesting and examining identification from the
purchaser positively establishing the purchaser's age as 21 years or greater,
unless the seller has some other conclusive basis for determining the buyer
is over the age of 21 years.
A. Sign requirements. A sign having a minimum size of six inches by eight
inches shall be posted in a conspicuous place near each cash register in
all retail establishments which sell tobacco products and shall contain
the following language:
SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO MINORS UNDER THE AGE OF
21 IS PROHIBITED BY LAW. Legal proof of age must be shown. A
person who sells or offers to sell a tobacco product to a person under
21 years of age may be prosecuted in accordance with state and local
ordinances.
§ 166-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 166-11
1:751
§ 166-11. Self-service displays prohibited.
All self-service displays for tobacco products, including cigarettes and snuff,
are prohibited. All tobacco products must be dispensed to the customer by
the clerk from a rack or display that is behind the counter.
§ 166-12. Tobacco vending machines prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to offer for sale or to sell tobacco through a tobacco
vending machine in the Borough of Kenilworth.
§ 166-13. Removal of tobacco vending machines.
All tobacco vending machines made unlawful by the terms of this article
shall be removed within 30 days from the effective date of this article.
§ 166-14. Enforcement.
§ 166-15. Severability; construal of provisions.
A. Whenever the Health Officer, Police Chief, other Borough official or one
of their designees reasonably believes there exists a violation of this
article, he/she may issue a complaint for summons, after discovery of
the alleged violation. The complaint shall be written and shall state with
reasonable particularity the nature of the violation, including reference
to the article and section in this chapter alleged to have been violated.
The complaint shall be delivered or sent by certified mail to the alleged
violator.
B. The Health Officer, Police Chief or one of their designees, or any other
person charged with enforcement of this article, after giving proper
identification, may inspect any matter, thing, premises, place, person,
record, vehicle, incident, or event as necessary to ensure that the
provisions of this article have not been violated.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to molest, willfully oppose, verbally
abuse or otherwise obstruct the Health Officer or his designee who may
request the assistance of the Borough of Kenilworth or the Kenilworth
Police Department or other police agency or peace officer to assist in
carrying out his or her official duties pursuant to this article.
D. The Health Officer may suspend the retail food establishment license of
any person convicted of violation of this article for a period of not more
than three days pursuant to the authority of the Health Officer to
license and regulate food establishments as provided by N.J.S.A.
26:3-31c and Chapter 202 of the Kenilworth Board of Health Code.
A. If any section, subsection or paragraph of this article is declared to be
unconstitutional, invalid or inoperative, in whole or in part, by a court of
competent jurisdiction, such section, subsection or paragraph shall, to
the extent that it is not unconstitutional, invalid or inoperative, remain
in full force and effect, and no such determination shall be deemed to
§ 166-11 KENILWORTH CODE § 166-15
1:752
§ 166-16. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication as
required by law.
§ 166-17. Violations and penalties. [Added at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
Any person, firm or corporation who or which violates any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction, be subject to the general penalty set forth in
Chapter 1, Article I, General Penalty, of the Borough of Kenilworth Code.
invalidate the remaining sections, subsections or paragraphs of this
article.
B. This article shall be liberally construed for the protection of the health,
safety, and welfare of the people of the Borough of Kenilworth.
§ 166-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 166-17
1:753
Chapter 167
SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees and licenses — See Ch. 91. Grading, excavations and landfills — See Ch.
112.
§ 167-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to control soil erosion and sediment damages
and related environmental damage by requiring adequate provisions for
surface water retention and drainage and for the protection of exposed
soil surfaces in order to promote the safety, public health, convenience and
general welfare of the community.
§ 167-2. Definitions and word usage.
A. Word usage. For the purpose of this chapter, certain rules of word usage
apply to the text as follows:
(1) Words used in the present tense include the future tense, and the
singular includes the plural, unless the context clearly indicates the
contrary.
(2) The term "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary; the
word "may" is permissive.
(3) Words or terms not interpreted or defined by this section shall have
a meaning of common or standard utilization.
B. Definitions. The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation
and enforcement of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically stated:
APPLICANT — A person, partnership, corporation or public agency
requesting permission to engage in land disturbance activity.
CRITICAL AREA — A sediment-producing, highly erodible soil or a
severely eroded area.
EROSION — Detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice and gravity.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — A plan which fully
indicates necessary land treatment measures, including a schedule of
the timing for their installation, which will effectively minimize soil
erosion and sedimentation. Such measures shall be in accordance with
standards as adopted by the State Soil Conservation Committee.
EXCAVATION or CUT — Any act by which soil or rock is cut into, dug,
quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced or relocated.
§ 166-17 KENILWORTH CODE § 167-2
1:754
§ 167-3. Plan and permit required.
No land area shall be disturbed by any person, partnership, corporation,
municipal corporation or other public agency within this municipality unless
the applicant has submitted to the Borough Engineer a plan to provide for
soil erosion and sediment control for such land area in accordance with the
Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey adopted
by the local Soil Conservation District and such plan has been approved,
and unless a valid land disturbance permit has been issued by the Borough
Engineer, except as exempted by § 167-10.
§ 167-4. Development of plan; data required.
FARM CONSERVATION PLAN — A plan which provides for the use of
land within its capabilities and for treatment within practical limits,
according to chosen use, to prevent further deterioration of soil and
water resources.
LAND — Any ground, soil or earth, including marshes, swamps,
drainageways and areas not permanently covered by water within the
Borough.
LAND DISTURBANCE — Any activity involving the clearing, grading,
transporting or filling of land and any other activity which causes land
to be exposed to the danger of erosion.
MULCHING — The application of plant residue or other suitable
materials to the land surface to conserve moisture, hold soil in place
and aid in establishing plant cover.
PERMIT — A certificate issued to perform work under this chapter.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in
suspension, is being transported or has been moved from its site of
origin by air, water or gravity as a product of erosion.
SEDIMENT BASIN — A barrier or dam built at suitable locations to
retain rock, sand, gravel, silt or other material.
SITE — Any plot, parcel or parcels of land.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin.
SOIL CONSERVATION DISTRICT — A governmental subdivision of this
state which encompasses this Borough, organized in accordance with
the provisions of Chapter 24, Title 4, of the New Jersey Revised
Statutes.
STATE SOIL CONSERVATION COMMITTEE — An agency of the state
established in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 24, Title 4, of
the New Jersey Revised Statutes.
STRIPPING — Any activity which significantly disturbs vegetated or
otherwise stabilized soil surface, including clearing and grubbing
operations.
§ 167-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 167-4
1:755
§ 167-5. Review and approval of plan.
§ 167-6. Control measures during disturbance activity.
Control measures shall apply to all aspects of the proposed land disturbance
and shall be in operation during all stages of the disturbance activity. The
following principles shall apply to the soil erosion and sediment control
plan:
A. The applicant must submit a separate soil erosion and sediment control
plan for each noncontiguous site. The applicant may consult with the
local Soil Conservation District in the selection of appropriate erosion
and sediment control measures and the development of the plan.
B. Such plans shall contain:
(1) Location and description of existing natural and man-made
features on and surrounding the site, including general topography
and soil characteristics and a copy of the Soil Conservation District
soil survey, where available.
(2) Location and description of proposed changes to the site.
(3) Measures for soil erosion and sediment control, which must meet
or exceed the Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in
New Jersey adopted by the State Soil Conservation Committee.
Said standards shall be on file at the offices of the local Soil
Conservation District and the Borough Clerk.
(4) A schedule of the sequence of installation of planned erosion and
sediment control measures as related to the progress of the
project, including anticipated starting and completion dates.
C. All proposed revisions of data required shall be submitted for approval.
A. Erosion and sediment control plans submitted with subdivision,
planned unit development (PUD) and site plan applications shall be
reviewed by the Planning Board and approved as part of the application
when in conformance with the Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control in New Jersey. The Board may seek the review of the local Soil
Conservation District in the review of such plans and may deem as
approved those plans which have been received and determined
adequate by the local Soil Conservation District. The Board may also
refer such plans to the Borough Engineer for his review and approval.
B. All other types of soil disturbance not exempted in § 167-10 shall come
under the review of the designated municipal officer in accordance with
his memorandum of understanding with the local Soil Conservation
District.
A. Stripping of vegetation, grading or other soil disturbance shall be done
in a manner which will minimize soil erosion.
§ 167-4 KENILWORTH CODE § 167-6
1:756
§ 167-7. Maintenance of control measures.
All necessary soil erosion and sediment control measures installed under
this chapter shall be adequately maintained for one year after completion
of the approved plan or until such measures are permanently stabilized
as determined by the Borough Engineer. The Borough Engineer shall give
the applicant, upon request, a certificate indicating the date on which the
measures called for in the approved plans were completed.
§ 167-8. Performance and maintenance bonds.
B. Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained and protected.
C. The extent of the disturbed area and the duration of its exposure shall
be kept within practical limits.
D. Either temporary seeding, mulching or other suitable stabilization
measures shall be used to protect exposed critical areas during
construction or other land disturbance.
E. During and after development or disturbance, drainage provisions shall
accommodate increased runoff resulting from modified soil and surface
conditions. Such provisions shall be in addition to all existing
requirements.
F. Water runoff shall be minimized and retained on the site wherever
possible to facilitate groundwater recharge.
G. Sediment shall be retained on the site.
H. Diversions, sediment basins and similar required structures shall be
installed prior to any on-site grading or disturbance.
A. In the event that certain work required under the land disturbance
permit cannot be performed within the time set for completion and is
postponed, a cash bond in a form approved by the Borough Attorney, in
an amount equal to the cost of such uncompleted work, may be
deposited with the Borough Treasurer to guarantee performance,
which amount shall be determined by the Borough Engineer. No such
permission to postpone work shall exceed six months. Upon failure to
complete the work, the Treasurer shall use the money deposited with
the Borough to finish the unfinished portion of the work in accordance
with the land disturbance permit. Any unused portion of the moneys
deposited shall be returned to the applicant.
B. Prior to acceptance of work performed in accordance with the land
disturbance permit, the Borough Engineer shall obtain a cash
maintenance bond from the applicant. Such bond shall be in an amount
equal to 15% of the cost of the work performed by the applicant, as
determined by the Borough Engineer. Such bond shall guarantee
proper maintenance of the disturbed site for the period required by this
chapter. Upon expiration of the period of the maintenance bond, the full
§ 167-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 167-8
1:757
§ 167-9. Fees.
The applicant shall pay to the Borough Clerk a fee as provided in Chapter
91, Fees and Licenses, at the time the application is submitted, to cover the
cost of providing reviews and inspections required by this chapter, except
that where the application is part of the processing of a subdivision, site
plan review or planned unit development (PUD) submission, no fee shall be
required.
§ 167-10. Exemptions.
The following activities are specifically exempt from this chapter:
§ 167-11. Enforcement; inspections.
The requirements of this chapter shall be enforced by the Borough
Engineer, who shall also inspect or require adequate inspection of the
work. If the Borough Engineer finds existing conditions not as stated in the
applicant's erosion and sediment control plan, he may refuse to approve
further work and may require necessary erosion and sediment control
measures to be promptly installed and may seek other penalties as provided
in § 167-13.
§ 167-12. Appeals.
Appeals from decisions under this chapter may be made to the Borough
Council in writing within 10 days from the date of such decision. The
appellant shall be entitled to a hearing before the Borough Council within
30 days from the date of appeal. The Borough Council may thereafter
reverse, modify or affirm the aforesaid decision. Notification of the decision
shall be sent to the appellant in writing and officially published within 10
days.
§ 167-13. Violations and penalties.
amount less the costs incurred for maintenance shall be returned to the
applicant.
A. Land disturbance associated with single-family dwellings on an existing
lot.
B. Use of land for gardening primarily for home consumption.
C. Applications involving sites of three acres or less in the business or
industrial zones.
D. Agricultural use of lands when operated in accordance with a farm
conservation plan approved by the local Soil Conservation District or
when it is determined by the local Soil Conservation District that such
use will not cause excessive erosion and sedimentation.
§ 167-8 KENILWORTH CODE § 167-13
1:758
Chapter 169
STORMWATER CONTROL
Chapter 170
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Loitering — See Ch. 127.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 142.
Retail sales on sidewalks — See Ch. 154, Art.
II.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 190
A. Any person, partnership, corporation, municipal corporation, public
agency or other entity violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to the general penalty set forth in
Chapter 1, Article I, General Penalty, of the Borough of Kenilworth
Code. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
B. In the event that construction is involved, the Borough Engineer shall
issue a stop-work notice, which shall be effective until rescinded.
C. In addition to the penalties herein provided, expenses incurred by the
Borough in repairing or correcting any such violation shall also be
recoverable from the violating party.
§ 167-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 167-13
1:759

ARTICLE I
Snow and Ice Removal
[Adopted 3-15-1995 by Ord. No. 95-6131]
§ 170-1. Definitions. [Amended 12-14-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-09]
The following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the
meanings stated herein unless their use in the text of this article of Chapter
170 clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not inconsistent with
the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words
used in the plural number include the singular number, and words used in
the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always
mandatory and not merely directory.
HANDICAPPED PARKING SPACE — Any parking space on public or private
property appropriately marked for vehicles for the physically handicapped
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.5 and 52:27D-119 et seq.
PARKING AREA OR LOT — Any area, not on a street of the Borough, which
is intended or used for storage or parking of vehicles.
PARKING SIDE OF A VEHICLE — The side of a parked vehicle nearest to
the edge and/or curb of a street.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
SIDEWALK — A paved path or footwalk for public use located between
the curbline and right-of-way line of any public or municipally maintained
roadway.
SNOWFALL — Snow, sleet, ice and the like resulting from precipitation
that accumulates on the streets, which requires removal by a plow or other
specialized equipment.
STREET — Public streets, avenues, thoroughfares and the like in the
Borough of Kenilworth.
§ 170-2. Removal from sidewalks.
A. It shall be the duty of the owner and occupant, jointly and severally, of
every parcel of real estate adjoining a public sidewalk, whether the
parcel of real estate is occupied by a structure or not, to keep such
sidewalks adjoining such property free from snow and ice along a threefoot
width for the entire length of the sidewalk adjoining said real
estate.
B. Except as provided in Subsection D hereof, snow and ice shall be so
removed from the sidewalks of all business and commercial premises
within the Borough within six hours after the cessation of any fall of
131. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. I, Snow and Ice Removal, adopted
3-25-1958 by Ord. No. 58-10, as amended.
§ 170-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-2
1:761
§ 170-3. Snow, ice and water falling from buildings.
The owner or occupants of buildings adjacent to public sidewalks shall
prevent the falling of snow, ice or water from such buildings upon said
public sidewalks.
§ 170-4. Depositing of snow and ice prohibited.
No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited any snow or ice in the
following places:
§ 170-4.1. Accumulations prohibited.
No person shall cause the accumulation of snow and/or ice on any street or
sidewalk in such a manner as to endanger pedestrians or vehicular traffic
or to obstruct the vision of motorists.
§ 170-4.2. Removal by Borough.
snow, sleet or freezing rain; provided, however, that snow or ice that
has ceased to fall or to be formed after 6:00 p.m. of any evening may be
removed at any time before 12:00 noon of the following day.
C. Except as provided in Subsection D hereof, snow and ice shall be so
removed from all other sidewalks within the Borough within 18 hours
after the cessation of any fall of snow, sleet or freezing rain.
D. In the event that snow and ice on a sidewalk have become so hard that
they cannot be removed without the likelihood of damage to the
sidewalk, the person or entity charged with their removal shall, within
the time mentioned in Subsection B or C hereof, cause enough sand or
other abrasive to be put on the sidewalk to make travel thereon
reasonably safe and shall then, as soon thereafter as weather permits,
cause said sidewalk to be cleaned so as to comply with Subsection A
above. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
A. Within a five-foot radius of any fire hydrant.
B. On any portion of a street.
C. On any public or private property without the permission of the owner.
D. On any corner within 10 feet of any intersection, in excess of four feet in
height or in such a manner so as to obstruct a motorist's vision.
E. On any terrace or parcel of land, within six feet of any street, in such a
manner as to create an obstruction to the vision of pedestrian or
vehicular traffic exiting or entering the street.
A. Whenever any person neglects or refuses to remove any snow or ice
which is piled, gathered or plowed up by him or her, or is allowed to
accumulate in violation of this article, within four hours after a notice to
§ 170-2 KENILWORTH CODE § 170-4.2
1:762
§ 170-4.3. Handicapped parking spaces. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
No owner, tenant or operator of any premises having parking spaces which
are properly marked and designated for disabled drivers shall block access
to such parking spaces or permit or allow a contractor or other person to
block access to such parking spaces by the plowing, piling or placement of
snow or ice in such spaces or in such a way as to prevent access to such
spaces by a motor vehicle.
§ 170-4.4. Enforcement.
The Kenilworth Police Department and the Superintendent of the
Department of Public Works shall have the authority to enforce the
provisions of this article.
§ 170-4.5. Parking restrictions; prohibited conduct. [Added
12-14-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-09132; amended 10-8-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-11]
In accordance with N.J.S.A. 39:4-197:
do so by the enforcing authority, the Borough may remove or cause to
be removed said snow or ice from such street, terrace, lot or sidewalk
and the responsible party shall be liable for the full cost of removal.
B. If the Borough removes or causes to be removed snow or ice pursuant
to Subsection A of this section, the Borough Clerk shall promptly
present to the violator a bill for the cost of removal. If not paid within 30
days, in the case of a property owner, the cost thereof shall be assessed
against the property and become a lien thereon, collectible in the same
manner as delinquent property taxes.
A. When snow, sleet or freezing rain covers the streets of the Borough,
prohibited parking shall then be enforced on municipal streets as
follows: [Amended 2-11-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-01; at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
(1) On days of the month that are even numbered, a vehicle shall not
be parked on the even-numbered side of the street.
(2) On days of the month that are odd-numbered, a vehicle shall not be
parked on the odd-numbered side of the street.
(3) Between the hours of 9:00 p.m. to 12:00 midnight, the restriction
on alternate side of the street parking shall be suspended.
(4) Unless otherwise posted, there shall be no parking in municipal
parking lots between 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. with the exception
132. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former § 170-4.5 as
§ 170-4.6.
§ 170-4.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-4.5
1:763
§ 170-4.6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-14-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011-09; 10-8-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-11]
of the municipal lot at South 23rd Street and the Boulevard and
the municipal lot on South 24th Street which shall be restricted
to municipal employees and officials without regard to handicap
parking locations.
(5) No owner or operator of any vehicle shall park in such manner
prohibiting or hindering snowplowing or de-icing operations.
B. A vehicle shall be less than four inches from the edge and/or curb of the
street.
C. No person shall use any method to reserve a parking area to maintain a
parking spot. The Borough of Kenilworth reserves the right to collect
and dispose of the means to reserve any parking space in violation of
this provision without maintaining any liability for the item removed
from the public street.
D. No owner, tenant or occupant or any premises abutting any street, nor
any person working for or on behalf of any owner, tenant or occupant,
shall throw, place or deposit any snow or ice upon the public street. The
intent of this provision is to prohibit all persons from throwing, placing
or depositing snow or ice from the private driveway, parking area, or on
the sidewalk in front of the property, upon the municipal street or
sidewalks of the Borough of Kenilworth.
A. Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this
article shall be subject to the following fine: a fine of $100. [Amended
2-11-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-01]
B. Any vehicle not in compliance with this provision within the Borough of
Kenilworth may, after the issuance of a summons, be removed from the
public street at the owner's expense for towing and storage at the rate
of $150 for the tow and $30 per day or any part thereof after it has been
stored for more than four hours. If a vehicle requires to be dug out to be
safely removed, the tow charge shall be deemed earned upon arrival of
the tow vehicle. [Amended 2-11-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-01]
C. No vehicle shall be released unless the towing and storage charge has
been paid by check, cash or credit card. Vehicles may be driven away
from the tow yard only after a release has been issued by the Police
Department confirming that the vehicle has currently in effect
insurance, is properly registered and the driver has a valid driver's
license. Vehicles without insurance and/or registration may be removed
after payment to the tow yard with a release from the Police
Department by a towing company after proof of authority to take
possession of the vehicle has been produced.
D. Any individual who knowingly stops payment on a check or credit card
to the tower for a vehicle removed from the Borough street due to
§ 170-4.5 KENILWORTH CODE § 170-4.6
1:764
§ 170-4.7. Severability. [Amended 10-8-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-11]
Each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of this article is
declared to be an independent section, subsection, sentence, clause and
phrase, and the finding or holding of any such portion of this article to
be unconstitutional, void, or ineffective for any cause, or reason, shall not
affect any other portion of this article.
§ 170-4.8. Repealer. [Amended 10-8-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-11;
2-11-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-01]
All Borough ordinances and parts of ordinances that are inconsistent with
this amended article are hereby repealed.
natural impediments shall incur an additional charge of $500 plus any
court costs.
§ 170-4.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-4.8
1:765

ARTICLE II
Poles, Wires and Trees
[Adopted 2-25-1958 by Ord. No. 58-6]
§ 170-5. Consent to erect required.
No pole shall hereafter be erected in any street in the Borough of
Kenilworth by any telegraph, telephone or electric light company or by
any person or corporation whatsoever unless the consent of the Borough
Council and the approval of property owners to such erection shall be
first obtained, and in no case shall trees be mutilated by cutting limbs or
branches without first obtaining permission from the Borough Council. No
posts shall be erected on any sidewalk when said sidewalk is less than seven
feet wide.
§ 170-6. Attachment to trees prohibited.
No person, company or corporation shall attach any guy or stay line or wire
or any electric wire, insulator or other device for the holding of an electric
wire to any tree standing in a street of the Borough of Kenilworth.
§ 170-7. Maintenance; removal of unsafe poles.
All telegraph, telephone or electric light poles erected by permission as
herein provided and poles already erected and renewed shall be straight
and free from imperfection and in length shall not be less than 35 feet and
in diameter not less than 10 inches at the butt and five inches at the top.
All poles of the dimensions aforesaid shall be set not less than five feet in
the ground. Poles exceeding 35 feet in length shall be set six inches in the
ground for each four feet of height, and any pole that, in the judgment of the
Council, is unsafe shall be removed by the corporation maintaining same
within 10 days after notice from the Council to remove the same shall have
been given.
§ 170-8. Use by Borough.
It shall be deemed part of the permission to set such telegraph, telephone or
electric light poles that a cross piece put on all poles hereafter erected may
be used by the Borough of Kenilworth to place fire alarms or police patrol
or telephone wires.
§ 170-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-8
1:767

ARTICLE III
Visibility at Intersections
[Adopted 9-27-1955 by Ord. No. 55-24]
§ 170-9. Enforcement agents.
The Chief of Police and the Building Inspector of the Borough of Kenilworth
are hereby designated and appointed as the officers of the municipality to
exercise the powers prescribed by this article in the manner hereinafter
provided, their services, as such, to continue at the pleasure of the Borough
Council.
§ 170-10. Notice to eliminate hazard. [Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
If the Chief of Police shall determine at any time that any brush, hedges or
other plant life growing within 10 feet of any roadway within the Borough of
Kenilworth and within 25 feet of the intersection of any two such roadways
obstructs the view of persons using such intersection so as to create a traffic
hazard, he shall notify the owner or tenant of the lands on which same
is growing to cut or trim same to a height of not more than 2 1/2 feet or
in such other manner as he may designate as necessary to eliminate such
hazard and to afford a clear and uninterrupted view at such intersection.
§ 170-11. Failure to comply.
If the owner or tenant so notified fails to comply with the order to cut or
trim such brush, hedges or other plant life within 10 days from the service
of such notice as hereinafter provided, then the Chief of Police shall notify
the Building Inspector of such fact, and the Building Inspector shall then
proceed to have the Department of Public Works cut or trim same or have
same cut or trimmed in such manner as to comply with said notice and to
eliminate said hazard.
§ 170-12. Removal by municipality.
In all cases where brush, hedges or other plant life are cut or trimmed from
any such lands by the municipality, the Building Inspector shall certify the
cost thereof, in writing, to the Borough Council. The Borough Council shall
examine such certificate and, if found correct, shall cause the cost, as shown
therein, to be charged against said lands or, in the event that such cost
is excessive, shall cause the reasonable cost thereof to be charged against
said lands, and the amount so charged shall forthwith become a lien upon
such lands and shall be added to, become and form a part of the taxes next
to be assessed and levied upon such lands, same to bear interest at the same
rate as other taxes, and same shall be levied, collected and enforced by the
same officers and in the same manner as taxes.
§ 170-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-13
1:769
§ 170-13. Service of notice.
The notice herein provided for shall be given by mailing same to the owner
and tenant, if any, of said lands at the last known address of said owner and/
or tenant as shown on the books of the Tax Collector of the Borough.
§ 170-14. Enforcement authorization.
The Borough of Kenilworth and all persons affected by this article shall
be entitled to the rights and remedies and subject to the restrictions and
penalties as prescribed by Chapter 152 of the Laws of 1949.133
133. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.26 et seq.
§ 170-13 KENILWORTH CODE § 170-14
1:770
ARTICLE IV
Openings
[Adopted 7-10-1996 by Ord. No. 96-16134]
§ 170-15. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EMERGENCY — A condition or circumstance which involves immediate
danger to life or property, or both, or which involves a possibility of
interruption or curtailment of a service furnished to the public by a public
utility.
PERMITTEE — Any public utility, individual or company to which a permit
has been issued under and pursuant to this article.
PUBLIC UTILITY — Any public utility as defined in N.J.S.A. 48:2-13.
§ 170-16. Permit required; application process.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to perform any excavation work or to
dig up, break, excavate, tunnel, undermine or in any manner disturb
any street or to make or cause to be made any excavation in or under
the surface of any street for any purpose or to place, deposit or leave
upon any street any earth or other excavated material obstructing or
tending to interfere with the free use of the street or dig up, break,
excavate or undermine or in any way affect any other public
improvement within a public right-of-way, unless such person shall first
have obtained a permit therefor from the Borough Construction
Department as herein provided.
B. Application for a permit shall be made on forms to be provided by the
Borough. The application shall state the purpose of the excavation and
the name and address of the person who will restore the permanent
pavement when the same is not to be done by the Borough or the
applicant. The application shall be accompanied by a diagram
indicating the nature and extent of the excavation to be made and work
to be done, the proposed dates of commencement and completion of the
excavation, which date shall be the expiration date of any permit issued
pursuant to the application, and other data as may reasonably be
required. If, during the course of the work, any major variation is
required, the permittee shall file an amended diagram showing the
manner in which the work is actually being done.
C. No permit shall be issued unless the application therefor has been
endorsed thereon in writing with the approval of the Supervisor of the
Traffic Bureau in the Police Department of the Borough of Kenilworth,
and the permit shall be subject to such conditions, restrictions,
134. Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded former Art. IV, Openings, adopted 4-8-1958 by
Ord. No. 58-13, as amended.
§ 170-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-16
1:771
§ 170-17. Fees.
The fees payable for permits issued under this article shall be as provided
in Chapter 91, Fees and Licenses. Such fees shall be applied to cover
administrative costs of processing the application and engineering
inspection fees necessitated by the work to be done.
§ 170-18. Fee computation for additional openings.
In all cases where the sewer, laterals or other road openings for any
purposes shall not run at right angles to the street or shall require an
opening wider than three feet, the fees for the permits above mentioned
shall be double the fees for each opening in excess of three feet in width;
and for all openings exceeding a distance of 15 feet, the fee shall be
predicated upon the payment of a street opening fee for each additional 15
feet that a street is opened.
§ 170-19. Traffic control, barricade and lighting.
§ 170-20. Repair deposits.
limitations and instructions as may be provided by the Traffic Bureau
to promote the safe and efficient use of roadways within the Borough of
Kenilworth.
A. The Building Department shall forward a copy of each application for a
street opening permit to the Chief of Police for a determination whether
traffic control shall be required during the period of construction. If it is
determined that the permittee shall need the assistance of a law
enforcement officer to control traffic in the vicinity of the construction
site, then the applicant shall be required, in addition to the other fees
provided for in this article, to pay all costs associated with having a
police officer direct traffic at the site.
B. All street openings and work areas shall be provided with warning
signs, barricades and lighting as necessary for public safety. All
warning, traffic control signs, barricades and lighting shall be in
conformance with the appropriate section of the State of New Jersey
Department of Transportation Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices.
A. The application for an excavation permit to perform excavating work
under this article shall be accompanied by a repair deposit. Such repair
deposit will be in the form of cash or certified check made payable to
the Borough of Kenilworth and shall be received by the Borough Clerk
prior to the issuance of any permit. The amount of the repair deposit
required shall be calculated based on surface area of opening and as
follows:
(1) For an opening up to 100 square feet: $500.
§ 170-16 KENILWORTH CODE § 170-20
1:772
§ 170-21. Surety bond.
(2) For an opening of 101 to 500 square feet: $1,000.
(3) For an opening of 500 to 1,000 square feet: $1,500.
(4) Any opening greater than 1,000 square feet: the cash deposit shall
be determined by the Borough Engineer, based on the size of the
project.
B. Any cash repair deposit made hereunder shall serve as security for the
repair and performance of work necessary to put the street in as good a
condition as it was prior to the excavation if the permittee fails to make
the necessary repairs or to complete the proper refilling of the opening
and the excavation work under the excavation permit.
C. Upon the permittee's completion of the work covered by such permit
and upon written certification of the Borough Engineer that the
permittee has performed all work in conformity with this article, the
entire cash deposit shall be refunded to the permittee; provided,
however, that the Borough may use any or all of such deposit to pay for
the cost of any work the Borough performs or contracts to be performed
to restore or maintain the street as herein provided in the event that the
permittee fails to perform such work in accordance with the provisions
of this article, in which event the amount to be refunded shall be
reduced by the amount thus expended by the Borough.
D. Cash repair deposits will be waived in the case of installation or repair
of sidewalks by the owner or by a person acting for the owner of real
property and may be waived in the case of installation of new public
improvements by a subdivider or site developer in accordance with
approved plans and without cost to the Borough; provided, however,
that such waiver will not be granted if, in the opinion of the Borough
Engineer, a cash repair deposit is necessary to assure protection of
existing improvements or to guarantee against damages during
construction.
A. If an individual cash repair deposit required by § 170-20 exceeds $500,
or if the applicant is a public utility regulated by the federal government
and/or the State of New Jersey, the applicant may deposit with the
Borough Clerk a surety bond in the amount of the cash repair deposit or
an annual bond in the amount of not less than $5,000, made payable to
the Borough of Kenilworth. The required surety bond must be:
(1) With good and sufficient surety.
(2) By a surety company authorized to transact business in the State of
New Jersey.
(3) Satisfactory to the Borough Attorney in form and substance.
§ 170-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-21
1:773
§ 170-22. Insurance.
Before the issuance of a permit, there shall be furnished to the Borough
a policy of insurance, insuring the Borough against public liability and
property damage with no less than single limit coverage of $1,000,000
(4) Conditioned upon the permittee's compliance with this article and
to secure and hold the Borough and its officers harmless against
any and all claims, judgments or other costs arising from the
excavation and other work covered by the excavation permit or for
which the Borough, the Borough Council or any Borough officer
may be liable by reason of any accident or injury to person or
property through the fault of the permittee, either in not properly
guarding the excavation or for any other injury resulting from the
negligence of the permittee, and further conditioned to fill up,
restore and place in good and safe condition, as nearly as it can be,
to its original condition and to the satisfaction of the Borough
Engineer, all openings and excavations made in streets and to
maintain any street where an excavation is made in a condition as
good as before said work shall have been done for a period of 12
months after said work shall have been done, usual wear and tear
excepted. Any settlement of the surface within said one-year period
shall be deemed conclusive evidence of defective backfilling by the
permittee.
B. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to require the permittee to
maintain any repairs to pavement made by the Borough if such repairs
should prove defective.
C. Recovery on such bond for any injury or accident shall not exhaust the
bond but it shall, in its entirety, cover any or all future accidents or
injuries during the excavation work for which it is given.
D. In the event of any suit or claim against the Borough by reason of the
negligence or default of the permittee, any final judgment against the
Borough requiring it to pay for such damage shall, upon the Borough
giving written notice to the permittee of such suit or claim, be
conclusive upon the permittee and his or her surety.
E. An annual bond may be given under this provision which shall remain in
force for one year, conditioned as above, in the amount specified above
and in other respects as specified above but applicable as to all
excavation work in streets by the principal in such bond during the term
of one year from said date.
F. Public utilities may deposit a corporate bond, conditioned as in the case
of a surety bond, in the amount of $5,000, in lieu of said surety bond,
but such corporate bond must be in addition to a cash repair deposit of
$500. Such cash repair deposit may, by Council action, be returned with
interest to the utility after a twelve-month period wherein the Borough
has made no charges or written demands against the deposit.
§ 170-21 KENILWORTH CODE § 170-22
1:774
for personal injuries and no less than coverage of $250,000 for property
damage. A municipal corporation or public utility corporation may, in lieu
of an insurance policy, file with the Borough its bond to hold the Borough
harmless from all damages to persons or property, including the defense of
any action, which may result from the issuance of any permit and the work
in connection therewith.
§ 170-22.1. General standards.
The permittee shall comply with the following general conditions with
regard to the opening, backfilling and resurfacing of any public street or
public place:
A. The permittee shall keep each opening properly guarded and, at night,
have lights placed thereat and, in doing the work, interfere as little as
possible with the travel along the road and open no greater part of the
road at any time than shall be allowed by the Borough. If the excavation
is to extend the full width of the road, no more than 1/2 of the road shall
be opened at one time, and such 1/2 shall be backfilled before the other
1/2 is opened, so as to permit the free flow of traffic.
B. The opening shall be backfilled immediately, and the pavement shall be
restored with at least a temporary pavement or bituminous concrete
base material unless otherwise directed by the Borough Engineer.
C. Restoration of the opening shall be the responsibility of the permittee,
and any deposit posted with the Borough as hereinbefore provided shall
be returned only after compliance with § 170-20 of this article.
D. The applicant shall give a twenty-four-hour notice to the Borough
Engineer prior to making an opening and prior to beginning surface
restoration.
E. No opening shall be commenced on a Saturday, Sunday or holiday,
except in a case of emergency.
F. On a bituminous-surface-treated road, the edges of the opening shall be
cut straight through the bituminous surface before the trench is
excavated.
G. The work shall be so conducted as not to interfere with the water mains,
gas lines, sewer lines or their connections with houses unless the
permission of the proper authorities shall have been obtained. All rock
within five feet of a water main or other pipe, which might be damaged
thereby, shall be removed without blasting. No excavation which will
damage trees shall be made.
H. After the underground installation has been completed, the permittee
shall promptly backfill the excavation. The backfill may consist of the
excavated materials but shall be free of all organic material, debris and
clay. It shall be placed in lifts of no more than 12 inches, each lift to be
thoroughly compacted to a grade of 24 inches below subgrade, the
§ 170-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-22.1
1:775
§ 170-22.2. Emergencies.
In case of emergency, any public utility, individual or company may make
an excavation in or tear up the surface of any road without first having
remainder to be backfilled with bank-run gravel. Should the excavated
material be unsuitable for backfill, in the opinion of the Borough
Engineer, then the entire trench shall be backfilled with bank-run
gravel and compacted as described above. Bank-run gravel shall
conform to New Jersey State Department of Transportation soil
aggregate dry Type 1A.
I. After the backfill has been placed, the permittee shall install a
temporary pavement of bituminous material over the opening and shall
keep such temporary pavement to grade until it has been replaced by a
permanent pavement.
J. When final settlement has taken place, the permittee shall replace the
temporary pavement with a permanent pavement, which shall not be
less than 12 inches larger than the length and width of the opening. The
permanent pavement shall be of the same type as the original
pavement, unless authorized by the Borough Engineer. The Borough
Engineer shall be given one day's written notice previous to the time
when the permanent pavement is to be installed in order to permit an
inspection thereof.
K. The permittee shall utilize advanced reconstruction technology (e.g.,
infrared) to restore the pavement surface to the satisfaction of the
Borough Engineer. [Added 10-22-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-18]
L. If work so permitted is to be performed on a street or roadway in the
Borough within five years after the street or roadway has been
resurfaced and/or reconstructed, the permittee shall be required to:
[Added 10-22-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-18]
(1) Provide a written explanation as to the necessity of the work to the
Borough Engineer.
(2) Utilize advanced technologies subject to the approval of the
Borough Engineer (e.g., infrared) to restore the work area.
(3) Post a performance guarantee with the Borough in the amount of
120% of the cost of the road improvements and a maintenance
guarantee of 15% of the cost of construction, as estimated by the
Borough Engineer for a two-year period from final acceptance.
Such guarantees may be posted as cash, irrevocable letter of credit
or bond in a form approved by the Borough Attorney (minimum
guarantee shall be $1,000).
(4) Post escrow funds of $750 to allow the Borough Engineer to make
inspections as necessary to assure compliance with the
requirements of this section.
§ 170-22.1 KENILWORTH CODE § 170-22.2
1:776
obtained from the Borough of Kenilworth a permit therefor, in which case
the public utility, individual or company shall make application for such
permit within two working days after the occurrence of such emergency,
provided that the public utility, individual or company first facsimile
transmits to the office of the Borough Clerk and Borough Building
Department a statement concerning the emergency in question. If the
emergency occurs on a weekend, the FAX notice required by this section
shall be made to the Police Department.
§ 170-22.3. Indemnification of Borough.
In accepting a permit, the permittee shall be deemed to have agreed to
indemnify and save harmless the Borough from and against any and all
loss, costs or damages incurred by reason of any damage to any property,
injury to any person or any loss of life resulting from any negligence of the
permittee, its agents or servants in performing the work covered by the
permit.
§ 170-22.4. Nonapplicability.
The provisions of this article shall not be applicable to any excavation work
under the direction of competent Borough officials, by employees of the
Borough or by any contractor of the Borough or agency or department
of the Borough performing work for and on behalf of the Borough
necessitating openings or excavations in streets, nor shall this article apply
to any excavation work performed adjacent to or within public rights-of-way
by subdividers or site developers in accordance with approved subdivision
or site plans, provided that such subdividers or site developers have, if
required, posted cash guaranties and surety in accordance with §§ 170-20
and 170-21 of this article.
§ 170-22.5. Violations and penalties. [Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
Any person, firm or corporation who or which violates any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction, be subject to the general penalty set forth in
Chapter 1, Article I, General Penalty, of the Borough of Kenilworth Code.
§ 170-22.6. Enforcing authority.
The Borough Engineer, Superintendent of the Department of Public Works
and the Police Department shall have the authority to enforce the provisions
of this article.
§ 170-22.7. Reconstruction or resurfacing of Borough streets;
notice to property owners and public utilities.
A. The Borough of Kenilworth has adopted a long-range capital
improvements program which includes the reconstruction and
resurfacing of Borough streets on an as-needed basis. The Borough has
initiated this program with a view to improving the Borough's roads and
§ 170-22.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-22.7
1:777
to implement a policy of ongoing preventive maintenance to ensure
a safe and efficient infrastructure in a cost-efficient manner to the
taxpayers of the Borough.
B. At least two months prior to the anticipated commencement of any road
construction or resurfacing project, the Borough Engineer shall provide
notice to all property owners with frontage on the street to be
improved. The same notice shall also be provided to all public utility
companies servicing the Borough of Kenilworth. Such notice shall be
made by regular, first-class mail, postage prepaid, and shall be effective
upon mailing. Any property owner, public utility or any other person
who intends to electively open a street for a repair or improvement of
an existing utility or the installation of a new utility must obtain the
permit to do so and complete the work prior to and so as not to interfere
with the reconstruction or resurfacing work scheduled by the
Borough.135
135. Editor's Note: Former § 170-22.8, Restrictions after reconstruction or resurfacing, as
amended, and § 170-22.9, Violations; enforcing authority, which immediately followed this
section, were repealed 10-22-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-18
§ 170-22.7 KENILWORTH CODE § 170-22.7
1:778
ARTICLE V
Street Closings
[Adopted 5-27-1980 by Ord. No. 80-14]
§ 170-23. Authorization.
The Mayor of the Borough of Kenilworth is hereby empowered to provide
by regulation for the closing of any street or a portion thereof to motor
vehicle traffic on any day or days or during specified hours on any day or
days whenever he finds that such closing is necessary for welfare.
§ 170-24. Posting of signs; violations and penalties.
Such regulations shall provide for the posting of proper warning signs of
such closing in the street or portion thereof during the time the same is
closed and shall also provide penalties for the violation thereof, which shall
be a fine not to exceed $500 for each violation.
§ 170-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-24
1:779

ARTICLE VI
Grass and Weed Removal
[Adopted 11-10-1992 by Ord. No. 92-17]
§ 170-25. Brush, weeds and trash removal near roadways.
[Amended 10-12-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-16]
§ 170-26. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
A. Owners or tenants of any property that abuts upon a public road or
sidewalk within the Borough shall be responsible for the removal of all
grass, weeds, trash or other impediments to the Borough's right-of-way
and/or the preservation of the public safety and/or health. Failure to
remove said items within 10 days after notice is received from a public
safety officer, zoning officer or public health officer of the Borough shall
permit the Borough to remove same, and the cost shall be charged
against the property owner which abuts said sidewalk or roadway. The
cost to perform the removal, in addition to an administrative fee of
$500, shall be charged to and become a lien upon the abutting property
so as to be added to the taxes to be levied upon said property the next
physical quarter, plus interest at the rate of 18%, unless paid within 30
days of notice of said assessment. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
B. Any owner or tenant within the Borough shall be required to cut all
brush, hedges or other plant life, excluding Borough trees, to a height
of not more than 2 1/2 feet where such brush, hedge or other plant life
is located within 10 feet of any roadway, or within 25 feet of the
intersection of two roadways, within 10 days after notice to cut same.
Failure to cut and/or remove said brush, hedge or plant life shall be
deemed an impediment as defined in Subsection A above. [Amended
at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II)]
C. The cost to perform the removal as defined hereinabove shall be
cumulative to any penalties for violations issued herein consistent with
§ 170-26.
A. Members of the Kenilworth Police Department, the Zoning
Enforcement Officer, the Construction Official and the Superintendent
of the Department of Public Works are hereby authorized to enforce this
article and issue a summons for any violation. Any property owner and/
or tenant found in violation of this article shall be subject to a fine of not
more than $500. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
B. Each and every day that such violation continues after notice shall be
considered a separate and specific violation of this article.
§ 170-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-26
1:781

ARTICLE VII
Sidewalk Maintenance
[Adopted 4-22-1998 by Ord. No. 98-9]
§ 170-27. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMERCIAL PREMISES — Has the same meaning as that provided for in
§ 150-2, Definitions, of this Code.
MAINTENANCE — Has the same meaning as that provided for in § 150-2,
Definitions, of this Code.
MIXED OCCUPANCY — Has the same meaning as that provided for in
§ 150-2, Definitions, of this Code.
OCCUPANT — Has the same meaning as that provided for in § 150-2,
Definitions, of this Code.
OPERATOR — Has the same meaning as that provided for in § 150-2,
Definitions, of this Code.
OWNER — Has the same meaning as that provided for in § 150-2,
Definitions, of this Code.
PREMISES — Has the same meaning as that provided for in § 150-2,
Definitions, of this Code.
§ 170-28. Maintenance of public sidewalks and walkways;
exceptions.
§ 170-29. Notice of hazardous and/or dangerous condition;
abatement; violations and penalties.
A. It shall be the joint and several obligation and responsibility of each
occupant, owner and/or operator of commercial or other premises to
maintain the public sidewalks and walkways abutting, adjoining and/or
servicing such premises so as to render them safe for their intended use
by the general public.
B. In the case of mixed-occupancy premises, it shall be the responsibility
of the first floor tenants to comply with the provisions of Subsection A
above.
A. Where a hazardous or dangerous condition is determined to exist, the
enforcing agent shall give notice as provided for in Chapter 150, Article
III, §§ 150-13 and 150-14.
B. The violations and penalties applicable to Chapter 150, Article III,
§ 150-16, shall apply to this article.
§ 170-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-30
1:783
§ 170-30. Enforcement.
The Zoning Officer, Kenilworth Police Department and Superintendent of
the Department of Public Works (DPW) shall have concurrent authority to
enforce the provisions of this article.
§ 170-30 KENILWORTH CODE § 170-30
1:784
ARTICLE VIII
Reconstruction of Sidewalks in Business District
[Adopted 7-11-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-12]
§ 170-31. Removal and reconstruction of sidewalk; Boulevard
business district.
§ 170-32. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
The Construction Official, Zoning Officer and Borough Engineer shall have
concurrent authority to enforce the provisions of this article. Any person
A. Any person proposing to install, replace or reconstruct any portion of
the public pedestrian sidewalk, or adjacent area between the sidewalk
and curb, on either side of the Boulevard from the western side of
Michigan Avenue to the light at Coolidge Drive shall finish the surface
of such area with brick paving materials which are the same or as
closely similar to the brick paving surfaces which have already been
installed by the Borough within the designated area.
B. The purpose of this section is not only to create an aesthetically
pleasing downtown central business district but to establish uniformity
of construction and design which is continuous throughout the
designated area.
C. No permit for the removal and installation, replacement or
reconstruction of any public sidewalk, or adjacent area between the
sidewalk and curb, within the designated area shall be issued until the
design criteria set forth herein has been verified and confirmed by the
Borough Engineer.
D. Landowners within the business district that currently have sidewalks
in need of repair and do not have brick pavers for any portion of their
sidewalks within their lot and block may elect to replace their entire
public sidewalk and the adjacent area with concrete. The installation of
the new sidewalk shall conform to the standards imposed, and the
installation shall be inspected and approved by the Borough Engineer.
[Added 6-9-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-08]
E. The cost of the replacement of the sidewalk with concrete rather than
brick pavers shall be borne exclusively by the landowner and not be a
cost assessed or otherwise taxed to a tenant for upkeep, maintenance
or rent. [Added 6-9-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-08]
F. Any landowner who shall violate this section shall, upon conviction
within the Municipal Court, be subject to a fine of not more than
$2,000, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days or a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days, or any combination thereof
in the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge. [Added 6-9-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-08; amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 170-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-32
1:785
who violates the provisions of this article by installing, replacing or
reconstructing a public sidewalk or adjacent area which fails to
substantially conform to the criteria established in § 170-31A shall, upon
conviction, be required to remove the nonconforming surface and replace it
with a conforming surface.
§ 170-32 KENILWORTH CODE § 170-32
1:786
ARTICLE IX
Placement of Dumpsters on Public Rights-of-Way, Sidewalks or
Streets
[Adopted 7-22-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-13]
§ 170-33. Compliance required.
No dumpster or similar container commonly used for the collection of solid
waste, garbage or other refuse shall be permitted to be placed on any public
right-of-way, sidewalk or street in the Borough except in compliance with
the provisions of this article.
§ 170-34. Permit required.
Any person requesting to place a dumpster on any public right-of-way,
sidewalk or street in the Borough will be required to apply for a permit
through the Building Department of the Borough of Kenilworth.
§ 170-35. Application for permit; fees; term; regulations.
A. Any person seeking to place, cause or permit to be placed or utilize a
dumpster on any public right-of-way, public sidewalk or street shall do
so only after having obtained a written permit from the Borough
Construction Official. In order to obtain a permit, an application for a
permit on a form to be furnished by the Building Department shall be
filed and the appropriate fee shall be paid.
B. The fee for obtaining a permit to place a dumpster in a public area shall
be the sum of $75. The permit shall be valid for a period of 30 days and
may be renewed for an additional thirty-day period for an additional
charge of $75.
C. No dumpster shall be placed on any public right-of-way, sidewalk or
street unless it is determined by the Borough Construction Official that
there is not sufficient room on the private property of the person
utilizing the dumpster to place the dumpster.
D. The application shall require the applicant to supply the name and
address of the applicant, the name and address of the property within
the Borough being serviced by the dumpster, the exact proposed
location of the dumpster, the size and capacity thereof, the estimated
length of time that said use is required, the contemplated use of the
dumpster and the party responsible that is supplying and removing the
dumpster by its name, address and telephone number.
E. Each applicant shall furnish the Borough with a certificate of liability
insurance stating that coverage may not be canceled without first
giving 10 days' written notice to the Borough. The limits of coverage
shall be at least $300,000 for bodily injury and $100,000 for property
damage. The insurance shall name the Borough of Kenilworth as an
additional insured. If notice of cancellation is received by the Borough
§ 170-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-35
1:787
§ 170-36. Display of permit.
A copy of the dumpster permit shall be maintained on the premises and
posted in a conspicuous location or affixed to the dumpster in plain view.
§ 170-37. Revocation of permit; emergency removal of dumpster.
and coverage is not reinstated within two business days or if coverage
is otherwise terminated for any reason, the permit shall expire at the
next business day.
F. Each applicant shall file with the application for the permit a completed
and signed release and indemnification agreement as provided by the
Borough. If the applicant is a business entity (i.e., LLC or corporation),
then an individual person with 10% or more ownership of the business
entity shall personally agree to indemnify the Borough for any damage
or claim.
G. The person to whom a permit is issued for a dumpster is required to
warrant that a tarpaulin covers the dumpster or other suitable cover at
all times that the dumpster is not in use for a period of more than two
hours or unattended.
H. All dumpsters shall at all times be kept in good repair and shall be
structurally sound and leakproof.
I. Any dumpster in use pursuant to this section shall comply with the
display markings required under N.J.S.A. 27:5I-1 et seq.
J. No permit shall be issued if the Construction Official or the Chief of
Police determines that the issuance of such permit will constitute a
danger to the public safety or unwarranted interference with the
efficient movement of vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
K. Under no circumstances shall hazardous or toxic material be placed or
stored in any dumpster.
L. Upon removal of the dumpster, the public area shall promptly be swept
clean of all loose debris and restored to its former condition. If any
debris remains in or on the public area after the removal of the
dumpster, the municipality may clean the area and the permit holder
shall reimburse the Borough at the rate of $100 per man hour plus any
costs incurred.
A. The Building Department by the Construction Official may, upon three
business days' notice, revoke a permit if it determines that materially
false statements were made in the permit application or if it determines
that the permit holder has failed to conform to the regulations set forth
herein.
B. The placement of any dumpster within a public right-of-way, sidewalk or
street without a valid permit may result in the removal of the dumpster
§ 170-35 KENILWORTH CODE § 170-37
1:788
§ 170-38. Enforcement.
The Borough Construction Official shall enforce the provisions of this
article.
§ 170-39. Violations and penalties. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine in the amount of $100 for the first violation,
and the violation shall be cured within a seven-day period. Continued
violation after the seven-day period shall be subject to a fine in the amount
of $100 per day.
by the Construction Official, at the expense of the owner of the
dumpster.
C. The applicant shall agree in the application that if the Construction
Official or Fire Official or Health Department official or Police
Department shall determine that an emergency exists directly or
indirectly with regard to any dumpster, the Borough may remove the
dumpster without notice, at the permit holder's expense. [Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
D. A decision by the Construction Official to revoke any permit issued
hereunder shall be transmitted in writing to the permit holder by
registered or certified mail; such decision shall state clearly the
grounds for revocation.
§ 170-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-39
1:789

ARTICLE X
Handicapped Parking
[Adopted 6-12-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
§ 170-40. Purpose. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
The purpose of this article is to supplement Chapter 170 as provided by
state law so as to permit persons with a disability to safely and efficiently
access their home and/or business from municipal streets.
§ 170-41. Handicapped parking zones. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
A. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.46 and 39:4-197.6, handicapped
parking zones are hereby established within the Borough of Kenilworth.
A "handicapped parking zone" means an area of a public roadway
designated for use by a particular person with a disability as provided
for therein and which is so marked by proper signage and roadway
markings. The term "person with a disability" is defined as set forth in
N.J.S.A. 39:4-204.
B. No person shall park a vehicle in any designated parking stalls in
locations which have been established as restricted parking zones as
referred to in the schedule maintained in the office of the Borough
Clerk and in the schedule of handicapped spaces within the general
ordinances of the Borough,136 unless such person is a person with a
disability who has applied for the establishment of the handicapped
parking zone in accordance with N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.6 and pursuant to
this section. Any vehicle parked in a parking zone which does not
display the permit for the use of that particular handicapped parking
zone pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.7 is presumed to have been parked
in such a stall unlawfully and subject to the fines and penalties set forth
in Title 39 of the New Jersey Statutes.
C. Handicapped parking zones may be established in front of or as may
safely be placed near the residences occupied by disabled drivers,
provided that such parking is not otherwise prohibited and does not
interfere with the normal flow of traffic. No handicapped parking zone
will be established for persons who do not possess a valid "person with
a disability" identification card and placard or handicapped plates, and/
or a valid vehicle registration with the vehicle registered in their name
or that of a spouse who resides at the same location. However, those
persons who are parents or legal guardians of developmentally disabled
children residing on a full-time basis within the same household and
conforming to Subsection A herein may be eligible. No restricted
parking zone will be established for applicants who have a driveway,
136. Editor's Note: See Ch. 190, Vehicles and Traffic, § 190-55.
§ 170-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-41
1:791
§ 170-42. Handicapped parking spaces.
carport, garage or other off-street parking space within 100 feet of their
residence which is available for their use.
A. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.5 and 39:4-205, parking spaces for
persons with a disability are established. A "handicapped parking
space" means an area of a public roadway or public parking lot
designated for use by any person with a disability as provided for and
which is so marked by proper signage and roadway markings. The term
"person with a disability" is defined as set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-204.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
B. No person shall park a vehicle in any of the designated parking stalls
for parking for use by persons with a disability in locations referred to
in the ordinances of the Borough,137 unless such person is a person with
a disability. Any vehicle parked in a parking stall reserved for disabled
drivers pursuant to this article which does not display the official state
license plate, or special identification sticker or placard from the New
Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission, is presumed to have parked in such a
stall unlawfully and subject to the fines and penalties set forth in Title
39 of the New Jersey Statutes. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
C. Applications for the establishment of handicapped parking zones and
handicapped parking spaces may be obtained from the Borough Clerk's
office and shall be filed, along with the appropriate documentation, with
the Borough's Police Department, with a copy provided to the Municipal
Clerk. The applicant shall submit an initial processing fee of $175 for a
handicapped parking space to the Borough Clerk, made payable to the
Borough, at the time the application is filed. An annual renewal fee
thereafter of $100 shall be paid with the submission of each annual
renewal application. The Traffic Officer shall, within 10 business days
after receipt of an application, review it and shall investigate each
application for compliance with this article. After the Traffic Officer has
determined compliance and the validity of the need, the application is
to be submitted so that an amendment to the Municipal Code for the
reserved parking space may be drafted. The Traffic Officer may, at his
or her discretion, require a personal interview with the applicant at his
or her residence. The applicant shall present at the interview any and
all documentation which he or she believes relevant to the applicant's
request. If the applicant does not possess adequate documentation to
verify his or her eligibility under this article, the application may be
denied.
D. Any individual that may be designated as indigent by the Borough's
Welfare Director or with liquid assets of less than $3,000 and the prior
calendar year's gross income equal to or less than $12,000 shall be
137. Editor's Note: See Ch. 190, Vehicles and Traffic, § 190-55.
§ 170-41 KENILWORTH CODE § 170-42
1:792
eligible to have the fees specified in Subsection C waived upon request.
The waiver of the fees shall remain in effect for two calendar years from
the date so determined.
E. The power to grant a handicapped parking space is vested solely in the
authority of the Borough Council acting through ordinance after a
recommendation from the Traffic Officer. If the Borough Council so
approves, the Police Department shall establish a restricted parking
space in front of or near the residence of the applicant and shall issue a
permit in compliance with N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.7. In the case of an
application for a handicapped parking space, the Borough Council shall
establish a handicapped parking space pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.5.
Only the motor vehicle for which a valid permit has been issued shall be
parked in such zone, and only when the permit is properly displayed.
Only one permit is issued to the applicant per household.
F. Applicants who do not meet all of the requirements of the above are to
be notified of the denial of their application by mail. The application fee
will not be refunded until 10 days after final determination of all
appeals, should such appeal be taken as set forth in Subsection H
below.
G. All handicapped parking spaces are valid for the same period that the
handicapped placard is valid.
H. Any party denied a handicapped parking space has the opportunity to
request reconsideration of such decision. A letter requesting
reconsideration must be received by the Traffic Officer and the Borough
Clerk within 20 days of the date that notice of denial is received. The
applicant will then be instructed as to when the Borough Council will
hold a hearing at a regularly scheduled work session to consider any
relevant evidence pertaining to the applicant's eligibility. It is the
applicant's responsibility to set forth any and all reasons and
documentation in support of his or her application. The applicant will be
notified by mail of the decision on reconsideration. No more than one
application for reconsideration to the Public Safety Committee will be
given to each applicant in any calendar-year period. Thereafter, the
applicant may reapply in accordance with this subsection after six
months have elapsed from the date of the notice of denial. A twenty-day
grace period will be afforded each applicant after the date of lapse.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
I. There will be a fine of $700 penalty per application for any fraudulent
application that is submitted. In the case where a permit is granted
under a fraudulent application, an additional fine of $50 per day will be
imposed on the holder of the fraudulently procured or renewed permit,
with a maximum penalty of $2,000. The penalties within this subsection
may be waived if the Borough elects to prosecute the applicant for a
violation under the applicable portions of Title 2C of the New Jersey
§ 170-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-42
1:793
§ 170-43. Existing handicapped parking locations.
§ 170-44. Parking during snow removal. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
The designated location on a Borough street for a person with a disability
shall not be exempt from the requirement that the vehicle be removed from
the Borough's thoroughfares for snow plowing.138
§ 170-45. Severability.
Each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of this article is
declared to be an independent section, subsection, sentence, clause and
State Statutes. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
J. In the event that the applicant states that due to financial hardship he
or she is unable to submit the required application fees under this
section, then in that event the applicant for the handicapped parking
may briefly explain the circumstances of the applicant's financial
hardship and request to the Council that the application fee or renewal
fee be waived. Any applicant receiving Medicaid or participating in the
State of New Jersey Pharmaceutical Assistance to the Aged and
Disabled (PAAD) program shall have his or her fee waived without
further explanation.
K. All signage and the installation of the same pursuant to this article shall
conform to the specifications as prescribed by the New Jersey
Department of Transportation and the National Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices.
A. All locations listed in schedules as of the effective date of the ordinance
codified in this article are designated as handicapped parking spaces.
B. All persons with existing handicapped parking spaces shall be sent a
letter by the Traffic Officer, by certified and regular mail, to inform
them of the new ordinance and that they shall have 60 days from the
date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this article to file an
application for continued status of an existing handicapped parking
space or to convert this space to a handicapped parking zone with the
Borough Clerk. Failure of an existing holder of a handicapped parking
space to file an application for continued status or conversion with the
Borough within 60 days of the date of adoption and publication of the
ordinance codified in this article results in automatic revocation of his
or her existing handicapped parking space. After application for
continued status or conversion is submitted as set forth above, and
should the application be granted, the renewal thereof is on an annual
calendar-year basis as set forth above.
138. Editor's Note: See § 170-4.5, Parking restrictions; prohibited conduct.
§ 170-42 KENILWORTH CODE § 170-45
1:794
phrase, and the finding or holding of any such portion of this article to be
unconstitutional, void, or ineffective for any cause or reason shall not affect
any other portion of this article.
§ 170-46. Repealer.
All Borough ordinances and parts of ordinances that are inconsistent with
this article are hereby repealed.
§ 170-47. When effective.
This article shall be effective after its adoption and its publication as
required by law.
§ 170-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-47
1:795
Chapter 174
(RESERVED)
Chapter 176
TAXATION
§ 170-47 KENILWORTH CODE § 170-47
1:796
ARTICLE I
Hotel and Motel Room Occupancy Tax
[Adopted 7-25-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-07]
§ 176-1. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to implement the provisions of P.L. 2003,
c. 114,139 which authorizes the governing body of a municipality to adopt
an ordinance imposing a tax at a uniform percentage rate not to exceed
1% on charges of rent for every occupancy on or after July 1, 2003, but
before July 1, 2004, and not to exceed 3% on charges of rent for every
occupancy on or after July 1, 2004, of a room or rooms in a hotel subject to
taxation pursuant to Subsection (d) of Section 3 of P.L. 1966, c. 30 (N.J.S.A.
54:32B-3), which shall be in addition to any other tax or fee imposed
pursuant to statute or local ordinance or resolution by any governmental
entity upon the occupancy of a hotel room.
§ 176-2. Tax established. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
There is hereby established a hotel and motel room occupancy tax in the
Borough of Kenilworth which shall be fixed at a uniform percentage rate not
to exceed 1% on charges of rent for every occupancy of a hotel or motel
room in the Borough of Kenilworth on or after July 1, 2003, but before July
1, 2004, and 3% on charges of rent for every occupancy in the Borough of
Kenilworth on or after July 1, 2004, of a room or rooms in a hotel subject to
taxation pursuant to Subsection (d) of Section 3 of P.L. 1966, c. 30, N.J.S.A.
54:32B-3 (sales tax).
§ 176-3. Tax in addition to other taxes and fees.
The hotel and motel room occupancy tax shall be in addition to any other
tax or fee imposed pursuant to statute or local ordinance or resolution by
any governmental entity upon the occupancy of a hotel room.
§ 176-4. Statutory requirements; violations and penalties.
In accordance with the requirements of P.L. 2003, c. 114:140
A. All taxes imposed by this article shall be paid by the purchaser.
B. A vendor shall not assume or absorb any tax imposed by this article.
C. A vendor shall not in any manner advertise or hold out to any person or
to the public in general, in any manner, directly or indirectly, that the
tax will be assumed or absorbed by the vendor, that the tax will not be
separately charged and stated to the customer, or that the tax will be
refunded to the customer.
139. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:48F-1 et seq.
140. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:48F-1 et seq.
§ 176-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 176-4
1:797
§ 176-5. Collection.
The tax imposed by this article shall be collected on behalf of the Borough
of Kenilworth by the person collecting the rent from the hotel or motel
customer. Each person required to collect the tax herein imposed shall be
personally liable for the tax imposed, collected or required to be collected
hereunder. Any such person shall have the same right in respect to
collecting the tax from a customer as if the tax were a part of the rent and
payable at the same time, provided that the Chief Financial Officer of the
Borough shall be joined as a party in any action or proceeding brought to
collect the tax.
D. Each assumption or absorption by a vendor of the tax shall be deemed a
separate offense, and each representation or advertisement by a vendor
for each day that the representation or advertisement continues shall
be deemed a separate offense.
E. The penalty for violation of the foregoing provisions shall be $1,250 for
each offense.
§ 176-4 KENILWORTH CODE § 176-5
1:798
Chapter 177
(RESERVED)
Chapter 179
TAXICABS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 91.
§ 179-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Includes a firm, copartnership, association and corporation and
the singular or plural and the masculine, feminine or neuter, unless the
contrary is clearly expressed.
TAXICAB — Includes any motor vehicle used for the business of carrying
persons for hire but does not mean and include any motor vehicle licensed
by the Board of Public Utilities of the State of New Jersey to operate over a
fixed or defined route.[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 179-2. License for each taxicab required; operator's license;
license for owner; fee. [Amended 9-11-1979 by Ord. No. 79-19;
4-11-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-07]
A. License required for each vehicle. No person shall carry on the business
of picking up passengers for hire in taxicabs in the Borough of
Kenilworth without first obtaining a Borough of Kenilworth license for
each vehicle to be used. Applications for a vehicle license shall be
available from and submitted to the Kenilworth Borough Clerk
accompanied by a fee for each vehicle in the amount set forth in
Chapter 91, Fees and Licenses. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
B. License required for taxicab operator. No person shall operate a taxicab
licensed in the Borough of Kenilworth without first obtaining a taxicab
operator's license.
(1) Applications for a taxicab operator's license.
(a) Each applicant for the issuance or renewal of any form of
license shall supply, in full, the information requested on
application forms adopted by the Borough Council and
obtained from the Kenilworth Borough Clerk and shall verify
§ 176-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 179-2
1:799
the correctness thereof by oath or affirmation. Any submission
of an application shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount
set forth in Chapter 91, Fees and Licenses, for each operator.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
(b) Applications for a taxicab operator's license shall include:
[1] Two identification photographs, size one inch by one inch,
of the head and shoulders of the applicant.
[2] The applicant shall file the completed application with the
Kenilworth Borough Clerk with a copy to the Kenilworth
Police Department, together with the full amount of the
proper fee herein fixed.
(c) Applications for new taxicab operator's licenses shall be filed
in accordance with preceding Subsection B(1)(b) no later than
30 days prior to the date action is requested on the license
application from the Borough Council.
C. License required for taxicab business operations. No person who owns
10% or more of any business entity shall carry on the business of
picking up passengers for hire in taxicabs in the Borough of Kenilworth
without first obtaining a taxicab business operator's license.
(1) Applications for a taxicab business operation's license.
(a) Each applicant for the issuance or renewal of any form of
license shall supply, in full, the information requested on
application forms adopted by the Borough Council and
obtained from the Kenilworth Borough Clerk and shall verify
the correctness thereof by oath or affirmation. Any submission
of an application shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount
set forth in Chapter 91, Fees and Licenses, for each
application. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
(b) Applications for a taxicab business operation's license shall
include:
[1] Two identification photographs, size one inch by one inch,
of the head and shoulders of the applicant.
[2] The applicant shall file the completed application with the
Kenilworth Borough Clerk with a copy to the Kenilworth
Police Department, together with the full amount of the
proper fee herein fixed.
D. Applications for new taxicab operator's licenses and taxicab business
operation's licenses shall be filed in accordance with preceding
subsections no later than 30 days prior to the date action is requested
on the license application from the Borough Council. If the maximum
§ 179-2 KENILWORTH CODE § 179-2
1:800
number of taxicab business operation's licenses has been issued, no
new licenses shall be approved before an existing license is
surrendered to the Kenilworth Borough Clerk.
E. At the time of filing an application for any license, the applicant shall be
fingerprinted at a location and/or agency designated by the Kenilworth
Police Department, and said fingerprints shall be submitted to the
Bureau of Identification, New Jersey State Police, for a report of the
applicant's criminal record, if any. Any and all costs of this process shall
be borne by the applicant.
(1) An application shall be automatically denied in the event the
applicant's criminal record reveals a conviction of any of the
following:
(a) Aggravated assault;
(b) Arson;
(c) Burglary;
(d) Escape;
(e) Extortion;
(f) Homicide;
(g) Kidnapping;
(h) Robbery;
(i) Aggravated sexual assault;
(j) Sexual assault;
(k) Endangering the welfare of a child pursuant to N.J.S.A.
2C:24-4;
(l) Crime pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 2C:39-3, 2C:39-4
or 2C:39-9; and
(m) Any crime other than a disorderly persons or petty disorderly
persons offense for the unlawful use, possession or sale of a
controlled dangerous substance as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:35-2.
(2) If an applicant produces a certificate of rehabilitation, a conviction
of the criminal offense stated in the preceding subsection shall not
disqualify the applicant from operating or driving a taxicab.
License holders who have received consent to operate in a
municipality prior to the effective date of P.L. 2011, c. 135,141 shall
not be required to submit a criminal history record background
check.
141. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 48:16-2.1 et seq.
§ 179-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 179-2
1:801
§ 179-3. Issuance and expiration of licenses. [Amended 4-11-2012
by Ord. No. 2012-07]
F. Applicants shall provide any other documentation and/or information
required by Title 48, Public Utilities, Chapter 16, Taxicabs, Autocabs
and Jitneys, of the Statutes of New Jersey or similar law, rule or
regulation.
G. Insurance requirements. An applicant shall provide a copy of an
insurance policy by an admitted insurance company. The policy must
satisfy all claims for damages, by reason of bodily injury to, or death of,
any person(s), or damages to property resulting from or on account of
an accident by reason of ownership, operation, maintenance or use of
such taxicab upon any public street. The policy must provide the
greater of:
(1) Not less than $100,000 of motor vehicle liability insurance
coverage; or
(2) The greater of the amounts required by N.J.S.A. 39:6B-1,
maintenance of vehicle liability insurance coverage.
A. Issuance and term of license. All licenses shall be issued by the
Kenilworth Borough Clerk only after a report by the Kenilworth Chief of
Police and approval of the Kenilworth Borough Council. Each license so
issued shall be provided with a blank space upon which the record shall
be made by the Kenilworth Police Department of any suspension or
revocation thereof. All such licenses shall expire on the 31st of
December next after the date of issuance.
B. Number of taxicab business operation's licenses. The total number of
taxicab business operation's licenses under this chapter that may be
issued and outstanding at any point shall not exceed 15. No person shall
hold or control more than one taxicab business operation's license, nor
shall more than one person living in the same dwelling hold a taxicab
business operation's license.
(1) Notice of public bidding. In the event that the governing body
determines one or more additional taxicab operation's licenses are
available for issuance, a notice shall be published stating the
number of new or additional authorized licenses. Said notice shall
be published at least twice and at least one week apart. The second
notice shall be published at least 30 days prior to the deadline of
issuance. One of the said publications can be made by posting on
the Borough's website for 10 or more days.
(2) Award of license. The Borough of Kenilworth shall issue the taxicab
business operation's license via public auction or through
supervision by the Kenilworth Borough Clerk to the highest
qualified and responsive bidder.
§ 179-2 KENILWORTH CODE § 179-3
1:802
§ 179-4. General regulations.
§ 179-5. Refusal to carry prohibited; exceptions.
No such licensee shall refuse to carry any orderly person applying for
transportation who offers to pay the proper fare unless he is already
engaged or otherwise unable to do so, but carriage may be refused unless
the proper fare is paid in advance.
§ 179-6. Lost articles.
It shall be the duty of every driver or operator of any such vehicle to
diligently search his vehicle upon the departure of any passenger for any
property left therein and, if any article is found, to turn it over to the
police at police headquarters with the name and address of the passenger
so departing, if the same is known or obtainable. The Police Department
must thereupon notify such person or advertise for the owner in the local
newspaper if his identity or address is unknown.
(3) Reimbursement. The recipient of a taxicab business operation's
license shall reimburse the Borough of Kenilworth for any costs
incurred in complying with the public notice requirement. If there
is more than one license issued, the cost shall be split equally
among the licensees.
(4) Surrender of license. In the event that the total number of taxicab
business operation's licenses are issued and outstanding, no new
licenses may be issued until the surrender of an issued and
outstanding license.
C. Number of taxicabs per taxicab business operation's license. The holder
of a taxicab operation's license under this chapter shall be permitted to
obtain a license for up to 15 individual taxicabs. The license issued for
an individual taxicab is only for that specific taxicab and shall not be
transferred to another taxicab.
A. All taxicabs shall display on the body of the vehicle their taxi license's
number along with each municipality that has issued a taxi license to
that taxicab. The information shall be three inches in height. The taxi
license number must be located on the center rear quarter panel on the
driver and passenger side as well as the rear center line of the trunk.
The list of each municipality shall be displayed on each rear door.
B. All taxicabs shall be kept clean and in good condition and shall
prominently display a TAXI sign. Each vehicle in use shall have
displayed in a conspicuous place in the interior thereof a card with the
license number of the vehicle and the rates of transportation as
established.
§ 179-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 179-7
1:803
§ 179-7. Compliance with statutory provisions required.
It shall be unlawful for the owner, lessee or bailee of any taxicab to operate
or cause or permit such taxicab to be operated, and no license shall be
issued hereunder, until and unless said owner, lessee or bailee shall have
complied with the provisions of Chapter 16 of Title 48 of the Revised
Statutes of the State of New Jersey, and the acts amendatory thereof or
supplemented thereto.
§ 179-8. Driver's license required; fee.
§ 179-9. Suspension of license.
Vehicle or driver's licenses required by this chapter may be suspended for
cause by the Chief of Police on his own initiative or by direction of the
Borough Council. In either case the licensee shall surrender his licenses
and card to the Police Department. On request of the licensee, the Borough
Council may review the case and raise the suspension or revoke the licenses
concerned.
A. Every person driving a public taxicab or other vehicle operated for hire
must carry a municipal driver's license issued by the Borough Clerk, but
only after report by the Chief of Police and approval of the Borough
Council.
B. An applicant for a driver's license must be not less than 18 years of age,
of sound physique, with good eyesight, and not subject to epilepsy,
vertigo, heart trouble or any other deformity of body or mind which
might render him unfit for the safe operation of a public taxicab. He
must be of good moral character, able to read and write the English
language, clean in dress and person and not addicted to the use of
intoxicating liquors, habit-forming narcotics or other drugs. [Amended
9-11-1979 by Ord. No. 79-19]
C. (Reserved)142
D. With each license there shall be delivered to the licensee a license card
which shall contain a copy of the photograph of the licensee, the license
number and the signature of the licensee. Said card shall be affixed to a
conspicuous and indispensable part of the interior of the taxicab being
operated by said licensee and shall not be defaced, removed, concealed,
obliterated or altered in any way.
142. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, concerning license applications, as amended
9-11-1979 by Ord. No. 79-19, was repealed 4-11-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-07. See now
§ 179-2.
§ 179-7 KENILWORTH CODE § 179-10
1:804
§ 179-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-11-1979 by Ord. No.
79-19; at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. II)]
Any person, firm or corporation who or which violates any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to the general penalty set forth
in Chapter 1, Article I, General Penalty, of the Borough of Kenilworth Code;
and each day during which a violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 179-11. Severability. [Added 4-11-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-07]
Each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of this chapter is
declared to be an independent section, subsection, sentence, clause and
phrase, and the finding or holding of any such portion of this chapter to
be unconstitutional, void, or ineffective for any cause, or reason, shall not
affect any other portion of this chapter.
§ 179-12. Repealer. [Added 4-11-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-07]
All Borough ordinances and parts of ordinances that are inconsistent with
this chapter are hereby repealed.
Chapter 181
TENNIS COURTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees and licenses — See Ch. 91.
§ 181-1. Residency requirements.
No person shall use the municipal tennis courts of the Borough of
Kenilworth who is not a resident of the Borough of Kenilworth, and no
person shall use the tennis courts of the David Brearley Regional High
School who is not a resident of Union County Regional High School District
No. 1, as evidenced by an automobile driver's license or other reasonable
means of identification, except that a person who is qualified by reason of
residence and who has obtained a permit described in § 181-2 hereof may
play with one person as a guest who is not so qualified.
§ 181-2. Permit required, fees. [Amended 3-22-1977 by Ord. No.
77-8; 9-11-1979 by Ord. No. 79-19]
Except as provided in § 181-3 hereof, no person shall use the municipal
tennis courts of the Borough of Kenilworth or the tennis courts at the David
Brearley Regional High School without first obtaining an annual permit
§ 179-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-2
1:805
from the Borough Clerk. Permits shall be issued on a family or individual
basis as follows:
§ 181-3. Exceptions from permit requirements. [Amended 4-8-1980
by Ord. No. 80-5]
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter:
§ 181-4. Rules and regulations.
The Recreation Director with the advice of the Recreation Committee shall
promulgate rules not inconsistent with this chapter as may be approved by
the governing body of the Borough of Kenilworth to regulate the municipal
tennis courts of the Borough of Kenilworth and the tennis courts of David
Brearley Regional High School, to protect property, to maintain good order
and to otherwise carry out the purposes of this chapter.
§ 181-5. Payment of fees to Treasurer.
The Borough Clerk and any persons collecting any of the fees to be collected
pursuant to this chapter shall pay the same over to the Borough Treasurer
within the time prescribed by law.
§ 181-6. Posting of rules.
A true copy of this chapter and every rule promulgated by the Recreation
Director shall be prominently posted at the municipal tennis courts of the
Borough of Kenilworth and the tennis courts at the David Brearley Regional
High School.
A. Upon a payment of a fee as provided in Chapter 91, Fees and Licenses,
the Borough Clerk shall issue permits to all members of a family paying
the same, and the family shall include all persons related by blood,
marriage or adoption, residing together in a common household.
B. Upon a payment of a fee as provided in Chapter 91, Fees and Licenses,
the Borough Clerk shall issue a permit to the individual paying the
same.
A. Any student attending the David Brearley Regional High School or
other high school within the region and establishing the same by a
student identity card or other reliable means of identification shall be
entitled to play on the tennis courts at the David Brearley Regional High
School without a permit.
B. The governing body may, by resolution, authorize a board of education
of a Union County municipality to use the municipal courts of the
Borough of Kenilworth for special reasons and for limited times not to
exceed two weekdays in any one week.
§ 181-2 KENILWORTH CODE § 181-7
1:806
§ 181-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-11-1979 by Ord. No.
79-19; at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. II)]
Any person violating any provision of this chapter or any rule promulgated
by the Recreation Director as is approved by the governing body shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the general penalty set forth in Chapter 1, Article
I, General Penalty, of the Borough of Kenilworth Code.
Chapter 181A
TOWING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees and licenses — See Ch. 91. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 190.
§ 181A-1. Purpose.
§ 181A-2. Minimum standards.
All tow operators engaged in nonconsensual towing or recovery of motor
vehicles from private property (without the express permission of the owner
or operator) shall comply with the minimum requirements mandated by the
regulations promulgated in the State of New Jersey by the Department of
Consumer Affairs (DCA) and as they may be amended.
§ 181A-3. Towing service licensing, rules and registration.
A. The purpose of this ordinance amending Chapter 181A is to promote
the public safety and welfare within the Borough and to update the
Borough's towing laws to conform to the statutes and regulations of the
State of New Jersey for the nonconsensual towing of all motor vehicles
from private property within the Borough of Kenilworth. In addition to
the foregoing purpose, this chapter establishes mercantile licensing
and rules and regulations associated with the towing and storage of
motor vehicles from private property from within the Borough of
Kenilworth when the services are not contracted for by the owner,
operator or designated agent for the vehicle.
B. This chapter is only applicable to vehicles that are towed without the
expressed permission of the owner or driver and when the tow is not
initiated by the Borough of Kenilworth.
A. No entity or individual shall operate a towing service for nonconsensual
towing initiated within the Borough limits unless such entity or
individual shall have obtained a towing license issued by the Borough
Clerk for Kenilworth, in accordance with this chapter.
§ 181-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181A-3
1:807
B. No license shall be issued without first having the designated member
of the Kenilworth Police Department inspect the applicant for
compliance with this chapter. The applicant inclusive of any tow truck
driver, officer, director, limited liability member or stockholder with
control or ownership (directly or indirectly) who holds in excess of 9%
ownership may have been convicted of a crime under Title 2C of the
New Jersey State Statutes other than a disorderly person (DP) offense
within the prior three years or have been found guilty by a court of law
of a crime or event of moral turpitude. [Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
C. The initial license fee for an applicant is included in Chapter 91, Fees
and Licenses, which shall be paid to the Borough prior to the inspection
with the completed application as formulated by the Chief of Police and
the Borough Attorney. The application shall include fingerprints for all
drivers, owners, managers and officers for the tow truck company. Once
a completed application is received by the Police Department, it shall be
reviewed and acted upon within 30 days. Any application materially
incomplete or deficient for cause shall be subject to re-examination
upon completion with an additional charge as set forth in Chapter 91,
Fees and Licenses, provided that it is supplied within 14 days after
receipt of the Police Chief's detailed explanation for the failure to issue
a license. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
D. The license to tow from private property shall commence on the first
day of the month following approval by the Chief of Police and remain
valid for 12 months. During said period, any new employees shall
provide their fingerprints to the Chief of Police within 10 days after first
day of employment.
E. During the 11th month of the annual license, the applicant desirous of
continuing as a nonconsensual tower from private property shall
resubmit an initial application to the Borough Clerk with any changes
that are to be highlighted in yellow and an application fee as set forth in
Chapter 91, Fees and Licenses. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
F. The towing services must utilize a secured storage site enclosed that is
properly zoned and which is located less than 13 aerial miles from the
Borough's Police Department and the driving time from the Borough
must take no more than 30 minutes during normal driving conditions on
or about 12:00 noon on a weekday. When calculating distance and/or
time, the Garden State Parkway shall not be utilized.
G. No Borough of Kenilworth employee or former law enforcement officer
having served in said capacity within the prior five years within Union
County shall be employed by the towing operator.
H. Once a vehicle that is being towed without the owner's consent from
private property, the tower shall immediately report to the Kenilworth
§ 181A-3 KENILWORTH CODE § 181A-3
1:808
§ 181A-4. Towing license transferability.
No towing license shall be transferred from the entity or individuals named
on the initial application. No towing license may be operated under a
managerial contract.
§ 181A-5. Schedule of maximum allowable fees.
Police Department prior to taking it to its storage yard and shall advise
the dispatcher on duty of the make, model and plate number of the
vehicle being towed, the location from which it has been removed,
to where the vehicle is being taken for storage and any obvious
preexisting body damage, in writing, on the form approved by the Chief
of Police. The tow operator shall leave with the dispatcher a business
card for the tow service at that time.
A. Licensed towing services may only charge fees to vehicle owners for the
following services:
(1) Basic tow, which shall be a maximum flat fee of $160 for light-duty
tows and $800 for heavy-duty tows.
(2) Storage charges at a towing company's storage facility shall be
based upon a twenty-four-hour day with the first two hours without
cost to the patron. Thereafter, a maximum daily rate for each full
day shall be $50 for light-duty tows and $150 for heavy-duty tows.
If the heavy-duty tow is for a tractor-trailer combination, then the
total charge is $500.
(3) Any vehicle that is still on the private property when attached to
the tow truck must be released to the operator for 25% of the tow
charge.
B. No towing service may use the New Jersey Parkway in conjunction with
the service provided under this license unless authority to do so has
been granted by the New Jersey Turnpike Authority.
C. A licensed towing service that engages in private property towing from
property within the Borough shall calculate storage fees based upon full
twenty-four-hour periods a motor vehicle is in the storage facility. For
example, if a motor vehicle is towed to a storage facility at 8:00 p.m. on
one day and the owner of the motor vehicle retrieves the motor vehicle
before 7:30 p.m. the next day, the towing company shall charge the
owner of the motor vehicle only for one day of storage. If a motor
vehicle is stored for more than 24 hours, but less than 48 hours, the
towing company may charge for two days of storage.
D. A towing company performing a private property tow or other
nonconsensual tow shall take the motor vehicle being towed to the
towing company's approved storage facility as registered with the
Borough and to no other yard.
§ 181A-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181A-5
1:809
§ 181A-6. Additional rules and regulations.
E. The bill for any tow allowed herein shall include the time at which a
towed motor vehicle arrived at the towing service's storage site, the
time the request was initiated, the time the tow truck operator arrived
at the site of the tow and the date and time the vehicle was retrieved.
F. In addition to the fees allowed to be charged against towed vehicles
within this section, the Borough shall charge an administrative charge
of $25 for the release of the vehicle which is to be collected by the
tower and paid to the Borough monthly with an accounting of the
number of tows, the itemized statement and additional information as
may be reasonably required by the Chief of Police to ensure compliance
with this chapter.
A. All persons operating a towing vehicle within the municipality, and all
their agents, shall keep in their possession business cards with the
name of the company and the address of the place of business and the
telephone number along with the hours of operation.
B. The bill shall contain the following information:
(1) Full name, address and business telephone number of the towing
service.
(2) Full name of the person engaging the towing vehicle.
(3) State registration number or license plate number of the vehicle
being towed.
(4) Address of the storage site to which the vehicle will be towed.
C. All bills for services, estimates and contracts relating to the towing of
vehicles by licensees shall be in writing and shall conform to the
provisions of this chapter and state law. No oral agreements shall be
made with vehicle owners or authorized agents of owners.
D. The licensee shall keep an accurate record of all towing calls made at
the request of the Borough. The Borough shall be provided with a copy
of all bills and invoices relating to the licensee's services to the Borough
for the preceding month on or before the second Monday of the month
along with the administrative fee.
E. The Borough shall have no financial responsibility for the services
provided by towing services within the Borough, unless provided for in
N.J.S.A. 56:13-7 or N.J.A.C. 13:45A-31.1.
F. Towing services operating within the Borough shall abide by all state
statutes, rules and regulations, and any violation of a state statute, rule
or regulation shall be considered a violation of this chapter which may
affect the rights of the licensee.
§ 181A-5 KENILWORTH CODE § 181A-6
1:810
§ 181A-7. Enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Kenilworth Police
Department.
§ 181A-8. Suspension or revocation of license; effect on future
license applications.
G. The licensee shall maintain records of all vehicles towed, stored and
released by it. Records shall be kept for a four-year period. These
records shall include the name and contact information of the person
summoning the licensee, name of towing employee, the date and time of
tow-in, destination towed, vehicle tag number and state, vehicle
identification number, make, model, color and year of vehicle, itemized
charges to the owner of the vehicle and the disposition of the vehicle
and date and time thereof.
H. The Chief of Police shall, upon request, have immediate access to any
and all of the required records during normal business hours during the
week.
I. The licensee must permit payment of fees by the use of at least two
major credit cards. The Borough will not be held liable for, or assist the
licensee in, the collection of any unpaid fees that were incurred under
the provisions of this chapter. Any individual that fails to honor a charge
made on a credit card or issued a check that was not honored in
payment for the services rendered by the tower may be charged under
Title 2C of the New Jersey Statutes with a theft of services or theft by
deception in the Municipal Court for the Borough.
J. Any vehicle that remains in the custody or control of the tower for more
than five business days shall be reported to the Borough Clerk and the
Chief of Police, in writing, before the ninth business day from the date it
was removed from the private property. Failure to comply with this
provision shall reduce the tower's entitlement for storage charges to $1
a day for said vehicle. If the vehicle remains more than 30 days in
storage without being reported to the Borough, the tower and its
principals shall have their license revoked for three years.
A. In addition to any other penalties set forth within this chapter or under
other Borough ordinances or under state laws for violations by
licensees, the Police Chief may recommend to the Public Safety
Committee of the Borough's governing body suspension or revocation
of license, after notice and an opportunity to be heard, suspend a
license for a period of no less than one week nor more than five weeks
or, for continued violations after a period of suspension, revoke any
license for any remaining period or any portion thereof.
B. For severe violations and/or recurring violations, the Chief of Police
may, after notice and an opportunity to be heard before the Police
Committee of the Borough Council, revoke any license and, in addition,
§ 181A-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181A-8
1:811
§ 181A-9. Violations and penalties.
§ 181A-10. Simple disputes as to charges.
Prior to bringing any formal complaint before the Municipal Court or the
Department of Community Affairs for inadvertent disputed charges, the
charged party disputing any charge must notify the Borough Clerk within 14
days of payment having been tendered. Thereafter, the Chief of Police shall
investigate the basis of the dispute and make a nonbinding recommendation
to the tower within 15 days. If the complainant accepts the payment as
recommended by the Chief of Police, then the complainant formally waives
any further action or claim against the tower.
use such violation as the determining factor for refusing to approve
subsequent annual applications for a period of not less than one month
but no more than 12 months.
C. Hearings held before the Public Safety Committee shall be open to the
public and held within 10 business days unless an adjournment is
requested by either party for up to 10 additional days.
A. Unless otherwise specified herein, any individual and/or entity violating
any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof before the
Municipal Court, be subject to a fine not exceeding:
(1) For the first offense: no less than $50 and up to $100 in any
calendar year.
(2) For the second offense: not less than $250 nor more than $500 in
any calendar year.
(3) For the third or subsequent offense: not less than $500 nor more
than $1,000 and/or imprisonment for a period not exceeding five
days, or both.
B. The actual amount of each penalty shall be determined by the sound
discretion of the Municipal Judge. In addition to the aforementioned
penalties, and as provided for herein, violations of this chapter may
subject the license to suspension or revocation as provided for herein
and the violation may be reported to the Attorney General responsible
for predatory towing.
C. If the Chief of Police determines that the tower should have its license
suspended or revoked, written notice shall be sent by certified mail to
the tower. No suspension or revocation of a license shall become
effective until a full five business days after posting by certified mail of
the determination to suspend or revoke a license.
§ 181A-8 KENILWORTH CODE § 181A-11
1:812
§ 181A-11. Suspension of license or failure to be approved.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
Any applicant which is denied an application to tow from private property
as a nonconsensual tower within the Borough or which has its license
suspended or revoked shall be entitled to a hearing before the Public Safety
Committee within the following 10 days, provided that a written request is
received by the Borough Clerk and the Borough Attorney who shall serve as
a hearing officer. If three members of the Police Committee are unavailable
to hear the matter, then any other member of the governing body may sit as
a hearing officer.
§ 181A-12. Severability.
Each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of this chapter is
declared to be an independent section, subsection, sentence, clause and
phrase, and the finding or holding of any such portion of this chapter to
be unconstitutional, void, or ineffective for any cause, or reason, shall not
affect any other portion of this chapter.
§ 181A-13. Repealer.
All Borough ordinances and parts of ordinances that are inconsistent with
this chapter are hereby repealed.
§ 181A-14. When effective.
The existing tower for the municipality shall continue to serve the Borough
with the above rate schedule until this chapter shall be in full force and
effect. This chapter is effective after its adoption and its publication as
required by law.
Chapter 182
(RESERVED)
Chapter 185
TREES
§ 185-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PUBLIC HIGHWAY — Includes the entire width between the boundary lines
of every publicly maintained roadway when any part thereof is open to the
use of the public for the purposes of vehicular traffic.
§ 181A-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-2
1:813
§ 185-2. Acts prohibited without permission; exceptions. [Amended
at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 185-3. Trimming of trees near electric wires required.
Every person, firm or corporation having control of any wire for the
transmission of electric current along a public highway shall properly trim
all trees through which or near which such wire passes in order to prevent
any injury from the wire or the electric current carried by it.
§ 185-4. Contact with brine, gas or injurious chemical prohibited.
No person, firm or corporation shall permit any brine, gas or injurious
chemical to come in contact with the stem or roots of any tree or shrub upon
any public highway.
§ 185-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-11-1979 by Ord. No.
79-19; at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. II)]
Any person, firm or corporation who or which violates any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to the general penalty set forth in
Chapter 1, Article I, General Penalty, of the Borough of Kenilworth Code.
A. No person, firm or corporation shall do or cause to be done any of the
following acts upon a public highway within the Borough of Kenilworth
without the written permission of the Superintendent of Public Works of
the Borough of Kenilworth:
(1) Cut, trim, break, climb with spikes, disturb the roots of or
otherwise injure or spray with any chemical or remove any
structure or device to support such tree or shrub.
(2) Plant any tree or shrub.
(3) Fasten any rope, wire, electric attachment, sign or other device to a
tree or shrub or to any guard about such tree or shrub.
(4) Close or obstruct any open space provided about the base of a tree
or shrub to permit the access of air, water or fertilizer to the roots
of such tree or shrub.
(5) Pile any building materials or make any mortar or cement within six
feet of a tree or shrub.
B. The aforesaid requirement for written permission shall not apply to
public utility companies which routinely must trim or remove trees or
shrubbery in order to provide safe, adequate and reliable electric or
telephone service to members of the public. Except in emergency
conditions, such public utility company shall notify the Superintendent
of Public Works of the Borough of Kenilworth of tree or shrub trimming
or removal before such work is performed.
§ 185-2 KENILWORTH CODE § 185-5
1:814
Chapter 190
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Traffic Bureau — See Ch. 48.
Bicycles — See Ch. 66.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 170.
Towing — See Ch. 181A.
§ 185-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-5
1:815

ARTICLE I
Definitions
§ 190-1. Words and phrases defined.
Whenever any words and phrases are used in this chapter, the meaning
respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases
used herein.
§ 190-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-1
1:817

ARTICLE II
Parking
§ 190-2. Effect of other provisions.
The provisions of this article imposing a time limit on parking shall not
relieve any person of the duty to observe other and more restrictive
provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles as set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-138, any other New Jersey statute or as
hereinafter provided.
§ 190-3. Parking prohibited at all times.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or
parts thereof described in Schedule I attached to and made a part of this
chapter.143
§ 190-3.1. Police vehicle access zone. [Added 4-9-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-05]
§ 190-3.2. Emergency/first responder parking zone. [Added
4-25-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-05]
A. Parking, stopping or standing of motor vehicles on the easterly side of
South 23rd Street from 25 feet south of the Boulevard curbline, then
southerly to the end of the municipal property line adjacent to the
Municipal Building is reserved for exclusive use for police vehicles.
B. Limited permissible use of this designated area shall also permit the
dropping off and/or picking up of handicapped or physically challenged
individuals arriving at or departing from the Municipal Building.
C. This designated area shall be delineated by painting the curb white and
the posting of a sign at each end of the designated area.
A. Parking, stopping or standing of motor vehicles on the easterly side of
Cross Street for the first 300 feet from the northern curbline side of
Washington Avenue is reserved for the exclusive use of emergency
personnel on duty for the Kenilworth Volunteer Fire and Rescue Squad.
B. The designated area shall be appropriately delineated and marked by
the painting of the curb and the posting of signs indicating the vehicles
not properly designated shall be subject to being ticketed and towed
with the violator subject to fines and community service. The signs shall
be conspicuous and placed no less than 25 feet from each end point and
additional signs as the Police Department's traffic officer may
reasonably be deemed required so as to provide adequate notice to the
public.
143. Editor's Note: See § 190-33, Schedule I: No Parking.
§ 190-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-3.2
1:819
§ 190-4. Parking prohibited during certain hours.
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified in Schedule II
of any day (except Sundays and public holidays) upon any of the streets or
parts of streets described in said Schedule II attached to and made a part
of this chapter.144
§ 190-5. Stopping or standing prohibited during specified times.
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle for the times specified in Schedule
III of any day (except Sundays and public holidays) upon any of the streets
or parts of streets described in said Schedule III attached to and made a
part of this chapter.145
§ 190-6. Limited time parking.
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit shown in
Schedule IV at any time between the hours listed in said Schedule IV of any
day (except Sundays and public holidays) upon any of the streets or parts
of streets described in said Schedule IV attached to and made a part of this
chapter.146
§ 190-7. Angle parking.
No person shall park any vehicle parallel to the edge of the roadway or curb
in the following designated places, and at such places the street shall be
marked for angle parking and all vehicles shall be parked at a thirty-degree
angle to the curb and within the lines indicated by the marks or signs on the
roadway, on streets or parts of streets listed in Schedule V attached to and
made a part of this chapter.147
C. Vehicles permitted to be parked in the designated first responder areas
shall display in the rear window of the vehicle a current highly
reflective prismatic numeric label identifying the vehicle as belonging
to a volunteer.
D. Any person parking in a restricted parking space reserved for fire and
rescue volunteers without a special vehicle identification as stated
above or the no parking areas designated for unfettered access for
emergency vehicles shall be liable for a fine of up to $250 or up to 90
days' community service on such terms and in such form as the court
shall deem appropriate, or any combination thereof.
144. Editor's Note: See Schedule II: No Parking Certain Hours.
145. Editor's Note: See § 190-35, Schedule III: No Stopping or Standing.
146. Editor's Note: See § 190-36, Schedule IV: Time Limit Parking.
147. Editor's Note: See § 190-37, Schedule V: Angle Parking.
§ 190-3.2 KENILWORTH CODE § 190-8
1:820
§ 190-8. Parking on public property.
No person shall park or operate a vehicle on public property in violation
of the regulations listed in Schedule VI attached to and made part of this
chapter.148
§ 190-8.1. Parking of trucks and commercial vehicles. [Added
4-13-1993 by Ord. No. 93-8; amended 5-10-1995 by Ord. No. 95-11;
7-10-1996 by Ord. No. 96-15]
A. The parking or storing of a commercial vehicle, including trucks and
commercially registered trailers, with an individual or combined gross
vehicle weight (GVW) in excess of 7,800 pounds on any street or
residential driveway or yard within the Borough is prohibited, except
that tow trucks, flat-bed trucks and dump trucks, regardless of GVW,
are prohibited at all times.
B. Nothing herein shall prohibit the parking of a commercial vehicle for
such reasonable time as may be required in the normal course of
pickup, delivery and emergency services.
C. The parking or storing of any vehicle or trailer containing or storing any
hazardous, unhealthy or noxious cargo or substance, except as
otherwise provided in Subsection B, shall be prohibited.
D. Owners, lessees, tenants and other persons responsible for or
knowingly permitting a violation of this section shall be guilty of such
violation, as will the owner or user of any vehicle so stored or parked.
Any person convicted in the Municipal Court for violating this section
shall be subject to a fine of up to $500 for a first offense and up to
$1,000 for the second and each subsequent offense. Each twenty-fourhour
period shall constitute a separate and distinct day for the purposes
of this section. Each day this section is violated shall be deemed to be a
separate and distinct offense.
E. Enforcement. The Police Department shall have the authority to enforce
the provisions of this section.
148. Editor's Note: See § 190-38, Schedule VI: Public Property.
§ 190-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-8.1
1:821

ARTICLE III
Operation of Vehicles
§ 190-9. Trucks over 7,800 pounds excluded from certain streets.
[Amended 5-10-1995 by Ord. No. 95-11]
Trucks over 7,800 pounds registered gross vehicle weight (RGVW) are
hereby excluded from the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule
VII, except for the pickup or delivery of materials on such streets, said
Schedule VII being attached to and being a part of this chapter.149
§ 190-10. Truck routes.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:67-16.1, the streets or parts of streets as described
in Schedule VIII attached to and made a part of this chapter are hereby
designated as routes for trucks over 7,800 pounds.150 All trucks having a
total combined gross weight of vehicle plus load in excess of 7,800 pounds
shall be excluded from all streets except from those streets which form a
part of the system of truck routes.
§ 190-11. One-way streets.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule IX attached to and
made a part of this chapter are hereby designated as one-way streets in the
direction indicated.151
§ 190-12. Through streets.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the streets or parts of
streets described in Schedule X attached to and made a part of this chapter
are hereby designated as through streets.152 Stop signs shall be installed
on the near right side of each street intersecting the through street except
where yield signs are provided for the designation.
§ 190-13. Stop intersections. [Amended 11-12-1985 by Ord. No.
85-16]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
in Schedule XI attached to and made a part of this chapter are hereby
designated as stop intersections.153 Stop signs shall be installed as provided
therein.
149. Editor's Note: See § 190-39, Schedule VII: Trucks Over 7,800 Pounds Excluded.
150. Editor's Note: See § 190-40, Schedule VIII: Routes for Trucks Over 7,800 Pounds.
151. Editor's Note: See § 190-41, Schedule IX: One-Way Streets.
152. Editor's Note: See § 190-42, Schedule X: Through Streets.
153. Editor's Note: See § 190-43, Schedule XI: Stop Intersections.
§ 190-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-14
1:823
§ 190-14. Yield intersections.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
in Schedule XII attached to and made a part of this chapter are hereby
designated as yield intersections.154 Yield signs shall be installed as
provided therein.
§ 190-15. Loading zones.
The locations described in Schedule XIII attached to and made a part of this
chapter are hereby designated as loading zones.155
§ 190-16. Taxi stands.
The locations described in Schedule XIV attached to and made a part of this
chapter are hereby designated as taxi stands.156
§ 190-17. Bus stops.
The locations described in Schedule XV attached to and made a part of this
chapter are hereby designated as bus stops.157
§ 190-18. Left turns prohibited.
No person shall make a left turn at any of the locations described in
Schedule XVI attached to and made a part of this chapter.158
§ 190-19. U-turns prohibited.
No persons shall make a U-turn at any of the locations described in
Schedule XVII attached to and made a part of this chapter.159
§ 190-20. Turning prohibited.
No person shall make a turn at any of the locations described in Schedule
XVIII attached to and made a part of this chapter.160
§ 190-21. Speed limits.
The speed limits for all directions of traffic at the locations described in
Schedule XIX shall be as described.161
154. Editor's Note: See § 190-44, Schedule XII: Yield Intersections.
155. Editor's Note: See § 190-45, Schedule XIII: Loading Zones.
156. Editor's Note: See § 190-46, Schedule XIV: Taxi Stands.
157. Editor's Note: See § 190-47, Schedule XV: Bus Stops.
158. Editor's Note: See § 190-48, Schedule XVI: Left Turn Prohibitions.
159. Editor's Note: See § 190-49, Schedule XVII: U-Turn Prohibitions.
160. Editor's Note: See § 190-50, Schedule XVIII: No Turns.
161. Editor's Note: See § 190-51, Schedule XIX: Speed Limits.
§ 190-14 KENILWORTH CODE § 190-22
1:824
§ 190-22. Lane use.
The lane locations described in Schedule XX attached to and made a part of
this chapter are designated as lane use reservations and traffic shall move
only as indicated.162
§ 190-23. Right turn on red prohibited.
No person shall make a right turn at any of the locations listed in Schedule
XXI during a red signal indication.163
§ 190-23.1. School children safe dropoff zone; purpose; procedure;
prohibited conduct; penalties. [Added 11-17-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-20]
A. Purpose. In order to create a safer environment and to provide an
orderly and efficient means of dropping of children for attendance at
the Harding School, that area on the north side of the Boulevard
between North 18th Street and Coolidge Drive is hereby declared and
designated a "school children safe dropoff zone," and shall be used
solely and exclusively between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m.
Monday through Friday when school is in session.
B. Procedure.
(1) The operator of a motor vehicle transporting a child to Harding
Elementary School shall drop any such child off at the school
children safe dropoff zone.
(2) The operator of a motor vehicle using the safe drop off zone shall
drop off a child or children for attendance at Harding School
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m. and shall do so in
accordance with the following procedure:
(a) The operator shall bring his or her vehicle to a full stop within
one of the designated parallel parking spaces within the drop
zone area.
(b) All children shall exit the vehicle on the curb side.
(c) Once the children have exited the vehicle and are on the
sidewalk area, the operator shall depart the drop zone area
westerly along the Boulevard.
C. Prohibited conduct. When using the dropoff zone area to drop off a child
at Harding School, the operator of the motor vehicle may not:
(1) Leave his or her vehicle unattended.
162. Editor's Note: See § 190-52, Schedule XX: Lane Use Reservations.
163. Editor's Note: See § 190-53, Schedule XXI: Right Turn on Red Prohibitions.
§ 190-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-23.1
1:825
(2) Bring his or her vehicle to a stop in such a manner so as to take up a
portion of two parking spaces.
(3) Stop on a cross-hatched area between parking stalls.
(4) Double-park or otherwise stop his or her vehicle in a location within
the dropoff zone which is not a designated parking space.
(5) Remain in the drop off zone after the child or children are on the
sidewalk for a period of time longer than reasonably necessary to
depart the drop off zone in accordance with Subsection B(2)(c)
above.
D. Penalties. Any operator of a motor vehicle who violates the provisions of
this section shall be subject to a fine as provided in § 190-26C.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 190-23.1 KENILWORTH CODE § 190-23.1
1:826
ARTICLE IV
Emergency Parking Regulations
§ 190-24. Conduct when emergency is declared.
§ 190-25. (Reserved)164
A. Upon the declaration of an emergency by the Chief of Police or, in his
absence, the ranking police officer, there shall be no parking upon
streets or sections of streets where temporary emergency no-parking
signs are displayed. The Chief of Police or, in his absence, the ranking
police officer, is authorized to declare an emergency and to direct the
posting of said emergency no-parking signs when weather conditions,
accidents, fires or public celebrations dictate or require the avoidance
of hazards or other conditions which interfere with the free flow of
traffic.
B. Notification that the emergency no-parking signs are being or will be
posted shall be given to the operator or owner of any vehicle which has
been parked prior to the posting of the signs.
164. Editor's Note: Former § 190-25, Snow emergency regulations; parking prohibited, as
amended 1-22-1997 by Ord. No. 97-1, was repealed 2-23-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-1.
§ 190-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-25
1:827

ARTICLE IVA
Handicapped Parking
[Added 11-12-1985 by Ord. No. 85-16; amended 11-12-2003 by Ord.
No. 2003-15]
§ 190-25.1. Handicapped parking zones.165
A. The locations described in Schedule XXIII (§ 190-55), attached to and
made part of this chapter, are hereby designated handicapped parking
zones.
B. Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall be subject to
the fines and penalties set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, as may be
amended and supplemented from time to time.
165. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 170, Art. X, Handicapped Parking.
§ 190-25.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-25.1
1:829

ARTICLE IVB
Designated Parking Spaces
[Added 11-10-1992 by Ord. No. 92-19]
§ 190-25.2. Parking restricted to designated spaces.
Parking along the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule XXIV
(§ 190-56), attached to and made a part of this chapter, is restricted to the
designated spaces, indicated by broad white lines, along said streets or
parts of streets.
§ 190-25.3. Permit parking. [Added 8-28-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-14;
amended 3-12-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-1; 11-12-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-14]
A. No person shall park a vehicle on streets or parts of streets as
described within the following section unless an appropriate and
current parking permit as issued by the Borough of Kenilworth is
displayed on said vehicle for those streets or parts of streets as
described or listed within the following section.
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
Washington
Avenue
Both* All Between North 19th and
North 20th Street
*Subject to N.J.S.A. 39:4-138 which shall control.
B. The Borough Clerk shall issue annual parking permits to active
members of the Kenilworth Fire Department and/or First Aid Squad
and/or Borough officials, that shall expire at the anniversary of their
issue. Any person exercising parking privileges provided for in
§ 190-25.3 above shall prominently display on the motor vehicle in the
rear window the special identification decal issued by the Borough
granting such parking privilege.
C. Any vehicle owner who parks in the restricted area and fails to identify
his or her vehicle pursuant to Subsection B above may be subject to the
penalty provisions of § 190-26.
D. No operator of a motor vehicle issued a parking permit shall stand or
park a motor vehicle of any kind in any of the following places: in front
of a public or private driveway; within 25 feet of the nearest crosswalk
or side line of a street or intersecting highway, except at alleys; within
50 feet of a stop sign or within 20 feet of a driveway entrance of any fire
department.
§ 190-25.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-25.3
1:831

ARTICLE IVC
Combat-Wounded Parking
[Added 3-28-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-03]
§ 190-25.4. Purpose; parking spaces; violations and penalties.
A. Purpose. The Borough Council seeks to promote the public safety and
welfare within the Borough by the creation of combat-wounded parking
spaces/stalls within the Borough in the following locations:
Location Quantity
401 Monroe Avenue - David Brearley Middle
High School
1
Municipal Parking Lot on 23rd Street (across
from Borough Hall)
1
Municipal Parking Lot on 21st Street (across
from the Kenilworth VFW Hall)
2
238 North 14th Street - American Legion
Parking Lot
1
B. No person shall park a vehicle in a parking space/stall designated and
established for combat wounded. A combat-wounded parking space
means an area of a public roadway or public parking lot designated for
use by any combat-wounded person as provided for and which is so
marked by proper signage and roadway markings.
C. A combat-wounded veteran is any person who served for any length of
time in any military service branch; who experiences any level of
hostility for any duration resulting from offensive, defensive or friendly
fire military action involving a real or perceived enemy in any foreign
theater and suffers injury or disability from same.
D. No person shall park a vehicle in any of the designated parking stalls
for parking for use by combat-wounded persons in locations referred to
in the ordinances of the Borough, unless such person is a combatwounded
individual. Any vehicle parked in a parking stall reserved for
combat-wounded drivers pursuant to this chapter which does not
display the official state license plate, or special identification sticker or
placard from the Borough of Kenilworth or the Borough's designee, is
presumed to have parked in such a stall unlawfully, and subject to the
fines and penalties set forth in Title 39 of the New Jersey Statutes.
(1) The Borough may designate the Commanders of the Kenilworth
Veterans of Foreign Wars and/or the Kenilworth American Legion
as compliance officers in determining the eligibility of said combatwounded
persons.
E. Any person parking in a restricted parking space without a special
vehicle identification as stated above shall be liable for a fine of up to
$250 for the first offense and up to 90 days' community service on such
§ 190-25.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-25.4
1:833
terms and in such form as the court shall deem appropriate, or any
combination thereof.
§ 190-25.4 KENILWORTH CODE § 190-25.4
1:834
ARTICLE V
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 190-26. Violations and penalties.
A. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey statute or
this chapter, every person convicted of a violation of a provision of this
chapter shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $50 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both, except that for
a violation of N.J.S.A. Title 39, Chapter 4, Article 11, 13, 14 or 17, for
which no specific penalty is provided, the offender shall be liable to a
penalty of not less than $50 nor more than $200 or imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 15 days, or both. [Amended 2-14-1989 by Ord.
No. 89-3; 9-12-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-14]
B. The penalty in Subsection A above is in conformity with N.J.S.A.
39:4-203. [Amended 9-12-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-14]
C. The fines for violations of certain sections of Chapter 190 of the
Borough Code shall be as follows: [Added 2-14-1989 by Ord. No.
89-3; amended 1-22-1991 by Ord. No. 91-1; 2-23-1993 by Ord.
No. 93-1; 3-15-1995 by Ord. No. 95-5; 11-12-1997 by Ord. No.
97-11; 3-22-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-4; 11-12-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-16; 2-9-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-01; 3-27-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-02; 9-12-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-14]
Code Section/Description Penalty
§ 190-3, Parking prohibited at all times $51
§ 190-4, Parking prohibited certain hours $51
§ 190-5, Stopping or standing prohibited
during specified times
$51
§ 190-6, Limited time parking $51
§ 190-7, Angle parking $51
§ 190-8, Parking on public property $51
§ 190-8.1, Parking of trucks and
commercial vehicles
Court appearance
required
§ 190-9, Operation of trucks over 7,800
pounds excluded
$85
§ 190-11, Operation on one-way streets $85
§ 190-15, Parking in a loading zone $51
§ 190-17, Parking in a bus stop $51
§ 190-18, Left turns prohibited $85
§ 190-19, U-turns prohibited $85
§ 190-20, Turning prohibited $85
§ 190-22, Lane use $85
§ 190-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-26
1:835
§ 190-27. Invalidity of provisions.
If any part or parts of this chapter are for any reason held to be invalid,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
chapter.
§ 190-28. Repealer.
All former traffic ordinances of the Borough of Kenilworth are hereby
repealed, and all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with or
inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed, except
that this repeal shall not affect or prevent the prosecution or punishment
of any person for any act done or committed in violation of any ordinance
hereby repealed prior to the taking effect of this chapter.
§ 190-29. Title.
This chapter may be known and cited as the "Traffic Ordinance."
§ 190-30. Severability. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
In the event that any section of this chapter is declared invalid by a court
of competent jurisdiction, such adjudication shall not affect the remaining
sections, which shall be deemed severable therefrom.
§ 190-31. (Reserved)166
Code Section/Description Penalty
§ 190-23, Right turn on red $85
§ 190-23.1, School children safe dropoff
zone
$51
§ 190-24, Conduct when emergency is
declared
$51
§ 190-25.1, Handicapped parking zones Court appearance
required
§ 190-25.2, Parking restricted to
designated spaces
$51
§ 190-32.1, Use of crosswalks; pedestrian
crossing
$25
§ 190-38C(4)(a), Municipal Parking Lot No.
3 reserved for employees only
$51
§ 190-38C(5)(a), Municipal Parking Lot No.
4 parking for Municipal Hall business only
$51
166. Editor's Note: Original § 190-31, Revocation of previous regulations, was repealed at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II). See § 190-28, Repealer.
§ 190-26 KENILWORTH CODE § 190-32
1:836
§ 190-32. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon final passage and publication according
to law.
§ 190-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-32
1:837

ARTICLE VI
Crosswalks
[Added 2-25-1998 by Ord. No. 98-2]
§ 190-32.1. Use of designated crosswalks; pedestrian crossing;
enforcement; violations and penalties.
A. At any intersection within the Borough of Kenilworth where traffic is
directed or controlled by a police officer or traffic signal, no pedestrian
shall enter upon or cross the highway at a point other than a designated
crosswalk. Where traffic is not controlled and directed either by a
police officer or traffic control signal, pedestrians shall cross the
roadway within a crosswalk or, in the absence of a crosswalk, and
where not otherwise prohibited, at right angles to the roadway.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to cross the Boulevard between the
traffic signal at the Parkway entrance North and the traffic signal at
Coolidge Drive, at any location other than a designated crossing, at any
time between the hours of 6:30 a.m. and 7:30 p.m. daily.
C. The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the Police
Department and, in the case of a citizens complaint, through the Police
Department.
D. The provisions of this section shall be prosecuted through summary
proceedings in the Municipal Court. Any person found to have violated
this section shall be subject to a fine as provided in § 190-26C.
[Amended 9-12-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-14]
§ 190-32.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-32.1
1:839

ARTICLE VII
Schedules
§ 190-33. Schedule I: No Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 190-3, no person shall park a vehicle
at any time upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets.
Name of Street Sides Location
Boright Avenue [Added
5-12-1999 by Ord. No.
99-7; amended
10-27-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-14]
South Entire length
Boright Avenue
[Repealed 10-27-1999
by Ord. No. 99-14]
Boulevard Both From a point 100 feet west of the
westerly curbline of North 8th
Street/Columbia Avenue to a point
100 feet east of the easterly curbline
of North 8th Street/Columbia Avenue
Boulevard North From Dorsett Drive to the Cranford
Township line
Boulevard South From a point 100 feet west of the
westerly curbline of Coolidge Drive
to a point 100 feet east of the
easterly curbline of Coolidge Drive
Boulevard South From the easterly curbline of South
23rd Street to a point 80 feet
easterly therefrom
Boulevard [Amended
11-10-1987 by Ord.
No. 87-24]
North From the westerly side of Epping
Drive to the Cranford Township line
Carnegie Avenue West Entire length
Clinton Avenue [Added
3-13-1996 by Ord. No.
96-3]
Both From westerly curbline of South 31st
Street to a point 200 feet west
therefrom
Coolidge Drive West From the southerly curbline of
Boulevard to a point 100 feet south
Cross Street [Added
4-25-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-05]
East From the north curbline of
Washington Avenue for 300 feet
north
Fairfield Avenue Both Between the Rahway Valley Railroad
and South 31st Street
§ 190-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-33
1:841
Name of Street Sides Location
Hoiles Place Both Entire length
Lafayette Avenue Both From Lafayette Place to its westerly
terminus
Lafayette Avenue South From a point 400 feet west of the
westerly curbline of 14th Street to a
point 100 feet westerly thereof
Market Street [Added
5-9-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-6]
Both From the southerly side of Boulevard
a distance of 500 feet south
Market Street [Added
6-27-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-08]
East From north side corner of West
Colfax Avenue for 50 feet
Michigan Avenue Both Between Via Vitale and U.S. Route 22
Michigan Avenue
[Added 3-12-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-5]
West From the curbline at the intersection
with Passaic Avenue north 50 feet
Michigan Avenue
[Amended 12-11-1990
by Ord. No. 90-20]
East From the south curbline of the
Boulevard to a point 120 feet south
from the south curbline of Kingston
Avenue
Michigan Avenue
[Amended 12-11-1990
by Ord. No. 90-20]
East From Via Vitale to a point 150 feet
north of the north curbline of
Jefferson Avenue
Michigan Avenue
[Amended 12-11-1990
by Ord. No. 90-20]
West From the south curbline of
Washington Avenue to a point 120
feet south of the south curbline of
Kingston Avenue
Michigan Avenue
[Repealed 10-14-1998
by Ord. No. 98-27]
Michigan Avenue
[Repealed 12-11-1990
by Ord. No. 90-20]
Monroe Avenue South Entire length
Monroe Avenue [Added
11-25-1986 by Ord.
No. 86-19]
North From 14th Street to 18th Street
Monroe Avenue [Added
8-12-1986 by Ord. No.
86-11; repealed
12-11-1990 by Ord.
No. 90-20]
§ 190-33 KENILWORTH CODE § 190-33
1:842
Name of Street Sides Location
North 10th Street West From the northerly boundary line of
Washington Avenue to the northerly
curbline of the Boulevard
North 12th Street Both From the northerly side of
Washington Avenue to the southerly
side of Monroe Avenue
North 14th Street
[Amended 11-10-1987
by Ord. No. 87-24]
Both From Monroe Avenue northward for
its entire length
North 16th Street
[Added 5-8-2002 by
Ord. No. 2002-9]
East From the dead end south for 250 feet
North 17th Street
[Added 3-28-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-03]
East From Monroe Avenue to Sheridan
Avenue
North 18th Street East From the northerly side of the
Boulevard for a distance of 125 feet
therefrom
North 18th Street East From the northerly side of the
Boulevard for a distance of 125 feet
therefrom
North 18th Street West From the northerly side of Boulevard
for a distance of 275 feet north
therefrom
North 19th Street East From the north curbline of Boulevard
to a point 250 feet north therefrom
North 19th Street West From the north curbline of Boulevard
to a point 250 feet north therefrom
North 19th Street
[Added 11-10-1987 by
Ord. No. 87-24]
East From the southerly curbline of
Washington Avenue to a point 40 feet
south therefrom
North 19th Street
[Added 4-25-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018-05]
West From the north curbline of
Washington Avenue for 300 feet
north
North 19th Street
[Added 11-10-1987 by
Ord. No. 87-24]
West From the southerly curbline of
Washington Avenue to a point 50 feet
south therefrom
North 20th Street East From the curbline of Boulevard to a
point 158 feet north therefrom
North 20th Street West From the north curbline of Boulevard
to a point 250 feet north therefrom
§ 190-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-33
1:843
Name of Street Sides Location
North 23rd Street East From the north curbline of Boulevard
to a point 100 feet north therefrom
North 31st Street
[Added 4-26-2000 by
Ord. No. 2000-9]
Both From Boulevard north the entire
length of the street
North 8th Street [Added
11-12-1985 by Ord.
No. 85-16]
East From Boulevard to Monroe Avenue
South 17th Street
[Added 3-11-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-02]
East Southerly from Boulevard for 120
feet
South 21st Street East From the south curbline of Boulevard
to a point 200 feet south therefrom
South 21st Street West Entire length
South 21st Street
[Added 11-10-1987 by
Ord. No. 87-24]
East From the southerly curbline of
Newark Avenue to the northerly
curbline of Quinton Avenue
South 31st Street Both From Summer Avenue to Fairfield
Avenue
South 31st Street West From Fairfield Avenue to Garden
State Parkway
South 31st Street
[Added 3-13-1996 by
Ord. No. 96-3]
Both From Boulevard to Clinton Avenue
Springfield Avenue
[Added 11-10-1987 by
Ord. No. 87-24]
Both From 14th Street to the Union
Township line
Springfield Road East Entire length
Summer Avenue North Entire length
Swenson Drive Both Entire length
Washington Avenue Both From North 8th Street to North 9th
Street
Washington Avenue
[Added 4-25-1989 by
Ord. No. 89-7]
South From North 23rd Street to Michigan
Avenue
West Colfax Avenue
[Added 6-27-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018-08]
North From the east side of Market Street
for 50 feet
§ 190-33 KENILWORTH CODE § 190-34
1:844
§ 190-34. Schedule II: No Parking Certain Hours.
In accordance with the provisions of § 190-4, no person shall park a vehicle
between the hours specified upon any of the following described streets or
parts of streets.
Name of Street Side Hours Location
All Both No trucks or
buses over 4
tons in weight
shall park
between 2:00
a.m. and 6:00
a.m.
All
Boulevard North 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m. school days
North 18th Street to
Coolidge Drive
Boulevard [Added
4-9-1991 by Ord.
No. 91-5]
Both 6:00 a.m. to 7:00
a.m. Thursdays
All
Coolidge Drive
[Added 11-13-2002
by Ord. No.
2002-17]
West 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m. school days
The Boulevard and
Lincoln Drive
Lexington Avenue
[Added 4-10-2019
by Ord. No.
2019-01]
North 7:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m. Monday
through Friday
Property Line of 722
Lexington Avenue
(approximately 134
feet) between utility
pole nos.
#CC30002-61342KL
Michigan Avenue
[Amended
12-11-1990 by
Ord. No. 90-21]
West 7:00 a.m. to 7:00
p.m.
Washington Avenue to
Via Vitale
Michigan Avenue
[Repealed
12-11-1990 by
Ord. No. 90-21]
Monroe Avenue
[Added 10-14-1986
by Ord. No. 86-17]
North 7:00 a.m. to 7:00
p.m., except
Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
From 18th Street to
Michigan Avenue
§ 190-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-34
1:845
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Monroe Avenue
[Added 11-12-1985
by Ord. No. 85-16;
repealed
10-14-1986 by
Ord. No. 86-17]
Monroe Avenue
[Repealed
8-12-1986 by Ord.
No. 86-11]
North 10th Street
[Added 11-13-2002
by Ord. No.
2002-17]
East 9:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Tuesdays
Monroe Avenue and
Sheridan Avenue
North 10th Street
[Added 11-13-2002
by Ord. No.
2002-17]
West 9:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Wednesdays
Monroe Avenue and
Sheridan Avenue
North 11th Street
[Added 11-13-2002
by Ord. No.
2002-17]
East 9:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Tuesdays
Monroe Avenue and
Sheridan Avenue
North 11th Street
[Added 11-13-2002
by Ord. No.
2002-17]
West 9:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Wednesdays
Monroe Avenue and
Sheridan Avenue
North 15th Street
[Amended
11-12-1985 by
Ord. No. 85-16;
repealed
12-11-1990 by
Ord. No. 90-21]
North 16th Street
[Repealed
12-11-1990 by
Ord. No. 90-21]
North 17th Street
[Repealed
12-11-1990 by
Ord. No. 90-21]
§ 190-34 KENILWORTH CODE § 190-34
1:846
Name of Street Side Hours Location
North 18th Street
[Repealed
12-11-1990 by
Ord. No. 90-21]
North 20th Street East 9:00 a.m. to
11:00 a.m.
Tuesdays
Boulevard to
Washington Avenue
North 20th Street West 9:00 a.m. to
11:00 a.m.
Wednesdays
Boulevard to
Washington Avenue
North 21st Street
[Amended
4-9-1991 by Ord.
No. 91-5]
East 5:00 a.m. to
11:00 a.m.
Tuesdays
From a point 35 feet
south of the curbline
of Washington Avenue
to a point 130 feet
north of the north
curbline of Boulevard
North 21st Street
[Amended
4-9-1991 by Ord.
No. 91-5]
West 9:00 a.m. to
11:00 a.m.
Wednesdays
From a point 35 feet
north of the curbline
of Boulevard to a
point 60 feet south of
the curbline of
Washington Avenue
Passaic Avenue
[Added 7-11-2001
by Ord. No.
2001-15]
Both Trucks in excess
of 7,800 pounds
registered gross
vehicle weight
are prohibited
from parking at
any time except
for the purpose
of pickup or
delivery to a
residence.
Commercial
pickup and
delivery is
prohibited.
From the west side of
Market Street to the
dead end at DiMario
Park
South 31st Street East 7:00 a.m. to 7:00
p.m.
Fairfield Avenue to
Garden State Parkway
Washington Avenue
[Amended
11-8-2006 by Ord.
No. 2006-19]
North 7:30 a.m. to 4:00
p.m. school days
North 22nd Street to
North 23rd Street
§ 190-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-35
1:847
§ 190-35. Schedule III: No Stopping or Standing.
In accordance with the provisions of § 190-5, no person shall stop or stand
a vehicle during specified times upon any of the following described streets
or parts of streets:
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
Boulevard Both Anytime From Michigan Avenue to
the Union Township line
Boulevard South Anytime From a point 200 feet west
of the westerly curbline of
Michigan Avenue to a point
200 feet westerly therefrom
Boulevard South Anytime From the westerly curbline
of South 21st Street to a
point 60 feet west
Columbia Avenue Both Anytime From the south curbline of
Boulevard to a point 100
feet south
Coolidge Drive East Anytime From the southerly curbline
of Boulevard to a point 100
feet south
Market Street Both Anytime From the southerly curbline
of Boulevard to a point 150
feet south
Michigan Avenue East Anytime Boulevard to Jefferson
Avenue
Michigan Avenue East Anytime From the north curbline of
Jefferson Avenue to a point
150 feet north therefrom
Monroe Avenue South Anytime North 14th Street to North
Cross Street
North 21st Street Both Anytime From the northerly curbline
of Boulevard to a point 130
feet north
North 8th Street Both Anytime From the northerly curbline
of Boulevard to a point 100
feet north
South 21st Street Both Anytime From the southerly curbline
of Boulevard to a point 220
feet south
§ 190-35 KENILWORTH CODE § 190-36
1:848
§ 190-36. Schedule IV: Time Limit Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 190-6, no person shall park a vehicle
for longer than the time limit shown upon any of the following streets or
parts of streets:
Name of
Street Sides
Time
Limit Hours Location
Boulevard North 2 hours 10:00 a.m.
to 6:00 p.m.
Monday to
Friday
Michigan Avenue to
North 18th Street
Boulevard South 2 hours 10:00 a.m.
to 6:00 p.m.
From a point 80 feet
east of the east curbline
of 23rd Street to a point
194 feet west of the
west curbline of
Michigan Avenue
Boulevard South 2 hours 10:00 a.m.
to 6:00 p.m.
Monday to
Friday
From a point 100 feet
east of the east curbline
of Coolidge Drive to a
point 35 feet west of the
west curbline of South
17th Street
Boulevard South 2 hours 10:00 a.m.
to 6:00 p.m.
Monday to
Friday
From a point 35 feet
east of the east curbline
of South 18th Street to a
point 120 feet west of
the west curbline of
South 19th Street
Boulevard South 2 hours 10:00 a.m.
to 6:00 p.m.
From a point 35 feet
east of the east curbline
of 21st Street to a point
120 feet west of the
west curbline of South
21st Street
Boulevard South 2 hours 10:00 a.m.
to 6:00 p.m.
Monday to
Friday
From a point 35 feet
east of the easterly
curbline of South 19th
Street to a point 60 feet
west of the west
curbline of South 21st
Street
Boulevard South 2 hours 10:00 a.m.
to 6:00 p.m.
Monday to
Friday
South 17th Street to
South 18th Street
§ 190-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-37
1:849
§ 190-37. Schedule V: Angle Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 190-7, angle parking shall be
provided upon any of the following streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Sides Location
Boulevard North From a point 125 feet west of the
west curbline of Michigan Avenue to
a point 35 feet east of the east
curbline of North 24th Street
Boulevard South South 20th Street to South 22nd
Street
Boulevard [Amended
11-12-1985 by Ord.
No. 85-16]
North North 24th Street to North 19th
Street
Boulevard [Repealed
11-7-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-19]
Washington Avenue
[Amended 11-12-1985
by Ord. No. 85-16;
repealed 10-9-1996 by
Ord. No. 96-19]
§ 190-38. Schedule VI: Public Property.
A. David Brearley High School.
(1) No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the
roadways, parking lot and grounds of David Brearley High School,
except in designated areas, between the painted lines as shown on
the sketch attached hereto as Schedule A and incorporated herein
and made a part of this schedule.167
(2) The use of this parking lot shall be limited to the students and
employees of David Brearley High School and all authorized
visitors, and all motor vehicles shall be properly identified. The
Board of Education of the Borough of Kenilworth may make, modify
and repeal rules and regulations providing for the proper
identification of all authorized motor vehicles.
(3) No person shall move a vehicle upon the roadway, parking lot and
grounds except on the paved portion of the roadway of the David
Brearley High School and except in the direction as shown on the
sketch attached hereto as Schedule A and incorporated herein and
made part of this chapter.168
167. Editor's Note: Schedule A is on file in the office of the Borough Clerk.
168. Editor's Note: Schedule A is on file in the office of the Borough Clerk.
§ 190-37 KENILWORTH CODE § 190-38
1:850
B. Public Library.
(1) No person shall use or park any motor vehicle in the municipal
parking lot adjacent to the Kenilworth Free Public Library except in
designated areas and between the painted lines as shown on the
sketch attached hereto as Schedule A and incorporated herein and
made part of this chapter.169
(2) The use of this municipal lot shall be limited to the patrons and
employees of the Kenilworth Free Public Library, and all motor
vehicles shall be properly identified. The Kenilworth Free Public
Library may make, modify and repeal rules and regulations for the
identification of the motor vehicles of its patrons.
C. Municipal parking lots.
(1) The municipal parking lots now or hereafter acquired or
established by the Borough of Kenilworth shall be under the
supervision of the Chief of Police.
(2) The municipal parking lot consisting of all or parts of Lots 23, 24,
25A, 36, 37 and 38, between North 21st Street and North 22nd
Street, is hereby designated Parking Lot No. 1.
(a) No person shall park a vehicle in Parking Lot No. 1 for more
than two consecutive hours between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
7:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. [Added 11-12-1985 by
Ord. No. 85-16; amended 5-14-1997 by Ord. No. 97-9170]
(3) The municipal parking lot consisting of all or part of Lots 5, 6, 7, 8
and 9, in Block 108, and Lots 1, 2, 3, 41 and 42, in Block 114, and
located at the easterly side of South 21st Street, between
Boulevard and Newark Avenue, is hereby designated as Parking Lot
No. 2.
(a) No person shall park a vehicle in Parking Lot No. 2 between
the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:30 a.m.
(4) The municipal parking lot consisting of Lots 25, 26, 27 and 28, in
Block 109, and located at the intersection of Boulevard and South
23rd Street, is hereby designated as Parking Lot No. 3.
(a) The spaces located along the southerly line of Parking Lot No.
3 are reserved for officers and employees of the Borough of
Kenilworth, and no person shall park a motor vehicle in said
spaces who is not an officer or employee of the Borough of
Kenilworth.
169. Editor's Note: Schedule A is on file in the office of the Borough Clerk.
170. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the repeal of former Subsection C(2)(a)
and the relettering of this subsection as Subsection C(2)(a).
§ 190-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-38
1:851
(b) The remaining spaces in said parking lot are reserved for
persons engaged in activities at the Municipal Building, and no
person shall park a motor vehicle in said spaces who is not
engaged in activities at the Municipal Building.
(c) No person other than an officer or employee of the Borough of
Kenilworth shall park a motor vehicle in Parking Lot No. 3 for
more than two consecutive hours.
(d) No person shall park a vehicle in Parking Lot No. 3 between
the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:30 a.m.
(5) The municipal parking lot consisting of all or parts of Lots 22, 23
and 28, in Block 110, and located along the west side of South 24th
Street, is hereby designated as Parking Lot No. 4.
(a) Restrictions. Parking on Lot 4 shall be limited to persons
engaged in activities or business in the Recreation Building or
the Borough Hall facilities. Upon the completion of such
business or activity, the owner and/or operator of the vehicle
shall promptly remove the vehicle from the lot. [Amended
4-24-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-6]
(6) The municipal recreation area consisting of Lots 1 through 13
inclusive and Lots 48 through 60 inclusive in Block 172 and located
on the eastern side of Michigan Avenue opposite Passaic Avenue is
hereby designated as DiMario Playground. [Added 11-12-1985 by
Ord. No. 85-16]
(a) No person shall park a vehicle in DiMario Playground.
(7) Spaces reserved for handicapped persons.
(a) (Reserved)
(b) No person shall park a vehicle in any space hereafter set aside
for the physically handicapped who is not physically
handicapped or using such vehicle for the conveyance of a
physically handicapped person.
(8) General restrictions.
(a) No person shall park any vehicle in any municipal lot so as to
occupy more than one designated parking space.
(b) No person shall park any vehicle in any municipal parking lot
except in the designated parking spaces.
(9) The Police Chief shall see that appropriate signs are posted or
painted so as to afford notice to the provisions of this schedule.
(10) Any person violating any provision of this schedule shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed $51. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 190-38 KENILWORTH CODE § 190-38
1:852
§ 190-39. Schedule VII: Trucks Over 7,800 Pounds Excluded.
[Amended 5-10-1995 by Ord. No. 95-11; 11-13-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-16]
In accordance with the provisions of § 190-9, trucks over 7,800 pounds
registered gross vehicle weight (RGVW) are hereby excluded from all
Borough streets, except those listed in § 190-40; provided, however, that
the restriction shall not prohibit travel over such streets for the purpose of
pickup and delivery from a location on such street in the normal course of
business.
§ 190-40. Schedule VIII: Routes for Trucks Over 7,800 Pounds.
[Amended 11-12-1985 by Ord. No. 85-16; 4-13-1993 by Ord. No.
93-7; 7-13-1993 by Ord. No. 93-17; 5-10-1995 by Ord. No. 95-11]
(11) This schedule shall take effect upon final passage and publication
in accordance to law.
A. In accordance with the provisions of § 190-10, the following streets, or
parts of streets, are hereby designated as routes for commercial
vehicles, including trucks and commercially registered trailers, with an
individual or combined registered gross vehicle weight in excess of
7,800 pounds.
B. All commercial vehicles, including trucks and commercially registered
trailers, with an individual or combined registered gross vehicle weight
in excess of 7,800 pounds shall be excluded from all other streets;
provided, however, that nothing herein shall prohibit travel over such
streets for the purpose of pickup and delivery in the normal course of
business.
Name of Street Location
Boulevard Entire length
Carnegie Avenue Entire length
Fairfield Avenue From Michigan Avenue to South 31st
Street
Faitoute Avenue From West Colfax Avenue to Michigan
Avenue
Federal Avenue Entire length
Galloping Hill Road Entire length
Jefferson Avenue Michigan Avenue to North 26th Street
Lexington Avenue Entire length
Market Street Entire length
Michigan Avenue Entire length
Monroe Avenue Entire length
North 14th Street Monroe Avenue to Springfield Road
§ 190-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-40
1:853
§ 190-41. Schedule IX: One-Way Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 190-11, the following described
streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as one-way streets in the
direction indicated:
Name of Street Direction Limits
Fairfield Avenue [Added
2-23-1993 by Ord. No.
93-3]
West-bound Michigan Avenue to Faitoute
Avenue
Faitoute Avenue [Added
2-23-1993 by Ord. No.
93-3; repealed
7-13-1993 by Ord. No.
93-23]
Franklin Avenue [Added
12-14-2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-19]
East-bound North 13th Street to North 14th
Street
Jefferson Avenue East-bound North 24th Street to Michigan
Avenue
Newark Avenue West-bound Michigan Avenue to South 21st
Street
North 10th Street North-bound Boulevard to Monroe Avenue
North 15th Street
[Amended 11-10-1988
by Ord. No. 98-34]
South-bound Springfield Road to Lafayette
Avenue
North 18th Street North-bound Boulevard to Washington Avenue
North 19th Street South-bound Washington Avenue to Boulevard
North 20th Street North-bound Boulevard to Washington Avenue
North 21st Street South-bound Washington Avenue to Boulevard
North 22nd Street North-bound Boulevard to Washington Avenue
Name of Street Location
North 21st Street Boulevard to Washington Avenue
North 26th Street Entire length
North 8th Street Boulevard to Monroe Avenue
South 31st Street Sumner Avenue to Fairfield Avenue
Springfield Road Entire length
Sumner Avenue Entire length
West Colfax Avenue Between Faitoute Avenue and Linden
Street
§ 190-40 KENILWORTH CODE § 190-41
1:854
Name of Street Direction Limits
Passaic Avenue East-bound Orange Avenue to Michigan
Avenue
South 22nd Street North-bound Newark Avenue to Boulevard
South 23rd Street South-bound Boulevard to Newark Avenue
Washington Avenue West-bound North 9th Street to North 8th
Street
§ 190-42. Schedule X: Through Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 190-12, the following described
streets, or parts of streets, are hereby designated as through streets. Stop
signs shall be installed on the near right side of each street intersecting
the through street, except where yield signs are provided for in the
designations:
Name of Street Limits
Bloomingdale Avenue Between the Cranford Township line
and Trenton Avenue
Boulevard-Galloping Hill Road Between the Cranford Township line
and the Union Township line
Columbia Avenue Between the Cranford Township line
and Boulevard
Coolidge Drive [Amended
11-12-1985 by Ord. No. 85-16]
Between Boulevard and Arbor Street
Fairfield Avenue [Amended
11-12-1985 by Ord. No. 85-16]
Between Ashwood Avenue and
Michigan Avenue
Faitoute Avenue-Michigan Avenue
[Amended 11-12-1985 by Ord.
No. 85-16]
Between the Roselle Park Borough
corporate line and U.S. Route 22, a
stop sign to control the west lane of
Faitoute Avenue at the intersection of
Faitoute Avenue and Michigan Avenue
Faitoute Avenue-Richfield Avenue
[Amended 11-12-1985 by Ord.
No. 85-16]
Between Bloomingdale Avenue and
South 21st Street
Lexington Avenue Between Michigan Avenue and Market
Street
Market Street Between West Colfax Avenue and
Boulevard
Monroe Avenue Between North 7th Street and
Michigan Avenue
Newark Avenue Between South 21st Street and
Michigan Avenue
§ 190-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-42
1:855
Name of Street Limits
North 21st Street-Oak Street From Monroe Avenue to Michigan
Avenue
North 4th Street/14th Street-
Springfield Road
Between Boulevard and Monroe
Avenue
North 4th Street/14th Street-
Springfield Road
Between Monroe Avenue and the end
of North 17th Street north of Lafayette
Street
North 4th Street/14th Street-
Springfield Road
Between Monroe Avenue and the
Union Township line
Orange Avenue-South 21st Street From the Cranford Township line to
Boulevard
Passaic Avenue Between South 23rd Street and
Michigan Avenue
Quinton Avenue Between South 23rd Street and
Michigan Avenue
Richfield Avenue [Repealed
11-12-1985 by Ord. No. 85-16]
Sheridan Avenue Between North 14th Street and North
17th Street
Sheridan Avenue Between North 17th Street and North
21st Street
Sheridan Avenue Between North 7th Street and North
14th Street
South 23rd Street From Richfield Avenue to Newark
Avenue
South 24th Street From Newark Avenue to Boulevard
Washington Avenue Between Michigan Avenue and the end
of Washington Avenue to the west of
North 18th Street
West Colfax Avenue Between Faitoute Avenue and the
Roselle Park Borough line east of the
Rahway Valley Railroad to the east
West Colfax Avenue Between the Roselle Park Borough line
to the west and Faitoute Avenue
§ 190-43. Schedule XI: Stop Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 190-13, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as stop intersections:
§ 190-42 KENILWORTH CODE § 190-43
1:856
Intersection Stop Sign On
Lafayette Avenue and North 16th
Street
North 16th Street
North 17th Street and Sheridan
Avenue [Added 3-10-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-04]
Both sides of North 17th Street and
Sheridan Avenue
Richfield Avenue and South 25th
Street
South 25th Street
Roosevelt Lane and Arbor Street Arbor Street
§ 190-44. Schedule XII: Yield Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 190-14, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as yield intersections:
(Reserved)
§ 190-45. Schedule XIII: Loading Zones.
In accordance with the provisions of § 190-15, the following locations are
hereby designated as loading zones:
(Reserved)
§ 190-46. Schedule XIV: Taxi Stands.
In accordance with the provisions of § 190-16, the following described
locations are hereby designated as taxi stands:
(Reserved)
§ 190-47. Schedule XV: Bus Stops.
In accordance with the provisions of § 190-17, the following described
locations are hereby designated as bus stops:
A. Boulevard.
(1) Eastbound on the southerly side thereof at:
(a) Columbia Avenue, far side, beginning at the easterly curbline
of Columbia Avenue and extending 120 feet easterly therefrom.
(b) North 12th Street, near side, beginning at the prolongation of
the westerly curbline of North 12th Street and extending 120
feet westerly therefrom.
(c) North 14th Street, near side, beginning at the prolongation of
the westerly curbline of North 14th Street and extending 120
feet westerly therefrom.
§ 190-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-47
1:857
(d) South 19th Street, near side, beginning at the westerly
curbline of South 19th Street and extending 120 feet westerly
therefrom.
(e) South 23rd Street, near side, beginning at the westerly
curbline of South 23rd Street and extending 120 feet westerly
therefrom.
(f) Between Michigan Avenue and South 24th Street, mid block,
beginning 150 feet west of the westerly curbline of Michigan
Avenue and extending 135 feet westerly therefrom.
(2) Westbound on the northerly side thereof at:
(a) Michigan Avenue, far side, beginning at the westerly curbline
of Michigan Avenue and extending 140 feet westerly
therefrom.
(b) North 7th Street, far side, beginning at the westerly curbline of
North 7th Street and extending 120 feet westerly therefrom.
(c) Epping Drive, near side, beginning at the easterly curbline of
Epping Drive and extending 120 feet easterly therefrom.
B. Michigan Avenue.
(1) Northbound on the easterly side thereof at:
(a) Woodland Avenue, near side, beginning at the southerly
curbline of Woodland Avenue extending 120 feet southerly
therefrom.
(b) Passaic Avenue, near side, beginning at the prolongation of the
southerly curbline of Passaic Avenue extending 120 feet
southerly therefrom.
(2) Southbound on the westerly side thereof at:
(a) Passaic Avenue, far side, beginning at the southerly curbline of
Passaic Avenue and extending 110 feet southerly therefrom.
(b) Trenton Avenue, far side, beginning at the southerly curbline
of Trenton Avenue and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
(c) Fairfield Avenue, near side, beginning at the northerly curbline
of Fairfield Avenue and extending 120 feet northerly
therefrom.
(d) Beginning at the northerly curbline of Richfield Avenue and
extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
C. Faitoute Avenue.
(1) Northbound on the easterly side thereof at:
§ 190-47 KENILWORTH CODE § 190-47
1:858
§ 190-48. Schedule XVI: Left Turn Prohibitions.
In accordance with the provisions of § 190-18, no person shall make a left
turn at any of the following locations:
(a) Between West Colfax Avenue and Lexington Avenue, mid block,
beginning 130 feet north of the northerly curbline of West
Colfax Avenue and extending 135 feet northerly therefrom.
(2) Southbound on the westerly side thereof at:
(a) West Colfax Avenue, near side, beginning at the northerly
curbline of West Colfax Avenue and extending 120 feet
northerly therefrom.
D. Monroe Avenue.
(1) Westbound along the northerly side thereof at:
(a) North 19th Street, near side, beginning at the easterly curbline
of North 19th Street and extending 120 feet easterly
therefrom.
(b) North 15th Street, far side, beginning at the westerly curbline
of North 15th Street and extending 120 feet westerly
therefrom.
(c) North 11th Street, near side, beginning at the easterly curbline
of North 11th Street and extending 110 feet easterly
therefrom.
E. North 8th Street.
(1) Southbound along the westerly side thereof at:
(a) Monroe Avenue, far side, beginning at the southerly curbline of
Monroe Avenue and extending 150 feet southerly therefrom.
(b) Washington Avenue, near side, beginning at the northerly
curbline of Washington Avenue and extending 120 feet
northerly therefrom.
F. Along North 20th Street.
(1) Northbound on the easterly side thereof at:
(a) Boulevard, far side, beginning at the northerly curbline of
Boulevard and extending 150 feet northerly therefrom.
A. West on Galloping Hill Road to the northbound exit ramp from the
Garden State Parkway to Interchange No. 138.
B. South on North 26th Street to east on Boulevard.
§ 190-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-48
1:859
§ 190-49. Schedule XVII: U-Turn Prohibitions.
In accordance with the provisions of § 190-19, no person shall make a Uturn
at any of the following locations:
Location Limits
Boulevard Entire length
Galloping Hill Road Entire length
§ 190-50. Schedule XVIII: No Turns.
In accordance with the provisions of § 190-20, no person shall make a turn
at any of the following locations:
§ 190-51. Schedule XIX: Speed Limits.
In accordance with the provisions of § 190-21, no person shall operate a
vehicle in the following locations in excess of the speeds listed below:
Location
Speed
(mph)
David Brearly Regional High School
property
10
§ 190-52. Schedule XX: Lane Use Reservations.
In accordance with the provisions of § 190-22, all vehicles shall move as
described below:
C. Boulevard westbound from South 31st Street. [Added 11-29-1995 by
Ord. No. 95-31]
D. Boulevard eastbound from North 31st Street. [Added 11-29-1995 by
Ord. No. 95-31]
E. Boulevard westbound from the Boulevard exit of the A&P parking lot
located at 901 Boulevard. [Added 3-13-1996 by Ord. No. 96-2]
F. South on North 14th Street to east on the Boulevard, between the hours
of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. [Added 12-14-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-18]
G. Entering or exiting the Harding School student dropoff loop from
Kenilworth Boulevard. [Added 3-9-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-01]
H. Quinton Avenue eastbound onto South Michigan Avenue northbound.
[Added 10-10-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-16]
A. East on Galloping Hill Road at the intersection with the northbound exit
ramp from the Garden State Parkway at Interchange No. 138.
A. Boulevard.
§ 190-48 KENILWORTH CODE § 190-52
1:860
§ 190-53. Schedule XXI: Right Turn on Red Prohibitions. [Amended
11-13-1990 by Ord. No. 90-17]
In accordance with the provisions of § 190-23, no person shall make a right
turn at any of the following locations during a red traffic signal indication:
Intersection Turns/Hours
Boulevard and Coolidge Avenue Both right turns from 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m., and 2:30 p.m. to 4:00 p.m.,
Mondays through Fridays
Boulevard and Michigan Avenue All 4 right turns between 7:00 a.m.
and 7:00 p.m.
Boulevard and 21st Street All 3 right turns from 7:30 a.m. to 4:00
p.m., Mondays through Fridays
Monroe Avenue and 14th Avenue No right turns on red at all times
§ 190-54. (Reserved)171
§ 190-55. Schedule XXIII: Handicapped Parking Zones. [Added
11-12-1985 by Ord. No. 85-16]
In accordance with the provisions of § 190-25.1, handicapped parking zones
shall be as follows:
Name of Street Side Location
North 14th Street
[Added 11-28-1989 by
Ord. No. 89-16]
East Entrance to Ward Field; near
concession stand; 1 slot north and 1
slot south of fire hydrant
North 18th Street
[Added 7-13-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-05]
West 154 feet north of the Boulevard for
20 feet to 174 feet north of the
Boulevard
North 20th Street
[Added 10-14-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-30]
East In front of No. 23 North 20th Street
North 23rd Street West From a point 35 feet south of the
south curbline of Washington Avenue
to a point 40 feet southerly thereof
(1) Between a point 180 feet east of the prolongation of the east
curbline of 24th Street and the prolongation of the west curbline of
Michigan Avenue. The center lane shall be used for left turns only.
(2) Between Michigan Avenue and Market Street. The center lane shall
be used for left turns only.
171. Editor's Note: Former § 190-54, Schedule XXII: Snow Parking Regulations, was repealed
1-22-1997 by Ord. No. 97-1.
§ 190-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-55
1:861
Name of Street Side Location
Passaic Avenue South From a point 25 feet west of the
sideline at South 25th Street to a
point 25 feet westerly thereof
South 23rd Street
[Added 6-13-2001 by
Ord. No. 2001-10]
West Along the side of the Gospel Chapel
between Newark Avenue and Passaic
Avenue, nearest the entrance to the
church
§ 190-56. Schedule XXIV: Parking Restricted to Designated Spaces.
[Added 11-10-1992 by Ord. No. 92-19]
In accordance with the provisions of § 190-25.2, parking along the following
described streets or parts of streets shall be restricted to the designated
spaces indicated by broad white lines, as follows:
Name of Street Location
18th Street [Added 5-25-1993
by Ord. No. 93-14]
Between the Boulevard and
Washington Avenue
19th Street [Added 5-25-1993
by Ord. No. 93-14]
Between the Boulevard and
Washington Avenue
20th Street [Added 9-14-1993
by Ord. No. 93-24]
Between the Boulevard and
Washington Avenue
22nd Street [Added 5-25-1993
by Ord. No. 93-14]
Between Washington Avenue and
Monroe Avenue
23rd Street [Added 5-25-1993
by Ord. No. 93-14]
Between Washington Avenue and
Monroe Avenue
North 21st Street Between Washington Avenue and the
Boulevard
Washington Avenue [Added
5-25-1993 by Ord. No. 93-14]
Between 19th Street and 24th Street
§ 190-55 KENILWORTH CODE § 190-56
1:862
Chapter 194
WILDLIFE FEEDING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 141.
§ 194-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to prohibit the feeding of unconfined wildlife
in any public park or on any other property owned or operated by the
Borough of Kenilworth so as to protect public health, safety and welfare,
and to prescribe penalties for failure to comply.
§ 194-2. Definitions and word usage.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
FEED — To give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any edible
material, with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing wildlife.
Feeding does not include baiting in the legal taking of fish and/or game.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
WILDLIFE — All animals that are neither human nor domesticated.
§ 194-3. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall feed, in any public park or on any other property owned
or operated by the Borough of Kenilworth, any wildlife, excluding confined
wildlife (for example, wildlife confined in zoos, parks or rehabilitation
centers, or unconfined wildlife at environmental education centers).
§ 194-4. Enforcement.
A. This chapter shall be enforced by the Police Department, Health
Department and code enforcement officers of the Borough of
Kenilworth.
B. Any person found to be in violation of this chapter shall be ordered to
cease the feeding immediately.
§ 190-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-5
1:863
§ 194-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.
Chapter 197
(RESERVED)
Part III: Board Of Health Legislation
Chapter 199
GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH
§ 194-5 KENILWORTH CODE § 194-5
1:864
ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code by Board of Health
[Adopted 11-15-2018]
§ 199-1. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the Board of Health ordinances of the Borough
of Kenilworth of a general and permanent nature adopted by the Board of
Health of the Borough of Kenilworth, as revised, codified and consolidated
into chapters and sections by General Code, and consisting of Chapters
199 through 214, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as
"Part III of the Code of the Borough of Kenilworth," hereinafter known and
referred to as the "Code."
§ 199-2. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent Board of Health ordinances enacted prior to the enactment
of this Code, except such Board of Health ordinances as are hereinafter
expressly saved from repeal or continued in force.
§ 199-3. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
§ 199-4. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
Borough Clerk and/or the Board of Health Secretary and shall remain
there for use and examination by the public until final action is taken on
this ordinance; and, if this ordinance shall be adopted, such copy shall
be certified to by the Secretary of the Board of Health of the Borough of
Kenilworth, as provided by law, and such certified copy shall remain on file
in the office of the Board of Health Secretary and/or Clerk of the Borough,
to be made available to persons desiring to examine the same during all
times while said Code is in effect.
§ 199-5. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to Part III of the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the Board
of Health to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into Part III of such Code so that reference to the "Code of the Borough
of Kenilworth" shall be understood and intended to include such additions
and amendments. Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements
to the Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as
provided hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as
amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 199-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 199-6
1:865
§ 199-6. Publication; filing.
The Secretary of the Board of Health or the Clerk of the Borough of
Kenilworth, pursuant to law, shall cause this Adopting Ordinance to be
published, in the manner required, in a newspaper of general circulation
in the Borough. Sufficient copies of the Code shall be maintained in the
office of the Secretary or Clerk for inspection by the public at all times
during regular office hours. The enactment and publication of this Adopting
Ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of the Code for inspection
by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal
publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 199-7. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Secretary of the Board of Health or the Clerk
of the Borough of Kenilworth, or someone authorized and directed by
the Secretary or Clerk, to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book
containing the Code required to be filed in his or her office for the use of
the public. All changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent
to the effective date of this codification which shall be adopted specifically
as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by
reference until such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements
to said Code book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted
therein.
§ 199-8. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the Clerk of the Borough of Kenilworth, or an authorized agent of the Clerk,
upon the payment of a fee authorized by the Borough. The Clerk shall also
arrange for procedures for the periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 199-9. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of Part III of the Code or to alter or tamper
with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the
Board of Health of the Borough of Kenilworth to be misrepresented thereby.
Anyone violating this section or any part of this ordinance shall be subject,
upon conviction, to a fine of not less than $5 nor more than $500.
§ 199-10. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of Part III of the Code, and every part of each section, is an
independent section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or
a part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall
not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections
or parts thereof.
§ 199-6 KENILWORTH CODE § 199-11
1:866
§ 199-11. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 199-12. Inconsistent ordinances repealed.
§ 199-13. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of Part III of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided
for in § 199-12 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances,
rights and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
§ 199-14. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
A. Except as provided in § 199-13, Ordinances saved from repeal, below,
all Board of Health ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with
the provisions contained in Part III of the Code adopted by this
ordinance are hereby repealed; provided, however, that such repeal
shall only be to the extent of such inconsistency, and any valid
legislation of the Board of Health of the Borough of Kenilworth which is
not in conflict with the provisions of the Code shall be deemed to
remain in full force and effect.
B. Repeal of specific ordinances. The Board of Health of the Borough of
Kenilworth has determined that the following ordinances are no longer
in effect and hereby specifically repeals the following legislation:
(1) Former Chapter 214, Weed Control (Ord. No. 2).
A. Any Board of Health ordinance adopted subsequent to June 16, 2017.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the Board of Health
or any penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Board of Health.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Board of Health.
A. In compiling and preparing the Board of Health ordinances for adoption
and revision as part of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, certain
grammatical changes and other minor changes were made in one or
§ 199-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 199-14
1:867
more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the Board of Health that
all such changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so
changed had been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the changes, amendments or revisions as set forth in Board
of Health Schedule A attached hereto and made a part hereof are made
herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance.
(Chapter and section number references are to the Board of Health
ordinances as they have been renumbered and appear in the Code.)172
172. Editor's Note: Board of Health Schedule A is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 199-14 KENILWORTH CODE § 199-14
1:868
Chapter 202
FOOD AND BEVERAGE VENDING: LICENSING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Food-handling establishments — See Ch. 100.
§ 202-1. License required. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 199, General Provisions, Board of Health, Art. I)]
It shall be unlawful for any person, whether as principal or agent, clerk or
employee, either for himself or any other person or for any body corporate
or as an officer of any corporation or otherwise, to maintain or permit to be
maintained on or in any location in this Borough one or more machines or
devices offered for public use which, upon insertion of a coin, coins or token
or by other means, dispenses unit servings of food or beverages, either in
bulk or package, without the necessity of replenishing the devices between
each vending operation, without first having applied to and procured a
license for each such machine or device from the Board of Health of
this municipality or without complying with any and all of the provisions
of N.J.A.C. 8:24, Sanitation in Retail Food Establishments and Food and
Beverage Vending Machines.
§ 202-2. Fees.
§ 202-3. Application for and issuance of licenses. [Amended at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 199, General Provisions, Board of
Health, Art. I)]
Application for and issuance of licenses referred to in § 202-1 above shall
be made in conformity with the provisions of N.J.A.C. 8:24, Sanitation in
Retail Food Establishments and Food and Beverage Vending Machines.
Such licenses are not transferable.
§ 202-4. Suspension, revocation or reinstatement of licenses.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 199, General
Provisions, Board of Health, Art. I)]
Licenses issued under authority of this chapter may be suspended, revoked
or reinstated by the Board of Health of this Borough pursuant to the
A. The fees for licenses as required by § 202-1 above, for the purpose of
raising revenue, for regulation and control, to be paid annually to this
municipality, are hereby fixed as follows: $5 per machine per year.
B. All licenses issued under authority of this chapter shall expire on the
last day of February of each year. License fees shall be paid to the Board
of Health.
§ 199-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 202-4
1:869
provisions of N.J.A.C. 8:24, Sanitation in Retail Food Establishments and
Food and Beverage Vending Machines.
§ 202-5. Interstate commerce.
No provision of this chapter shall be applied so as to impose any unlawful
burden on either interstate commerce or any activity of the state or federal
government.
§ 202-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 199, General Provisions, Board of Health, Art. I)]
Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate any of the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not
less than $5 nor more than $500, and each violation of any of the provisions
of this chapter, and each day the same is violated, shall be deemed and
taken to be a separate and distinct offense.
§ 202-7. Filing of copies with state.
A true certified copy of this chapter shall be filed with the State
Commissioner of Health.
Chapter 207
NUISANCES, PUBLIC HEALTH
GENERAL REFERENCES
Food-handling establishments — See Ch. 100. Sanitary standards — See Ch. 212.
§ 207-1. Adoption of standards by reference. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 199, General Provisions, Board of Health,
Art. I)]
A code defining and prohibiting certain matters, things, conditions or acts
and each of them as a nuisance, prohibiting certain noises or sounds,
requiring the proper heating of apartments, prohibiting spitting in or upon
public buildings, conveyances or sidewalks, authorizing the inspection of
premises by an enforcing official, providing for the removal or abatement
of certain nuisances and recovery of expenses incurred by the Board of
Health in removing or abating such nuisances and prescribing penalties for
violations is hereby established pursuant to Chapter 188 of the Laws of
1950,173 subject only that Section 2.1(a) and (b) and Section III are deleted
therefrom. A copy of said code is annexed hereto and made a part hereof
without the inclusion of the text thereof herein.
173. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 et seq.
§ 202-4 KENILWORTH CODE § 207-2
1:870
§ 207-2. Title.
Said code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the "Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey
(1953)."
§ 207-3. Copies on file.
Three copies of said Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey (1953)
have been placed on file in the office of the Secretary of this local Board of
Health upon the introduction of this chapter and will remain on file there
for use and examination by the public.
§ 207-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or neglects to comply with any provision of this
chapter or code established therein or notice issued pursuant thereto shall,
upon conviction thereof, be liable to a penalty of not less than $5 nor more
than $500 for each violation.
§ 207-5. Filing of copies with state.
A true certified copy of this chapter shall be filed with the State
Commissioner of Health.
Chapter 212
SANITARY STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Food-handling establishments — See Ch. 100.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 106.
Littering — See Ch. 125.
Nuisances — See Ch. 134.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 142.
Smoking — See Ch. 166.
Licensing of food and beverage vending — See
Ch. 202.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 207.
§ 207-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-5
1:871

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 212-1. Title. [Amended 1-2-2009]
This chapter shall be known and designated as the "Sanitary Code of the
Borough of Kenilworth."
§ 212-1.1. Definitions. [Added 1-2-2009]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
HEALTH AUTHORITY — The legal authority of the Board of Health of the
Borough of Kenilworth and the authority conveyed upon its Health Officer.
HEALTH OFFICER — An individual licensed by the New Jersey Department
of Health and Senior Services pursuant to N.J.S.A. Title 26 and employed by
the Health Authority and includes his designee.
§ 212-2. Licenses. [Amended 1-2-2009]
Upon payment of the applicable fee, all licenses regarding the sale and/or
the distribution of food and/or beverages within the Borough of Kenilworth
shall be issued by the Secretary of the Department of Health after written
approval by the Health Officer subject to satisfactory compliance with
N.J.A.C. Title 8, Chapter 24.
§ 212-3. Display of license. [Amended 1-2-2009; 12-5-2010]
Any license issued under this article shall be conspicuously displayed to
the public within the premises for which it was issued and upon each and
every vehicle or device used in the business for which a license is required.
Licenses shall be issued according to the risk type retail food facility as
defined according to N.J.A.C. 8:24-1.5.
§ 212-4. Licenses to be exhibited upon demand.
Every holder of a license shall exhibit same upon demand to any member of
the Board of Health, the Health Officer or any authorized representative of
the Board of Health.
§ 212-5. Right of entry.
It shall be lawful for any member of the Board of Health, the Health Officer,
inspector or any person acting under and by the authority of the Board of
Health to enter in or upon any premises for any of the purposes specified in
this chapter or for any other purpose in connection with his regular duties.
§ 212-6. Revocation of licenses.
§ 212-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-6
1:873
A. The Board of Health shall have the right to revoke any license whenever
the holder thereof or any of his servants or agents violate the terms
under which same was issued. Before any license shall be revoked, a
notice of the contemplated action of the Board of Health shall be served
upon the holder of said license, setting forth such charges as may be the
reason for said revocation and the place, date and hour when said
Board will hear the matter.
B. Whenever any licensee shall violate the terms under which said license
was issued, the Board of Health or the Health Officer shall have the
right to suspend the operation of said license pending the hearing.
§ 212-6 KENILWORTH CODE § 212-6
1:874
ARTICLE II
Nuisances
§ 212-7. Conditions and acts declared to be nuisances.
A. The following specific acts, conditions, and things are each and all of
them declared to constitute public health nuisances and are prohibited:
(1) Depositing garbage.
(a) Maintaining or permitting to be deposited, maintained or to
accumulate in or upon any public or private street or
thoroughfare or place or in or upon any property or building
any wastewater, sewage, garbage, offal, excrement or tin cans,
any dead animal or part thereof, any decaying or putrescible
matter, any oyster or clam shells or any foul, putrid or decaying
liquid or substance.
(b) Allowing any garbage or excrement or any other offensive or
decomposed solid or fluid matter or substance to leak or
escape from any cart, wagon, vehicle or other container in
which same may be conveyed or contained.
(2) Excremental matter. Permitting any human excrement to remain or
flow upon the surface of the ground or to remain or flow in any
open ditch or stream; or burying, ploughing under or otherwise
disposing of such excrement or permitting same to be done within
100 feet of any stream, well, spring or other source of water used
for drinking or domestic purposes; or depositing or permitting to
be deposited any such material in any place where it is likely to
gain access to such water or to appear again above the surface of
the ground.
(3) Toilet accommodations. Any premises that are not provided with
suitable water closets in good working order for all persons
working thereon or living therein.
(4) Buildings.
(a) Permitting any building or portion thereof occupied by human
beings to be or remain in a state of uncleanliness detrimental
to the health of the occupants or of the public.
(b) Permitting any building which is inhabited by human beings or
which is occupied by human beings for any purpose to be
without an adequate supply of running water at any time while
so occupied.
(c) Permitting any filthy or unhealthful condition to exist in the
plumbing or plumbing fixtures of or in a building used or
occupied by human beings for any purpose, regardless of
§ 212-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-7
1:875
whether such condition shall be the result of leakage, stoppage
or any other cause.
(5) Insects, larvae, pupae.
(a) Maintaining or permitting to be maintained any pool, pond,
ditch, stream or other body of water or any cistern, rain barrel
or other receptacle containing liquid in which mosquito larvae
or pupae may or do exist.
(b) Maintaining or allowing to be maintained any condition which
is beneficial to or engenders the breeding of flies, mosquitoes
or vermin.
(6) Vermin or insect exterminators.
(a) The sale of any poisonous substance, either gaseous, liquid,
solid or semisolid, for the extermination of vermin or insects,
unless such substance is clearly and legibly labeled and so
sealed as to make the accidental use of such substance
improbable.
(b) The sale of poisonous fly papers or of articles containing any
poisonous substance to be placed about houses, stores or other
buildings for the destruction of flies or other insects by feeding
or drinking.
(c) The use of any poisonous gas or any poisonous liquid or
substance for the extermination of vermin without first
obtaining a permit from the Board of Health.
(7) Smoke. Emission from any premises of any smoke, gases, soot,
stench or other substance in quantity or strength sufficient to cause
injury or damage to health.
(8) Slaughtering, Killing, skinning or dressing of any animal intended
for food without permission from the Board of Health.
(9) Plants.
(a) Permitting poison ivy or any other poisonous plants to be or to
grow upon any public or private property within 25 feet of any
public sidewalk, public street, party line or building.
(b) Permitting the flowering of any ragweed or other noxious or
hurtful weed upon any property, either public or private.
(10) Patent medicines. The sale or distribution of medicines, remedies,
medical literature, cosmetics or remedial, curative or prophylactic
devices upon the streets or from house to house, without
permission from the Board of Health.
(11) Spitting.
§ 212-7 KENILWORTH CODE § 212-7
1:876
(a) Spitting upon the floors, steps, platform or upon the interior of
any street or railway car, bus or other public conveyance or
upon the floors, staircases or any part of any building or upon
the sidewalks or crosswalks of any street, alley, lane or public
place.
(b) Cuspidor. The maintaining of any cuspidor or spittoon.
(12) Obnoxious trades. The carrying on of any trade or business in such
a manner as to be obnoxious or offensive or which may be attended
by noisome or unhealthful odors or which may be attended by such
conditions or noises as may be detrimental to health.
(13)Common towels. The supplying or furnishing of any roller towel,
except such roller towel which can be mechanically adjusted for
individual use or except individual paper towels, or of any towel for
use by more than one person without intermediate laundering in
any hotel, school, clubhouse, washroom or public lavatory or in any
place where a number of people congregate.
(14) Public vehicles. Maintaining or permitting to be maintained any
bus, automobile or other vehicle used for transportation of the
public in an unsanitary condition.
(15) Food. The keeping of food or drink intended for human
consumption, which is sold or dispensed to the public, in such
manner as to allow flies, dust, dirt or other foreign or injurious
contamination to come in contact with it.
B. In addition to the provisions of Subsection A of this section, whatever is
detrimental to health or whatever is potentially injurious or dangerous
to health is hereby declared to be a health nuisance.
§ 212-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-7
1:877

ARTICLE III
Food Establishments
§ 212-7.1. Standards for operations of retail and mobile food
facilities. [Added 1-2-2009]
The Board of Health of the Borough of Kenilworth hereby adopts and
incorporates by reference Chapter 24 of Title 8 of New Jersey
Administrative Codes and as may be amended for the conduct of all retail
and mobile food facilities operating within the Borough of Kenilworth.
§ 212-8. License required; fee. [Amended 1-2-2009]
Any entity that stores, prepares, packages, serves, vends, or otherwise
provides food within the Borough shall be licensed by the Department of
Health. The fee for said license shall be as follows: Refer to Article XIII,
License and Fee Schedule.
§ 212-9. Water supply.
§ 212-10. Ice license. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 199, General Provisions, Board of Health, Art. I)]
No person shall sell any ice in the Borough of Kenilworth without first
obtaining a license therefor from the Board of Health. The fee for said
license is set forth in § 212-26, Fees enumerated.
§ 212-10.1. Food manager certification. [Added 12-17-1998]
A. No person shall construct, maintain or operate a well or spring the
water of which is used for domestic purposes, whether for drinking,
washing or other domestic use, either in the home or in a business
establishment, without first obtaining permission from the Board of
Health. If such permission is granted, the person receiving such
permission shall allow the Health Officer or any agent of said Board to
enter the premises at any time for the purpose of taking samples of
water for analysis.
B. All water dispensers, coolers, containers or devices used in connection
with the sale or distribution of drinking water shall meet with the
approval of the Board of Health.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
FOOD — Includes any substance used or intended to be used as food or
drink for human consumption.
FOOD HANDLER'S CERTIFICATE — A certificate provided for herein
issued by the Kenilworth Health Department or any other agency
recognized by the Kenilworth Health Department and acting on its
behalf.
§ 212-7.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-10.1
1:879
RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — Any fixed or mobile restaurant;
coffee shop; cafeteria; short order cafe; luncheonette; grill; tearoom;
sandwich shop; soda fountain; tavern; bar; cocktail lounge; nightclub;
roadside stand; industrial feeding establishment; private, public or
nonprofit organization or institution serving food; catering kitchen;
commissary; box lunch establishment; retail bakery; meat market;
delicatessen; grocery store; public food market; or similar place in
which food or drink is prepared for retail sale or for service on the
premises or elsewhere; and any other retail eating or drinking
establishment or operation where food is served, handled or provided
for the public with or without charge.
SUPERVISOR — Any person charged with the responsibility of
overseeing the operations, including the supervision of employees
engaged in the preparing, processing and sale of food or drink intended
for human consumption, be it for on- or off-premises consumption.
B. No establishment shall operate for more than 90 days without the
supervisor(s) employed in that establishment applying for a food
handler's certificate.
C. No establishment shall operate for more than six months without the
supervisor(s) employed in that establishment completing a course of
general instruction in bacteria characteristics and growth, spread of
food-borne diseases, methods of preventing food poisoning, proper
food-handling techniques, equipment and establishment sanitation,
dishwashing and sanitization and insect and rodent control.
D. No person to whom a food handler's certificate is issued or granted
shall give, lend, transfer or permit the same to be used by any other
person for any purpose whatsoever.
E. Within six months of enactment of this section, no establishment shall
be open for business in the preparing, processing and/or sale of food or
drink intended for human consumption without having a supervisor on
the premises who has a food handler's certificate.
F. A food handler's certificate may be granted to supervisors taking a
comparable course of instruction by another New Jersey municipal
health department or recognized institution approved by the
Kenilworth Board of Health.
G. Any person or persons, corporation or other organization violating any
of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to a penalty of not less than $5 nor more than $500 in the
discretion of the Judge of the Municipal Court for each offense. Any
license issued by the Kenilworth Board of Health for any premises
wherein a violation of this section is found to exist may, in the discretion
of said Board of Health and after proper hearing had thereon, be
revoked.
§ 212-10.1 KENILWORTH CODE § 212-10.1
1:880
ARTICLE IIIA
Grease Interceptors in Food Establishments
[Added 2-21-2008]
§ 212-10.2. Grease interceptor required.
Every food establishment, new or existing, whether retail or wholesale, that
generates any amount of grease shall have a grease interceptor installed
downstream of the fixture used to wash its multiuse utensils and equipment.
Such fixture shall be a mechanical dishwasher or multicompartment sink.
Those existing establishments that do not have a grease interceptor shall
have a grace period of 90 days from the date of enactment of this article to
install a grease interceptor.
§ 212-10.3. Generators of large amounts of grease.
A. The person or firm installing the grease interceptor shall first obtain a
permit from the Borough of Kenilworth Building Department.
B. The grease interceptor shall not be installed closer than 10 feet to the
utensil washing fixture it serves, without permission from the Borough
of Kenilworth Building Department. The grease interceptor is to be
installed as far away from the mechanical dishwasher as reasonably
possible.
C. Grease shall be allowed to congeal overnight, and the grease
interceptor interior shall be inspected as soon as the establishment is
opened the following business day to determine the thickness of the
layer of grease. These inspections shall be conducted daily. If and when
the grease layer reaches a thickness of one inch or rises to within one
inch of the outlet baffle, it shall be removed from the interceptor and
placed into an approved exterior grease container. Small grease
generators not requiring an exterior grease container shall be
permitted to place the accumulation into a small plastic bag and
dispose of the grease in a garbage receptacle. The grease shall be
removed from the interceptor at frequent enough intervals to prevent
grease in excess of the Joint Meeting of Essex and Union Counties limit
of 100 mg/L from entering the Borough of Kenilworth sanitary system
and to prevent waste backup within the establishment or elsewhere.
D. Proprietors must inspect grease interceptors daily and maintain
inspection records. The records must be posted near the grease
interceptor visible to the Borough inspector and must include the date
of inspection, the name of the employee who performed the inspection,
and the thickness of the grease at the time of inspection.
A. Restaurants with a seating capacity of 50 or more patrons and
restaurants and takeout food establishments as well as all food
establishments with deep fryers shall provide an exterior grease
container and shall have the waste grease and cooking oils placed
therein for collection by a firm or person qualified to remove it. The
§ 212-10.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-10.3
1:881
§ 212-10.4. Enforcement.
For the purpose of this article, the Health Officer shall be designated as the
enforcing officer. The enforcing officer shall be authorized to designate as
many officials as deemed reasonable and necessary to carry out the purpose
of this article. The enforcing officer or his designee is authorized to act
as a law enforcement officer solely with respect to the enforcement of the
provisions of the article herein by being empowered to issue summonses for
any violations of this article in accordance with rules governing the courts
of the State of New Jersey.
§ 212-10.5. Violations and penalties. [Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 199, General Provisions, Board of Health, Art. I)]
Any person who violates, fails or neglects to comply with any provision of
this article or notice issued pursuant thereto shall, upon conviction thereof,
be liable to a fine of not less than $5 nor more than $500 for each violation.
Each day that a violation continues beyond a given deadline shall constitute
a separate and distinct offense and additional penalties may be imposed.
§ 212-10.6. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately upon its passage and publication
as required by law.
container used shall not be less than 55 gallons and shall be equipped
with a bung and a funnel. A commercial grease container, in lieu of a
drum, may be used to contain liquid waste between collections. The
funnel shall be used for pouring the grease and oils into the drum, and
the drum and surrounding area shall be kept neat and clean.
B. Restaurants and fast-food establishments with a seating capacity of
greater than or equal to 100 shall provide a one-thousand-gallon
exterior in-ground grease interceptor, gravity-fed to the interceptor and
from the interceptor to the sanitary system maintained by the
municipality. The owner or occupant of said establishment shall engage,
under contract, a person, firm or corporation to monitor and remove the
grease at timely intervals.
C. Proprietors must inspect grease interceptors daily and maintain
inspection records. The records must be posted inside the
establishment and must include the date of inspection, the name of the
employee who performed the inspection, and the thickness of the
grease at the time of inspection. Disposal records must be maintained
at the site and available for inspection by Borough officials. The records
must list the date when grease was removed from the interceptor, the
name of the company hired to remove the grease, the volume of grease
removed, and where it was disposed.
§ 212-10.3 KENILWORTH CODE § 212-10.7
1:882
§ 212-10.7. Severability.
If it is determined, by a court of competent jurisdiction, that any provision
or section of this article is unconstitutional, all other sections and provisions
shall remain in effect.
§ 212-10.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-10.7
1:883

ARTICLE IV
(Reserved)174
§ 212-11. (Reserved)
174. Editor's Note: Original Art. IV, Animals (keeping of fowl for domestic use), amended
1-2-2009, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 199, General Provisions,
Board of Health, Art. I).
§ 212-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-11
1:885

ARTICLE V
Housing
§ 212-12. Trailers. [Amended 1-2-2009]
No person shall maintain for camping purposes or as living quarters,
beyond seven days, within the limits of the Borough of Kenilworth any
trailer or other vehicle, unless same is properly connected with the public
sanitary sewer system and has an adequate supply of potable water; nor
shall any trailer or other such vehicle be maintained in such manner as to
be or create a nuisance.
§ 212-12.1. Adoption of standards by reference. [Added 2-21-2008;
amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 199, General
Provisions, Board of Health, Art. I)]
The Borough of Kenilworth adopts and incorporates by reference the State
of New Jersey Housing Code, N.J.A.C. 5:28-1.1 through 1.13 inclusive.
§ 212-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-12.1
1:887

ARTICLE VI
Privy Vaults and Cesspools
§ 212-13. Use restrictions.
No privy vault, cesspool or other receptacle for human excrement shall
hereafter be constructed in the Borough of Kenilworth except by special
permission from the Board of Health.
§ 212-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-13
1:889

ARTICLE VII
Barbershops and Beauty Shops
[Amended 1-2-2009]
§ 212-14. Licenses required to operate; fees.
Every person, firm or corporation desiring to conduct a barbershop,
hairdressing or beauty parlor, massage studio or public health baths in
the Borough of Kenilworth must procure a license from the Department of
Health. A license fee shall be as follows: See Article XIII, License and Fee
Schedule.
§ 212-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-14
1:891

ARTICLE VIII
Boarding Homes for Children
§ 212-15. License required.
Every person desiring to conduct or maintain a boarding home for children
shall procure a license from the Board of Health.
§ 212-16. License fee. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 199, General Provisions, Board of Health, Art. I)]
The license fee is included in § 212-26, Fees enumerated.
§ 212-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-16
1:893

ARTICLE IX
Lodging Houses
§ 212-17. License required. [Amended 1-2-2009]
Every person desiring to provide accommodations for three or more
roomers or lodgers shall procure a license from the Department of Health.
§ 212-18. Toilet requirements in tenement houses.
No tenement house or dwelling shall be used for this purpose unless one
toilet is provided for each five or fewer persons, exclusive of the members
of the household.
§ 212-19. Lavatory and hot and cold water requirements.
Each sleeping room or unit shall be provided with a lavatory supplied with
hot and cold running water.
§ 212-20. Lodgers and roomers to be provided with linen and
bathroom supplies.
In addition to the above-mentioned, the lodger or roomer shall be provided
with sufficient soap and towels, clean bed linen and other necessary
provisions for maintaining proper sanitary living conditions.
§ 212-21. License fee. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 199, General Provisions, Board of Health, Art. I)]
The annual fee for this license is included in § 212-26, Fees enumerated.
§ 212-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-21
1:895

ARTICLE X
Laundries, Launderettes and Cleaning Establishments
§ 212-22. License required; fee. [Amended 1-2-2009]
Every person desiring to operate a laundry, launderette or cleaning
establishment in the Borough of Kenilworth shall procure a license from
the Department of Health and shall pay a fee annually for same as follows:
see Article XIII, License and Fee Schedule; and comply with New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection guidelines and regulations for said
establishments, including the submission of plans for the construction or
reconstruction of said establishment.
§ 212-23. Construction or reconstruction plans.
Every person desiring to construct or reconstruct a building to be used as a
laundry, launderette or cleaning establishment in the Borough of Kenilworth
shall, before beginning work, submit to the Board of Health a detailed plan
showing the location and the type of construction. This plan must also show
the location of toilet and washing facilities and describe the methods for
ventilating all rooms and fixtures.
§ 212-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-23
1:897

ARTICLE XI
Expiration of Licenses
[Amended 1-2-2009]
§ 212-24. Expiration date of licenses.
All licenses required by this chapter shall expire on March 1 of the year
following the issuance of same.
§ 212-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-24
1:899

ARTICLE XII
Penalties
[Amended 1-2-2009]
§ 212-25. Violations and penalties. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 199, General Provisions, Board of Health, Art. I)]
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this chapter that is not
covered by a prescribed penalty section in the New Jersey Administrative
Code shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a penalty of not less than
$5 nor more than $500 for each violation.
§ 212-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-25
1:901

ARTICLE XIII
License and Fee Schedule
[Added 2-19-1998; amended 1-2-2009]
§ 212-26. Fees enumerated. [Amended 6-16-2017]
The following schedule of fees is hereby established with respect to
licenses, permits and activities required or regulated by the Board of
Health:
A. Food establishments shall be licensed according to N.J.A.C. 8:24, Risk
Type 1, 2, 3, or 4. Fees are based upon risk type.
(1) Risk Type 1: $100.
(2) Risk Type 2: $175.
(3) Risk Type 3: $250.
(4) Risk Type 4: $350.
B. Temporary retail food establishments not to exceed seven consecutive
temporary days of operation in a single event.
(1) Risk Type 1: $25.
(2) Risk Type 2: $100.
(3) Risk Type 3: $125.
(4) Risk Type 4: $175.
C. Produce stands.
(1) Produce stand or market offering only uncut fresh fruits and
vegetables: $100.
(2) A temporary produce stand or market not exceeding seven
consecutive days of operation and offering only uncut fresh fruit
and vegetables in a single event: $50.
(3) Farmers' market vendor: $100. [Added 5-17-2018]
D. Nonprofit organizations must request, in writing, to the Board of Health
a waiver for fee exemption approved by the Board of Health. No fee
shall be charged for a license issued to a church, school or nonprofit
organization, society or group approved by the Board of Health;
provided, however, that this fee exemption shall not apply to a
commercial caterer serving food at a function of any such organization.
E. Food facility plan review.
(1) New construction, conversion of an existing structure or
remodeling or change of a food facility requires that properly
§ 212-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-26
1:903
prepared floor plans, equipment specifications, proposed menu,
volume of food to be stored, prepared and/or sold and/or served
be submitted to the Health Department prior to any construction,
remodeling, alteration or changes of the facility.
(2) Required submission shall include:
(a) Layout of equipment and facilities in a floor plan drafted to
scale.
(b) Mechanical schematics, construction material and finish.
(c) Equipment types, manufacturer's specs (cut sheets), model
number, location of equipment on floor plan with a legend for
each piece of equipment coded with a sequential number listed
on the plan, in the legend and on the manufacturer's spec (cut)
sheet.
(d) Performance capacities and installation instructions for each of
the equipment.
(e) Other information as may be required by the Health
Department.
(3) Period of review.
(a) Upon submission of the plans and specifications as identified
above, a date stamp shall mark the receipt of submission.
(b) The Health Department has 30 days from the plan submission
date to approve the plan. If there is missing or incomplete
information, the thirty-day period will only apply when the
additional information is submitted as required.
(c) Construction, renovation, remodeling or changes shall not
begin until the Health Officer has given his formal approval of
the plans as is or as modifications may be required.
(d) Construction, remodeling, etc., of the facility shall be
consistent with the approved plans. Any changes must have
written prior approval of the Health Officer.
(e) Fee schedule for plan review: $50.
F. A preoperational inspection is required and the facility must pass with a
satisfactory rating before a new constructed, renovated, or converted
establishment can be granted a license to operate. A satisfactory rating
is only issued when the Health Department determines compliance with
N.J.A.C. 8:24-1 et seq.
G. Miscellaneous.
(1) Ice: $10.
§ 212-26 KENILWORTH CODE § 212-26
1:904
(2) Ice cream: $10.
(3) Ice cream truck: $100.
(4) Lunch truck: $200.
(5) Milk: $10.
(6) (Reserved)175
(7) Incinerator permit: $100.
(8) Laundries, launderettes, dry-cleaning establishments: $100.
(9) Vending permit: $80.
(10) Vending license stamps, each: $8.
(11) Wholesale: $100.
(12) Boarding homes for children: $25.
(13) Barber and beauty shops/salons: $35.
(14) Lodging house, per year: $10. [Added at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 199, General Provisions, Board of Health, Art.
I)]
H. Vital statistics.
(1) Birth certificate: $10.
(2) Burial permit: $15.*
(3) Disinterment permit: $15.*
(4) Death certificate: $10.
(5) Marriage/civil union/domestic partnership certificate: $10.
(6) Marriage/civil union/domestic partnership license: $28.*
*NOTE: These fees are subject to change based upon New Jersey
state regulations.
I. Wells.
(1) Well search: $5 per street.
(2) Well record: $15 per well.
J. A late payment fee is hereby established as follows: 25% of the
established annual licensing fee.
175. Editor's Note: Former § 212-26G(6), which contained a fee for keeping fowl, was repealed
at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 199, General Provisions, Board of Health, Art. I).
§ 212-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-26
1:905
§ 212-27. Emergent service.
Any individual, company or business establishment causing or affected by
a situation requiring an inspection or emergent service by the Department
of Health personnel during off-duty hours shall be billed by the Department
of Health for the reasonable cost of said inspection or emergent service
response.
K. For those new establishments commencing business from October 1
through December 31 of the year, the licensing fee shall be 25% of the
established annual licensing fee for that calendar year.
L. A five-day period of grace following the established license deadline is
hereby established.
M. All ordinances and part of ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed.
N. This chapter shall take effect after publication in the manner provided
by law.
§ 212-26 KENILWORTH CODE § 212-27
1:906
Chapter 213
TANNING FACILITIES
§ 213-1. Title, purpose, summary and findings.
§ 213-2. Definitions.
Wherever used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
TANNING EQUIPMENT — Any enclosed or semi-enclosed area, bed or
room, containing one or more ultraviolet lamps, intended for irradiation of
any part of the human body that induces skin tanning.
TANNING FACILITY — Any commercial enterprise or establishment
containing one or more pieces of tanning equipment made available to the
public or membership in any organization.
§ 213-3. License required; application; liability insurance.
A. This chapter may be cited as the "Tanning Facility Ordinance of the
Borough of Kenilworth."
B. The purpose of this chapter is to safeguard and protect the public from
the improper use of tanning equipment that has been related to health
hazards.
C. The governing body of the Borough of Kenilworth makes the following
findings:
(1) There has been rapid growth in popularity of facilities offing
tanning equipment;
(2) The operation of a tanning facility involves a serious potential
hazard to the public health, welfare and safety through the
exposure of persons to concentrations of ultraviolet light in excess
of those normally occurring in the environment;
(3) It has been established that acute overexposure to the ultraviolet
light emitted by tanning booth lamps will cause skin burns and eye
damage; and
(4) It has been established that chronic exposure to ultraviolet light
can result in increased incidences of skin cancer.
D. To protect the health, welfare and safety of its citizens from the
potential hazards associated with the operation of tanning equipment at
tanning facilities and gyms, the governing body of the Borough of
Kenilworth hereby adopts licensing procedures and standards to
govern such commercial facilities which are to be administrated by the
Health Department. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
199, General Provisions, Board of Health, Art. I)]
§ 212-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-3
1:907
§ 213-4. Conditions and requirements.
No license to conduct, maintain or operate a tanning facility shall be
granted to any person until such person has demonstrated to the
satisfaction of the Board of Health that the following requirements have
been met:
A. No person shall at any time within the Borough of Kenilworth conduct,
maintain or operate a tanning facility without first having obtained a
license to do so from the Board of Health of the Borough of Kenilworth.
B. Application for such a license shall be made to the Board of Health, on
forms approved by it, signed and executed by the applicant.
C. Applicants shall maintain liability insurance for injury to any individual
using the tanning equipment in an amount of no less than $100,000 for
any injury and agree that no user of the equipment may be solicited to
waive liability for any injury or disease related to the use of the tanning
equipment.
A. Each piece of tanning equipment shall have, prominently displayed on
its door or beside its entrance, a sign that states: "Danger — Ultraviolet
Radiation. Follow instructions. As with natural sunlight, overexposure
can cause injury and sunburn; repeated exposure may cause premature
aging of skin and skin cancer. Exposure of eyes to ultraviolet light
without protective eyewear may cause serious injury to eyes.
Medications or cosmetics applied to the skin may increase
oversensitivity to ultraviolet light, as may a family history of skin
problems or allergy to sunlight. Consult a physician before using this
booth if you are taking any medications or if you believe yourself
sensitive to sunlight."
B. Each piece of tanning equipment shall be equipped with handrails, floor
markings or other suitable physical aids to assure that the user
maintains the proper exposure distance from the lamps.
C. Users shall, on each visit, be provided, free of charge, with sanitary
protective eyewear that protects the user's eyes from ultraviolet
radiation but permits sufficient vision to enable the user to maintain
balance, read necessary labels or instructions and effect a quick, safe
exit from the tanning equipment.
D. Each timer used to control exposure duration, whether controlled by
the user from within the tanning equipment or by the operator of the
tanning facility, shall be accurate to within plus or minus 10% of any
selected timer interval.
E. The ambient air temperature in each tanning booth shall at no time
exceed 100° F.
F. Each piece of tanning equipment shall be sufficiently strong and rigid to
resist collapse due to the impact of a falling person. Tanning booth
§ 213-3 KENILWORTH CODE § 213-4
1:908
§ 213-5. Fees.
Every applicant, for whom a license is granted, as required by the
provisions of this chapter, shall pay to the Board of Health an annual facility
license fee for the same in the amount of $100 plus $25 per piece of tanning
equipment and $25 per operator at the facility.
§ 213-6. Contents of license; transferability; display; expiration.
access doors shall open outwardly, shall be free of locks or latches
and shall, in all other respects, be designed to facilitate safe and rapid
entrance to and exit from the booths. Tanning equipment area floors
shall provide adequate traction, even when wet, to allow such safe and
rapid ingress and egress.
G. Each piece of tanning equipment shall be equipped with heavy wire
grids, ultraviolet transmitting plastics or some similar physical barrier
to protect users from contact with ultraviolet lamps. Such barrier shall
be sufficiently strong and rigid to resist collapse due to the impact of a
falling person.
H. In addition to the foregoing, each piece of tanning equipment and
tanning facility shall be constructed, operated and maintained in
compliance with state regulations.
I. When tanning equipment is in use, an attendant must be present at all
times to ensure its safety. This attendant must be versed in the proper
use and operation of the equipment as well as the recommended
exposure time of the tanning equipment.
J. Each tanning facility and the equipment used therein shall comply with
the regulations promulgated by the United States Food and Drug
Administration and published in Volume 21 of the Code of Federal
Regulations at 1002.61(a)(4) and 1040.20.
K. Each tanning facility shall obtain and maintain on file with the Board of
Health of Kenilworth an annual certification:
(1) From a dermatologist who maintains an active medical practice
within the State of New Jersey stating that the methods for
exposure determination, both as to duration and distance, utilized
by the tanning facility are safe and that such methods annually
comply with current medical standards; and
(2) From each operator of the tanning equipment stating that he or she
has been trained in the safe operation of each one of the tanning
equipment in the facility and is aware of the proper use and
duration of the equipment.
A. Each license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall bear the
actual date of issue thereof, the legal name of the person, firm,
corporation or other organization, society or group to whom issued and
§ 213-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-6
1:909
§ 213-7. Suspension or revocation of license; violations and
penalties.
§ 213-8. Exceptions.
The chapter shall not be applicable to or include any hospital, clinic or
other medical facility wherein ultraviolet radiation is or may be used, under
the supervision of trained medical staff, for the diagnosis or treatment of
disease.
§ 213-9. Severability.
If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, sentence, phrase or provision
of this chapter is declared unconstitutional or invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions
of this chapter.
§ 213-10. Repealer.
All Borough ordinances and parts of ordinances that are inconsistent with
this chapter are hereby repealed.
the location of the premises or other place of operation for which the
license is requested.
B. No license shall be transferable.
C. Each tanning facility shall display its license in a conspicuous place on
the licensed premises.
D. All licenses and permits granted under the provisions hereof shall
expire on the close of the first business day of each year, unless
suspended or revoked or unless issued for a temporary or shorter
specified period.
A. A license or permit may be suspended or revoked for any violation by
the holder thereof of any provisions of this chapter after an opportunity
has been afforded to said holder for a hearing before the Board of
Health, the Health Officer, or their designee of the Borough of
Kenilworth.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, upon conviction
before the Municipal Court, shall be liable to a penalty of not less than
$100 or more than $500 for each violation. Each day a particular
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
C. If more than five violations shall occur within any calendar year at a
facility, the Health Department may request the Municipal Court to
revoke the license for tanning equipment for a six-month period, and
should the tanning facility continue to be operated without a license, an
additional fine of $2,000 shall be imposed by the Municipal Court.
§ 213-6 KENILWORTH CODE § 213-11
1:910
§ 213-11. When effective.
This chapter shall become effective days after final passage, adoption and
publication as required by law.
Chapter 214
(RESERVED)
Appendix
Chapter A216
(RESERVED)
Chapter A217
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
§ 213-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-11
1:911

ARTICLE I
(Reserved)
[Editor's Note: Former Art. I, Initial Term Consent, adopted
2-27-1979 by Ord. No. 79-2, was removed as having expired. See Art.
II, Franchise Renewal, for current provisions.]
§ A217-1. through § A217-22. (Reserved)
§ A217-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A217-1
1:913

ARTICLE II
Franchise Renewal
[Adopted 10-27-1999 by Ord. No. 99-3176; amended in its entirety
11-12-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-12]
§ A217-23. Purpose.
The municipality hereby grants to Comcast renewal of its nonexclusive
municipal consent to place in, upon, across, above, over and under
highways, streets, alleys, sidewalks, easements, public ways and public
places in the municipality, poles, wires, cables, underground conduits,
manholes and other television conductors, fixtures, apparatus and
equipment as may be necessary for the construction, operation and
maintenance in the municipality of a cable television and communications
system.
§ A217-24. Definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. Such meaning
or definition of terms is supplemental to those definitions of the Federal
Communications Commission ("FCC") rules and regulations, 47 CFR 76.1 et
seq., and the Cable Communications Policy Act, 47 U.S.C. § 521 et seq., as
amended, and the Cable Television Act, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq., and shall in
no way be construed to broaden, alter or conflict with the federal and state
definitions.
ACT or CABLE TELEVISION ACT — Chapter 186 of the General Laws of
New Jersey, and subsequent amendments thereto, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq.
APPLICATION — The company's application for renewal of municipal
consent.
BASIC CABLE SERVICE — Any service tier, which includes the
retransmission of local television broadcast signals as defined by the FCC.
BOARD or BPU — The Board of Public Utilities, State of New Jersey.
COMPANY — The grantee of rights under this ordinance and is known as
"Comcast of New Jersey II, LLC."
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
OFFICE or OCTV — The Office of Cable Television of the Board.
PRIMARY SERVICE AREA or PSA — Consists of the area of the municipality
currently served with existing plant as set forth in the map annexed to the
company's application for municipal consent.
TOWN or MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Kenilworth, County of Union,
State of New Jersey.
176. Editor’s Note: This ordinance superseded former Art. II, Franchise Renewal, adopted
10-27-1999 by Ord. No. 99-13.
§ A217-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A217-25
1:915
§ A217-25. Statement of findings.
Public hearings conducted by the municipality concerning the renewal of
municipal consent herein granted to the company were held after proper
public notice pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Act and the
regulations of the Board adopted pursuant thereto. Said hearings having
been fully open to the public and the municipality having received at said
public hearings all comments regarding the qualifications of the company
to receive this renewal of municipal consent, the municipality hereby finds
that the company possesses the necessary legal, technical, character,
financial and other qualifications and that the company's operating and
construction arrangements are adequate and feasible.
§ A217-26. Duration of franchise.
§ A217-27. Franchise fee.
Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Act, the company shall, during
each year of operation under the consent granted herein, pay to the
municipality 3.5% of the gross revenues from all recurring charges in
the nature of subscription fees paid by subscribers for cable television
reception service in the municipality or any higher amount required by
the Act or otherwise allowable by law, whichever is greater. The current
franchise fee amount for the Borough is 3.5% pursuant to N.J.S.A.
48:5A-30d.
§ A217-28. Franchise territory.
The consent granted under this ordinance to the renewal of the franchise
shall apply to the entirety of the municipality and any property subsequently
annexed hereto.
§ A217-29. Extension of service.
The company shall be required to proffer service to any residence or
business along any public right-of-way in the primary service area, as set
forth in the company's application. The company's line extension policy, as
A. The nonexclusive municipal consent granted herein shall expire 15
years from the date of expiration of the previous certificate of approval
issued by the Board, with a ten-year automatic renewal as provided by
N.J.S.A. 48:5A-19 and 48:5A-25 and N.J.A.C. 14:18-13.6.
B. In the event that the municipality shall find that the company has not
substantially complied with the material terms and conditions of this
ordinance, the municipality shall have the right to petition the OCTV,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47, for appropriate action, including
modification and/or termination of the certificate of approval; provided,
however, that the municipality shall first have given the company
written notice of all alleged instances of noncompliance and an
opportunity to cure same within 90 days of that notification.
§ A217-25 KENILWORTH CODE § A217-29
1:916
set forth in the company's application, shall govern any extension of plant
beyond the primary service area.
§ A217-30. Construction requirements.
§ A217-31. Customer service.
A. Restoration. In the event that the company or its agents shall disturb
any pavement, street surfaces, sidewalks, driveways, or other surface
in the natural topography, the company shall, at its sole expense,
restore and replace such places or things so disturbed in as good a
condition as existed prior to the commencement of said work.
B. Relocation. If at any time during the period of this consent the
municipality shall alter or change the grade of any street, alley or other
way or place, the company, upon reasonable notice by the municipality,
shall remove, re-lay or relocate its equipment, at the expense of the
company.
C. Removal or trimming of trees. During the exercise of its rights and
privileges under this franchise, the company shall have the authority to
trim trees upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks or other
public places of the municipality so as to prevent the branches of such
trees from coming in contact with the wires and cable of the company.
Such trimming shall be only to the extent necessary to maintain proper
clearance of the company's wire and cables.
A. In providing services to its customers, the company shall comply with
N.J.A.C. 14:18-1 et seq. and all applicable state and federal statutes and
regulations. The company shall strive to meet or exceed all voluntary
company and industry standards in the delivery of customer service and
shall be prepared to report on it to the municipality upon written
request of the municipality Administrator or Clerk.
B. The company shall continue to comply fully with all applicable state and
federal statutes and regulations regarding credit for outages, the
reporting of same to regulatory agencies and notification of same to
customers.
C. The company shall continue to fully comply with all applicable state and
federal statutes and regulations regarding the availability of devices for
the hearing impaired and the notification of same to customers.
D. The company shall use every reasonable effort to meet or exceed
voluntary standards for telephone accessibility developed by the
National Cable Television Association (NCTA).
E. Nothing herein shall impair the right of any subscriber or the
municipality to express any comment with respect to telephone
accessibility to the complaint officer, or impair the right of the
complaint officer to take any action that is permitted under law.
§ A217-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A217-32
1:917
§ A217-32. Municipal Complaint Officer.
The Office of Cable Television is hereby designed as the complaint officer
for the municipality pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-26b. All complaints shall
be received and processed in accordance with N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.5. The
municipality shall have the right to request copies of records and reports
pertaining to complaints by municipality customers from the OCTV.
§ A217-33. Local office.
During the term of this franchise, and any renewal thereof, the company
shall maintain a business office or agent in accordance with N.J.A.C.
14:18-5.1 for the purpose of receiving, investigating and resolving all local
complaints regarding the quality of service, equipment malfunctions, and
similar matters. Such a business office shall have a publicly listed toll-free
telephone number and be open during standard business hours, and in no
event (excepting emergent circumstances) less than 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday.
§ A217-34. Performance bonds.
During the life of the franchise, the company shall give to the municipality
a bond in the amount of $25,000. Such bond shall be to insure the faithful
performance of all undertakings of the company as represented in its
application for municipal consent incorporated herein.
§ A217-35. Subscriber rates.
The rates of the company shall be subject to regulation as permitted by
federal and state law.
§ A217-36. Public, educational and governmental access.
A. The company shall continue to provide residents with a system-wide
public access channel maintained by the company. Qualified individuals
and organizations may utilize public access for the purpose of
cablecasting noncommercial access programming in conformance with
the company's published public access rules.
B. The company shall continue to provide a system-wide leased access
channel maintained by the company for the purpose of cablecasting
commercial access programming in conformance with the company's
guideline and applicable state and federal statutes and regulations.
C. The company shall continue to provide a dedicated local access channel
maintained by the company for the purpose of cablecasting
noncommercial access programming in conformance with the
company's guideline and applicable state and federal statutes and
regulations.
D. The company shall take any steps that are necessary to ensure that the
signals originated on the access channels are carried without material
§ A217-32 KENILWORTH CODE § A217-36
1:918
§ A217-37. Commitments by the company.
degradation, and with a signal whose quality is equal to that of the
other standard channels that the company transmits.
E. The Communications Act of 1934, as amended [47 U.S.C. § 543(b)(4)],
allows the company to itemize and/or identify the amount on the
monthly bill assessed to satisfy any requirements imposed on the
company by the cable franchise to support public, educational, and
governmental channels, or the use of such channels or any other
services required under the franchise. The company reserves its
external cost, pass-through rights to the extent permitted by law.
A. The company shall provide standard installation and basic cable
television service on one outlet at no cost to each school in the
municipality, public and private, elementary, intermediate and
secondary, provided the school is within 200 feet of active cable
distribution plant. Each additional outlet installed, if any, shall be paid
for on a materials plus labor basis by the school requesting service.
Monthly service charges shall be waived on all additional outlets except
for equipment.
B. The company shall provide standard installation and basic cable
television service at no cost on one outlet to each police, fire,
emergency management facility and public library in the municipality,
provided the facility is located within 200 feet of active cable
distribution plant. Each additional outlet installed, if any, shall be paid
for on a materials plus labor basis by the municipality. Monthly service
charges shall be waived on all additional outlets except for equipment.
C. The company shall provide, free of charge, one nonnetworked highspeed
cable modem and monthly internet service to each school in the
municipality, including public, private, elementary, and intermediate
and secondary schools and to the public library. The internet service
provided herein must be available to student and patron use and cannot
be limited to administrative uses. All facilities must be located within
200 feet of active cable distribution plant.
D. Within one year of written request from the municipality the company
shall provide at no cost to the municipality a second dedicated local
access channel and return line and necessary equipment for signal
transmission. The origination site of the channel shall be a location of
the Borough's choosing.
E. The company shall also provide, at no cost to the municipality, an
additional access channel return line and necessary transmission
equipment for signal transmission for the second access channel
identified in Subsection C above. Origination sites for all access
channels and return lines must be with 200 feet of active cable
distribution plant.
§ A217-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A217-37
1:919
§ A217-38. Emergency uses.
§ A217-39. Liability insurance.
The company shall at all times maintain a comprehensive general liability
insurance policy with a single limit amount of $1,000,000 covering liability
for any death, personal injury, property damages or other liability arising
out of its construction and operation of the cable television system, and
an excess liability (or "umbrella") policy in the amount of $5,000,000. The
Borough shall be named an additional insured and shall be provided every
year, during January, with proof of said coverage.
§ A217-40. Incorporation of the application.
All of the statements and commitments contained in the application or
annexed thereto and incorporated therein, and any amendment thereto,
except as modified herein, are binding upon the company as terms and
conditions of this consent. The application and other relevant writings
submitted by the company shall be annexed hereto and made a part hereof
by reference, provided that the same do not conflict with applicable state or
federal law.
§ A217-41. Competitive equity.
Should the municipality grant a franchise to construct, operate and
maintain a cable television system to any other person, corporation or entity
on terms materially less burdensome or more favorable than the terms
contained herein, the company may substitute such language that is more
favorable or less burdensome for the comparable provision of this ordinance
subject to the provisions of N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.7.
§ A217-42. Separability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court
or federal or state agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be
deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and its validity or
F. Within six months of the issuance of a renewal certificate of approval
(COA) by the Board, the company shall provide to the municipality a
one-time access-related technology grant in the amount of $50,000.
A. The company will comply with the Emergency Alert System ("EAS")
rules in accordance with applicable state and federal statutes and
regulations.
B. The company shall in no way be held liable for any injury suffered by the
municipality or any other person, during an emergency, if for any
reason the municipality is unable to make full use of the cable television
system as contemplated herein.
§ A217-37 KENILWORTH CODE § A217-42
1:920
unconstitutionality shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of
the ordinance.
§ A217-43. Third-party beneficiaries.
Nothing in this franchise or in any prior agreement is or was intended to
confer third-party beneficiary status on any member of the public to enforce
the terms of such agreements or franchise.
§ A217-44. Effective date.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon issuance of a renewal
certificate of approval from the BPU.
§ A217-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A217-44
1:921
Chapter A218
PUBLIC UTILITIES
§ A217-44 KENILWORTH CODE § A217-44
1:922
ARTICLE I
Bell Atlantic
[Adopted 5-12-1999 by Ord. No. 99-6177]
§ A218-1. Statutory authority; permitted acts.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 48:17-10, N.J.S.A. 48:17-11 and
N.J.S.A. 48:17-12, permission and consent is hereby granted to Bell Atlantic,
New Jersey, Inc., (the "company"), its successors and assigns, to install,
operate, inspect, maintain, repair, replace and remove its communications
facilities and other transmission or process equipment, including
underground facilities, such as conduits, manholes, cables, wires and all
other facilities appurtenant thereto, and aboveground facilities, such as
cables, wires, antennas, poles, posts, supports, guys, pedestals, cable
termination and distribution cabinets and all other facilities appurtenant
thereto, in, through, upon, along, over, under, and across all of the various
public streets and ways, which include the roads, avenues, right-of-way,
sidewalks, highways, bridges, waterways and other public places and parts
thereof, throughout their entire length and to effect the necessary street
openings and lateral connections to curb poles, property lines and other
facilities in the Borough of Kenilworth (the "Borough") for said company's
local and through lines and other communications facilities in connection
with the transaction of its business. In the event that any public street
or way where the company has facilities is vacated by the Borough, the
Borough agrees to reserve unto said company the rights granted the
company by the present ordinance.
§ A218-2. Location of poles and posts.
All poles, posts, pedestals, cabinets or other facilities shall be located and
placed back of the curblines where shown on the Official Map(s) of the
Borough; the poles and posts, however, shall be located within 18 inches
of the face of such curbline or as may otherwise be mutually agreed by
both parties, or at the points or places now occupied by the poles, posts,
pedestals, cabinets or other facilities of the company, its successors and
assigns and, where there are no curblines, at other convenient points or
places in, upon, along, adjacent or across the public streets and ways as
may be mutually agreed upon between the parties.
§ A218-3. Burying of equipment.
The company may bury its local and through communications facilities, such
as cables, conduit manholes and associated equipment, fixtures, process
equipment and appurtenances, within the right-of-way of the various public
streets and ways and at such locations as shall be mutually agreed upon by
the parties for said company's local and through lines and communications
facilities. Underground conduits and associated facilities, as
177. Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Art. I, Bell Atlantic - New Jersey,
Inc., adopted 10-11-1995 by Ord. No. 95-27.
§ A218-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A218-3
1:923
aforementioned, shall be placed at least 18 inches below the surface of said
public streets and ways, and with the exception of lateral branches to curb
poles and property lines and other facilities, the same shall generally not be
constructed more than 10 feet from the curbline, unless obstructions make
it necessary to deviate from such course or unless the parties mutually
agree to another location. Manholes shall be located at such points along
the line of underground conduits as may be necessary or convenient for
placing, maintaining and operating the facilities, as aforementioned, which
the company may from time to time use in connection with its underground
conduit system, and shall be so constructed as to conform to the crosssectional
and longitudinal grade of the surface so as not to interfere with
the safety or convenience of persons or vehicles.
§ A218-4. Notice and permits required; restoration.
Before proceeding with any new construction or relocation work in an
area covered by this ordinance, the company shall give prior notice in
writing thereof to the Borough, through its designated representative, of
its intention to perform such work. The company shall obtain such street
opening or excavation permits as may be lawfully required by any
applicable ordinances regulating such openings or excavations. Any such
area affected by the company in constructing its facilities shall be restored
to as good condition as it was before the commencement of work thereon.
No public streets or ways shall be encumbered for a period longer than shall
be reasonable to execute the work.
§ A218-5. Indemnification of Borough.
The company agrees to indemnify and save harmless the Borough from and
against all claims and liabilities resulting from any injury or damage to the
person or property of any person, firm or corporation caused by or arising
out of road conditions resulting from any negligent or faulty excavations,
installation or maintenance connected with the work or equipment of said
company and not attributable to the fault or negligence of the Borough,
except that if such injury or damage shall be caused by the joint or
concurring negligence or fault of the company and the Borough, the same
shall be borne by them to the extent of their respective fault or negligence.
§ A218-6. Relocation of curblines and facilities.
Whenever a curbline shall be established on streets where one does not now
exist or where an established curbline shall be relocated in order to widen
an existing street in conjunction with road construction being performed
by the Borough, the company shall change the location of its aboveground
facilities covered by this ordinance in accordance with applicable law, so
that the same shall be back of, and adjacent to, the new curbline, so
long as the Borough has acted in accordance with applicable law and
with reasonable care in establishing the new curbline and providing notice
thereof.
§ A218-3 KENILWORTH CODE § A218-7
1:924
§ A218-7. Joint use of poles, posts, etc.
Any company or corporation having legal authority to place its facilities in
the public streets and ways of the Borough may jointly use the company's
poles, posts, pedestals or other structures for all lawful purposes, provided
that the company consents to such use on terms and conditions acceptable
to the company and not inconsistent with the provisions of the present
ordinance.
§ A218-8. Borough use of poles, notice and indemnification.
The company shall provide space, to the extent available, on its poles
so long as said poles are occupied by the company, and space, to the
extent available, in its main conduits existing on the date of passage of
this ordinance, but not exceeding one duct of standard size, for the sole
benefit of the Borough during the pendancy of this ordinance. Such space
shall be provided for the exclusive use of the Borough which use shall be
limited to accommodating the wires or electrical conductors required for
one-way signal control in connection with municipal police patrol, fire alarm
signal control and traffic signal control systems only, but for no other uses
or purposes, either alone or in conjunction therewith, nor for circuits for
the supply of electrical energy for traffic or other signals, nor for wires,
conductors, cable or the equivalent which provide a means of transmitting
any signal to a private, commercial or residential location, and which is
normally provided by a nongovernmental supplier; provided, further, that
no such use or attachment by the Borough shall interfere with the plant
or facilities of or the use thereof by the company. All costs or expenses
incurred by the company in connection therewith shall be paid by the
Borough. It shall be the obligation of the Borough to attach its wires to
the poles or place its electric conductors in the conduits or manholes of
the company, provided that before proceeding with said work either by
itself or by a person, firm or corporation engaged to perform such work,
the Borough shall give the company 30 days' prior notice in writing. All
such work shall be performed under the supervision of said company. The
Borough will indemnify and save harmless the company from and against all
claims, liabilities or demands arising in any manner in connection with the
Borough's wires or facilities or their installation, maintenance, operation
or removal or the Borough's use or enjoyment of the company's plant or
facilities provided under this section.
§ A218-9. Control of streets by county, state.
If any or all of the said streets or ways are later taken over by the County of
Union or the State of New Jersey, such county or state shall have such rights
and privileges and be subject to the same terms, conditions and limitations
of use as apply herein to the Borough, provided, however, that satisfactory
prior arrangements as may be necessary are made with the Borough and
the company for the full protection of the respective interest of each.
§ A218-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A218-10
1:925
§ A218-10. Defined terms.
The term "Borough" as used in this ordinance shall be held to apply to and
include any form of municipality or government into which the Borough or
any part thereof may at any time hereafter be changed, annexed, or merged.
§ A218-11. Scope of consent; prior ordinances superseded.
The permission and consent hereby granted shall apply to and cover all
communications facilities of the company existing at any time, and related
structures, process equipment and appurtenances heretofore or hereafter
erected, constructed, reconstructed, removed, located, relocated, replaced,
maintained, repaired or operated by the company, its predecessors,
successors or assigns within the Borough. This ordinance shall cancel and
supersede all prior consent ordinances between the Borough and the
company regarding the subject matter hereof.
§ A218-12. Maintenance of property.
The company shall maintain its property within the Borough and shall
comply with applicable law for the provision of safe, adequate and proper
service at just and reasonable rates and safeguard the public interest in
continuous and uninterrupted service within the Borough.
§ A218-13. Severability; construal of provisions.
In the event that any provision herein shall for any reason be illegal or
unenforceable under applicable law, such illegality or unenforceability shall
not affect any other provisions of this ordinance, and this ordinance shall
be construed as if such illegal or unenforceable provision(s) had never been
contained herein.
§ A218-14. Advertising expenses; notice; when effective.
The company shall pay the expenses incurred for advertising required
in connection with the passage of this ordinance, after the date of its
first reading, within 30 days after the company has received a bill for
said advertising from the publisher. Following passage of this ordinance,
the Borough Clerk shall provide the company with written notice thereof
by certified mail. As provided by applicable law, this ordinance, and any
subsequent amendments, shall not become effective until acceptance
thereof by the company and approval thereof by the Board of Public Utility
Commissioners.
§ A218-10 KENILWORTH CODE § A218-14
1:926
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2005-01 2-9-2005 Vehicles And Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 190
2005-02 2-9-2005 Fees And Licenses: Fees
Generally Amendment
Ch. 91, Art. I
2005-03 2-9-2005 Property Maintenance Ch. 150
2005-04 2-9-2005 Salaries Amendment NCM
2005-05 3-23-2005 Exceeding Budget
Appropriation Limits
NCM
2005-06 4-13-2005 Departmental Structures Ch. 15
2005-07 5-11-2005 Appropriation NCM
2005-08 5-11-2005 Appropriation NCM
2005-09 Tabled
2005-10 6-8-2005 Parks And Recreation
Amendment
Ch. 141, Art. I and
Art. II
2005-11 8-3-2005 Bond NCM
2005-12 8-3-2005 Bond NCM
2005-13 8-3-2005 Bond NCM
2005-14 8-3-2005 Bond NCM
2005-15 10-12-2005 Property Maintenance
Amendment
Ch. 150
2005-16 10-12-2005 Streets And Sidewalks:
Grass And Weed Removal
Amendment
Ch. 170. Art. VI
2005-17 12-14-2005 Technical Review And
Inspection Fees
Ch. 91, Art. IV
2005-18 12-14-2005 Vehicles And Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 190
2005-19 12-14-2005 Vehicles And Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 190
2005-20 12-14-2005 Appropriation NCM
2006-01 Tabled
§ A218-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:927
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2006-02 4-12-2006 Appropriation NCM
2006-03 4-12-2006 Cap Bank NCM
2006-04 4-12-2006 Bond NCM
2006-05 5-24-2006 Stormwater Control Superseded by Ord.
No. 2008-04
2006-06 5-24-2006 Storm Sewer System
Improper Disposal Of
Waste
Ch. 158, Art. V
2006-07 5-24-2006 Illicit Connections Ch. 158, Art. IV
2006-08 5-24-2006 Yard Waste Collection
Program
Ch. 106, Art. VI
2006-09 5-24-2006 Littering Amendment Ch. 125
2006-10 5-24-2006 Wildlife Feeding Ch. 194
2006-11 5-24-2006 Dogs Amendment Ch. 83
2006-12 7-12-2006 Zoning Amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 2015-05
2006-13 9-13-2006 Flood Damage
Prevention
Ch. 98
2006-14 9-27-2006 Bond NCM
2006-15 9-27-2006 Bond NCM
2006-16 10-11-2006 Bond NCM
2006-17 11-8-2006 Salaries Amendment NCM
2006-18 11-8-2006 Fees And Licenses: Bingo
And Raffle Licenses
Ch. 91, Art. V
2006-19 11-8-2006 Vehicles And Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 190
2006-20 11-8-2006 Appropriation NCM
2006-21 12-13-2006 Interlocal Agreement NCM
2007-01 5-9-2007 Zoning Amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 2015-05
2007-02 3-28-2007 Vehicles And Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 190
2007-03 3-28-2007 Vehicles And Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 190
2007-04 4-11-2007 Cap Bank NCM
2007-05 5-23-2007 Zoning Amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 2015-05
2007-06 6-13-2007 Appropriation NCM
§ DL-1 KENILWORTH CODE § DL-1
1:928
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2007-07 7-25-2007 Hotel And Motel Room
Occupancy Tax
Ch. 176, Art. I
2007-08 7-25-2007 Site Plan Review
Amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2015-05
2007-09 8-22-2007 Graffiti Ch. 109
2007-10 9-12-2007 Property Maintenance
Amendment
Ch. 150
2007-11 11-28-2007 Bond NCM
2007-12 11-28-2007 Bond NCM
2007-13 11-28-2007 Bond NCM
2007-14 12-18-2007 Bond NCM
2007-15 12-18-2007 Bond NCM
2008-01 2-13-2008 Americans With
Disabilities Act
Compliance
Ch. 7
BOH 2-21-2008 Sanitary Standards
Amendment
Ch. 212
BOH 2-21-2008 Sanitary Standards
Amendment
Ch. 212
2008-02 3-12-2008 Zoning Amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 2015-05
2008-03 3-26-2008 Zoning Amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 2015-05
2008-04 3-26-2008 Stormwater Control Repealed by Ord.
No. 2015-05
2008-05 4-9-2008 Vehicles And Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 190
2008-06 4-23-2008 Fees And Licenses
Generally Amendment
Ch. 91, Art. I
2008-07 4-23-2008 Police Reports And
Services Fees
Amendment
Ch. 91, Art. II
2008-08 5-14-2008 Cap Bank NCM
2008-09 6-25-2008 Appropriation NCM
2008-10 6-25-2008 Bond NCM
2008-11 7-9-2008 Bond NCM
2008-12 7-9-2008 Bond NCM
2008-13 7-9-2008 Salaries Amendment NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:929
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2008-14 8-27-2008 Bond NCM
2008-15 9-24-2008 Bond NCM
2008-16 9-24-2008 Departmental Structures
Amendment
Ch. 15
2008-17 10-8-2008 Bond NCM
2008-18 10-22-2008 Fees Generally
Amendment; Streets And
Sidewalks: Openings
Amendment
Ch. 91, Art. I; Ch.
170, Art. IV
2008-19 11-12-2008 Bond NCM
2009-01 2-11-2009 Appropriation NCM
2009-02 2-11-2009 Recreation Programs
Fees Amendment
Ch. 91, Art. III
BOH 1-2-2009 Sanitary Standards
Amendment
Ch. 212
2009-03 3-25-2009 Health Benefits
Repealer; Personnel
Policies: General
Personnel Practices
Ch. 25; Ch. 37, Part
1
Res. 3-25-2009 Personnel Policies:
Policies And Procedures
Ch. 37, Part. 2
2009-04 3-25-2009 Defense And
Indemnification
Ch. 14A
2009-05 3-25-2009 Fees And Licenses: Fees
Generally Amendment
Ch. 91, Art. I
2009-06 3-25-2009 Land Use Procedures
Amendment; Site Plan
Review Amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2015-05
2009-07 3-25-2009 Fees Amendment Ch. 91, Art. I
2009-08 3-25-2009 Fire Prevention
Amendment
Ch. 94
2009-09 4-22-2009 Exceed Budget; Cap
Bank
NCM
2009-10 5-13-2009 Fees And Licenses:
Police Reports And
Services Amendment
Ch. 91, Art. II
2009-11 6-10-2009 Subdivision Of Land
Amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2015-05
2009-12 7-22-2009 Zoning Amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 2015-05
§ DL-1 KENILWORTH CODE § DL-1
1:930
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2009-13 7-22-2009 Placement Of Dumpsters
On Public Rights-Of-Way,
Sidewalks Or Streets
Ch. 170, Art. IX
2009-14 7-8-2009 Appropriation NCM
2009-15 7-22-2009 Bond NCM
2009-16 7-8-2009 Bond NCM
2009-17 9-23-2009 Zoning Amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 2015-05
2009-18 10-14-2009 Salaries Amendment NCM
2009-19 10-14-2009 Bond NCM
2009-20 10-14-2009 Bond NCM
2009-21 10-14-2009 Bond NCM
2009-22 10-28-2009 Bond NCM
2009-23 11-12-2009 Site Plan Review
Amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2015-05
2009-24 12-9-2009 Cats Amendment; Dogs
Amendment
Ch. 75; Ch. 83
2010-01 2-17-2010 Police Department:
Establishment,
Maintenance And
Regulation Amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2013-07
2010-02 2-17-2010 Filming Ch. 93
2010-03 2-24-2010 Bond NCM
2010-04 3-10-2010 Vehicles And Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 190
2010-05 5-26-2010 Appropriation NCM
2010-06 5-26-2010 Appropriation NCM
2010-07 5-26-2010 Exceed Budget; Cap
Bank
NCM
2010-08 6-9-2010 Streets And Sidewalks:
Reconstruction Of
Sidewalks In Business
District Amendment
Ch. 170, Art. VIII
2010-09 7-14-2010 Appropriation NCM
2010-10 8-25-2010 Appropriation NCM
2010-11 8-25-2010 Appropriation NCM
2010-12 10-13-2010 Bond NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:931
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2010-13 10-13-2010 Sewers: Sump Pump
Inspections And
Certificates
Ch. 158, Art. VI
2010-14 11-10-2010 Fees And Licenses: Fees
Generally Amendment
Ch. 91, Art. I
2010-15 11-10-2010 Garbage, Rubbish,
Refuse And Recycling:
Mandatory Recycling
Ch. 106, Art. II
BOH 12-5-2010 Sanitary Standards
Amendment
Ch. 212
2010-16 12-8-2010 Appropriation NCM
2010-17 12-8-2010 Salaries Amendment NCM
2010-18 12-8-2010 Personnel Policies:
Policies And Procedures
Amendment
Ch. 37, Part 2
2011-01 3-9-2011 Vehicles And Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 190
2011-02 4-13-2011 Stormwater Control:
Maintenance Of Refuse
Containers And
Dumpsters
Ch. 169, Art. II
2011-03 4-13-2011 Stormwater Control:
Private Storm Drain Inlet
Retrofitting
Ch. 169, Art. III
2011-04 4-13-2011 Department Of
Recreation Amendment
Ch. 41
2011-05 4-27-2011 Exceed Budget; Cap
Bank
NCM
2011-06 7-13-2011 Appropriation NCM
2011-07 10-26-2011 Salaries Amendment NCM
2011-08 11-9-2011 Appropriation NCM
2011-09 12-14-2011 Streets And Sidewalks:
Snow And Ice Removal
Amendment
Ch. 170, Art. I
2012-01 2-8-2012 Fees And Licenses: Fees
Generally Amendment
Ch. 91, Art. I
2012-02 2-22-2012 Bond NCM
2012-03 2-22-2012 Massage And Bodywork
Establishments
Ch. 129
2012-04 3-14-2012 Salaries Amendment NCM
§ DL-1 KENILWORTH CODE § DL-1
1:932
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2012-05 4-11-2012 Exceed Budget; Cap
Bank
NCM
2012-06 4-11-2012 Bond NCM
2012-07 4-11-2012 Taxicabs Amendment Ch. 179
2012-08 4-11-2012 Fees And Licenses: Fees
Generally Amendment
Ch. 91, Art. I
2012-09 9-12-2012 Salaries Amendment NCM
2013-01 2-13-2013 Garbage, Rubbish,
Refuse And Recycling:
Clothing Recycling
Ch. 106, Art. III
2013-02 4-24-2013 Exceed Budget; Cap
Bank
NCM
2013-03 5-8-2013 Salaries Amendment NCM
2013-04 5-22-2013 Towing Amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 2015-08
2013-05 5-22-2013 Bond NCM
2013-06 6-12-2013 Streets And Sidewalks:
Handicapped Parking
Ch. 170, Art. X
2013-07 6-12-2013 Police Department Ch. 39
2013-08 7-10-2013 Departmental Structures
Amendment
Ch. 15
2013-09 7-24-2013 Bond NCM
2013-10 11-6-2013 Reappropriation NCM
2014-01 2-12-2014 Departmental Structures
Amendment
Ch. 15
2014-02 3-12-2014 Personnel Policies:
Policies And Procedures
Amendment
Ch. 37, Part 2
2014-03 2-26-2014 Fees And Licenses: Fees
Generally Amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2018-14
2014-04 4-23-2014 Tanning Facilities Ch. 213
2014-05 4-23-2014 Exceed Budget; Cap
Bank
NCM
2014-06 5-14-2014 Bond NCM
2014-07 6-25-2014 Fees And Licenses: Bingo
And Raffle Licenses
Amendment
Ch. 91, Art. V
2014-08 7-9-2014 Bond NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:933
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2014-09 8-27-2014 Sale Of Property To
Rahway Valley Sewerage
Authority
NCM
2014-10 9-10-2014 Salaries NCM
2014-11 10-8-2014 Streets And Sidewalks:
Snow And Ice Removal
Amendment
Ch. 170, Art. I
2014-12 11-12-2014 Cable Television
Franchise: Franchise
Renewal Amendment
Ch. A217, Art. II
2015-01 2-11-2015 Streets And Sidewalks:
Snow And Ice Removal
Amendment
Ch. 170, Art. I
2015-02 3-11-2015 Vehicles And Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 190
2015-03 4-22-2015 Exceed Budget; Cap
Bank
NCM
2015-04 5-13-2015 Bond NCM
2015-05 9-23-2015 Land Use Ch. 120
2015-06 10-28-2015 Illicit Connections
Amendment
Ch. 158, Art. IV
2015-07 11-10-2015 Bond NCM
2015-08 12-9-2015 Fees And Licenses
Amendment; Towing
Ch. 91, Art. I; Ch.
181A
2016-01 3-9-2016 Uniform Construction
Codes Amendment; Fees
And Licenses
Amendment
Ch. 78; Ch. 91, Art. I
2016-02 4-13-2016 Bond NCM
2016-03 4-13-2016 Exceed Budget; Cap
Bank
NCM
2016-04 6-22-2016 Salaries NCM
2016-05 7-13-2016 Vehicles And Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 190
2016-06 7-13-2016 Fees And Licenses
Amendment; Property
Maintenance
Amendment
Ch. 91, Art. I; Ch.
150
2016-07 9-28-2016 Land Use Amendment Ch. 120
2016-08 9-28-2016 Land Use Amendment Ch. 120
§ DL-1 KENILWORTH CODE § DL-1
1:934
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2016-09 10-12-2016 Fees And Licenses
Amendment; Key Lock
Box Emergency Access
System
Ch. 91, Art. I; Ch.
165, Art. II
2016-10 11-8-2016 Salaries Amendment NCM
2016-11 12-14-2016 Vacating Right-Of-Way NCM
2017-01 2-8-2017 Administration Of
Government Amendment
Ch. 5
2017-02 4-12-2017 Salaries NCM
2017-03 4-26-2017 Exceed Budget; Cap
Bank
NCM
2017-04 11-8-2017 Land Use Amendment Ch. 120
2017-05 5-24-2017 Bond NCM
BOH 6-16-2017 Sanitary Standards
Amendment
Ch. 212
2017-06 7-12-2017 Recreation Programs
Amendment
Ch. 91, Art. III
2017-07 7-26-2017 Salaries NCM
2017-08 7-26-2017 Salaries NCM
2017-09 9-27-2017 Bond NCM
2017-10 10-11-2017 Property Maintenance
Amendment
Ch. 150
2017-11 Tabled
2017-12 10-11-2017 Bond NCM
2017-13 11-8-2017 Police Department
Amendment
Ch. 39
2017-14 Tabled
2018-01 1-24-2018 Fire Prevention
Amendment
Ch. 94
Not adopted
2018-03 3-28-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 190
2018-04 4-25-2018 Fees: Fees Generally
Amendment; Property
Maintenance
Amendment
Ch. 91, Art. I; Ch.
150
2018-05 4-25-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 190
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:935
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2018-06 5-9-2018 Exceed Budget; Cap
Bank
NCM
BOH 5-17-2018 Sanitary Standards
Amendment
Ch. 212
2018-07 5-23-2018 Peace and Good Order:
No Knock Registry;
Peddling and Soliciting
Amendment
Ch. 142, Art. III; Ch.
144
2018-08 6-27-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 190
2018-09 6-27-2018 Bond NCM
2018-10 7-11-2018 Salaries Amendment NCM
2018-11 8-22-2018 Bond NCM
2018-12 9-12-2018 Police Department
Amendment
Ch. 39
2018-13 9-12-2018 Salaries Amendment NCM
2018-14 9-12-2018 Adoption of Code by
Mayor and Council
Ch. 1, Art. II
2018-15 9-12-2018 Land Use Amendment Ch. 120
2018-16 10-10-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 190
2018-17 11-7-2018 Fees and Licenses:
Recreation Programs
Amendment
Ch. 91, Art. III
BOH 11-15-2018 Adoption of Code by
Board of Health
Ch. 199, Art. I
2019-01 4-10-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 190
2019-02 5-8-2019 Exceed Budget; Cap
Bank
NCM
2019-03 5-22-2019 Land Use Amendment Ch. 120
2019-04 6-26-2019 Administration of
Government Amendment
Ch. 5
2019-05 6-12-2019 Salaries NCM
2019-06 6-12-2019 Bond NCM
2019-07 Not Adopted
2019-08 7-10-2019 Land Use Amendment Ch. 120
2019-09 8-14-2019 Land Use Amendment Ch. 120
2019-10 8-14-2019 Appropriation NCM
§ DL-1 KENILWORTH CODE § DL-1
1:936